Section 16. How the Stranger vainly endeavoured to reveal to me in words the mysteries of Spaceland As soon as the sound of the Peace-cry of my departing Wife had died away, I began to approach the Stranger with the intention of taking a nearer view and of bidding him be seated: but his appearance struck me dumb and motionless with astonishment. Without the slightest symptoms of angularity he nevertheless varied every instant with gradations of size and brightness scarcely possible for any Figure within the scope of my experience. The thought flashed across me that I might have before me a burglar or cut-throat, some monstrous Irregular Isosceles, who, by feigning the voice of a Circle, had obtained admission somehow into the house, and was now preparing to stab me with his acute angle. In a sitting-room, the absence of Fog (and the season happened to be remarkably dry), made it difficult for me to trust to Sight Recognition, especially at the short distance at which I was standing.

*  ...  is   the  para-  -a bail mmtme   outa

mmmm s  are are are are is    are... as...asdinaeyiaaAairetaaa

Then I came here, and how do you think I came? I. Through the roof, I suppose. STRANGER. Not so. Your roof, as you know very well, has been recently repaired, and has no aperture by which even a Woman could penetrate. I tell you I come from Space. Are you not convinced by what I have told you of your children and household? I. Your Lordship must be aware that such facts touching the belongings of his humble servant might be easily ascertained by any one in the neighbourhood possessing your Lordship's ample means of obtaining information. STRANGER. (TO HIMSELF.) What must I do? Stay; one more argument suggests itself to me. When you see a Straight Line--your wife, for example--how many Dimensions do you attribute to her? I. Your Lordship would treat me as if I were one of the vulgar who, being ignorant of Mathematics, suppose that a Woman is really a Straight Line, and only of One Dimension.

of measurement. STRANGER. You do not understand me. I mean that when you see a Woman, you ought--besides inferring her breadth--to see her length, and to SEE what we call her HEIGHT; although that last Dimension is infinitesimal in your country. If a Line were mere length without "height", it would cease to occupy Space and would become invisible. Surely you must recognize this? I. I must indeed confess that I do not in the least understand your Lordship. When we in Flatland see a Line, we see length and BRIGHTNESS. If the brightness disappears, the Line is extinguished, and, as you say, ceases to occupy Space. But am I to suppose that your Lordship gives to brightness the title of a Dimension, and that what we call "bright" you call "high"? STRANGER. No, indeed. By "height" I mean a Dimension like your length: only, with you, "height" is not so easily perceptible, being extremely small.

I convince him? Surely a plain statement of facts followed by ocular demonstration ought to suffice. --Now, Sir; listen to me. You are living on a Plane. What you style Flatland is the vast level surface of what I may call a fluid, on, or in, the top of which you and your countrymen move about, without rising above it or falling below it. I am not a plane Figure, but a Solid. You call me a Circle; but in reality I am not a Circle, but an infinite number of Circles, of size varying from a Point to a Circle of thirteen inches in diameter, one placed on the top of the other. When I cut through your plane as I am now doing, I make in your plane a section which you, very rightly, call a Circle. For even a Sphere--which is my proper name in my own country--if he manifest himself at all to an inhabitant of Flatland--must needs manifest himself as a Circle.

no power to raise your eye out of the plane of Flatland; but you can at least see that, as I rise in Space, so my sections become smaller. See now, I will rise; and the effect upon your eye will be that my Circle will become smaller and smaller till it dwindles to a point and finally vanishes. [Illustration 8] [ASCII approximation follows] The Sphere on the point of vanishing (2) ----- The Sphere with The Sphere rising / (3) his section ----- / at full size / | | ----- / | | / | | | | / - | | / My | -- -- | | --- | / Eye --|-----------------|------ ------- --/------------===----------+(> | -- -- | --- / - / ----- / ----- There was no "rising" that I could see; but he diminished and finally vanished.

s    it   ...   aa are    into int    amp  ....he.he

Four sides and four angles. SPHERE. Now stretch your imagination a little, and conceive a Square in Flatland, moving parallel to itself upward. I. What? Northward? SPHERE. No, not Northward; upward; out of Flatland altogether. If it moved Northward, the Southern points in the Square would have to move through the positions previously occupied by the Northern points. But that is not my meaning. I mean that every Point in you--for you are a Square and will serve the purpose of my illustration--every Point in you, that is to say in what you call your inside, is to pass upwards through Space in such a way that no Point shall pass through the position previously occupied by any other Point; but each Point shall describe a straight Line of its own. This is all in accordance with Analogy; surely it must be clear to you.

, tls    d   mm  a andag Tour A ToaiAeo exye aa
