In the old days of New York, dinner was served at seven, and the custom of post-prandial calls, though mocked by the younger set, remained the law of the land. As the young man strolled up Fifth Avenue from Waverley Place, the broad avenue was nearly empty save for a cluster of carriages parked before the Reggie Chiverses' residence—where a dinner was being held for the Duke—and the solitary figure of an elderly gentleman in a heavy overcoat and muffler ascending a brownstone stoop to vanish into a gas-lit hall. Thus, as Archer crossed Washington Square, he noted that Mr. du Lac was visiting his cousins, the Dagonets, and turning the corner of West Tenth Street, he spotted Mr. Skipworth of his own firm, clearly en route to the Miss Lannings. A short distance further, Beaufort emerged onto his doorstep, silhouetted against a brilliant flood of light, descended to his private brougham, and rolled away toward a destination shrouded in mystery and likely silence. It was not an Opera night, nor was anyone hosting a party; therefore, Beaufort's outing was undoubtedly clandestine. Archer mentally linked it to a small house beyond Lexington Avenue, recently adorned with beribboned window curtains and flower boxes, before whose freshly painted door the canary-colored brougham of Miss Fanny Ring was often seen waiting.

Beyond the small, slippery pyramid that constituted Mrs. Archer's world lay the almost unmapped quarter inhabited by artists, musicians, and "those who write." These scattered fragments of humanity had never sought to merge with the social structure. Despite their eccentricities, they were largely respectable, yet they preferred isolation. Medora Manson, in her prosperous days, had attempted to inaugurate a "literary salon," but it quickly faded due to the reluctance of the literary crowd to frequent it. Others had tried; there was the household of the Blenkers—an intense, voluble mother and three blowsy daughters who mimicked her—where one might meet Edwin Booth, Patti, William Winter, the new Shakespearian actor George Rignold, and various magazine editors and critics.

Mrs. Archer and her circle felt a distinct timidity regarding these individuals. They were odd, uncertain, and possessed backgrounds in their lives and minds that remained obscure. Literature and art were deeply respected in the Archer set, and Mrs. Archer was always eager to remind her children how much more agreeable and cultivated society had been when it included figures like Washington Irving, Fitz-Greene Halleck, and the poet of "The Culprit Fay." The most celebrated authors of that generation had been "gentlemen"; perhaps the unknown successors shared their sentiments, but their origins, appearances, hairstyles, and intimate connections with the stage and the Opera rendered any traditional New York criterion inapplicable to them.

"When I was a girl," Mrs. Archer used to say, "we knew everyone between the Battery and Canal Street; and only the people one knew owned carriages. It was perfectly easy to place anyone then; now one cannot tell, and I prefer not to try."

Only old Catherine Mingott, with her lack of moral prejudices and a parvenu indifference to subtle distinctions, might have bridged the divide; but she had never opened a book or examined a painting, caring for music only because it recalled gala nights at the Italiens during her triumphs at the Tuileries. Possibly Beaufort, who matched her in daring, would have succeeded in forging a union; but his grand house and silk-stockinged footmen were obstacles to informal sociability. Moreover, he was as illiterate as old Mrs. Mingott and regarded "fellows who write" as mere paid purveyors of rich men's pleasures, a view never questioned by anyone wealthy enough to influence his opinion.

Newland Archer had been aware of these divisions since childhood, accepting them as part of the fabric of his universe. He knew of societies where painters, poets, novelists, scientists, and great actors were as sought after as Dukes; he had often imagined living in the intimacy of drawing-rooms dominated by the conversation of Mérimée, Thackeray, Browning, or William Morris. Yet such things were inconceivable in New York and unsettling to contemplate. Archer knew most of the "fellows who write," the musicians, and the painters; he met them at the Century Club or at the emerging musical and theatrical societies. He enjoyed them there, though he grew bored at the Blenkers', where they were mingled with fervid, dowdy women who passed them around like captured curiosities. Even after his most stimulating conversations with Ned Winsett, he always departed with the feeling that if his world was small, so was theirs, and that the only way to enlarge either was to reach a stage of manners where they would naturally merge.

He was reminded of this while trying to picture the society in which the Countess Olenska had lived, suffered, and perhaps tasted mysterious joys. He recalled with amusement how she had told him that her grandmother Mingott and the Wellands objected to her living in a "Bohemian" quarter given over to "people who write." It was not the peril but the poverty her family disliked; however, that nuance escaped her, and she suspected they considered literature compromising.

She herself harbored no fears, and the books scattered about her drawing-room—a space where books were usually deemed "out of place"—though chiefly works of fiction, had whetted Archer's interest with new names like Paul Bourget, Huysmans, and the Goncourt brothers. Ruminating on these matters as he approached her door, he became once more conscious of the curious way in which she reversed his values, and of the necessity of imagining conditions incredibly different from any he knew if he were to be of use in her present difficulty.

Nastasia opened the door, smiling mysteriously. On the bench in the hall lay a sable-lined overcoat, a folded opera hat of dull silk with a gold "J. B." on the lining, and a white silk muffler; there was no mistaking that these costly articles belonged to Julius Beaufort.

Archer felt anger rising within him, so intense that he nearly scribbled a word on his card and departed. Then he remembered that in his letters to Madame Olenska, he had been restrained by excessive discretion from stating his desire to see her privately. He had therefore no one to blame but himself if she had opened her doors to other visitors, and he entered the drawing-room with a dogged determination to make Beaufort feel obstructed and to outstay him.

The banker stood leaning against the mantelpiece, draped with an old embroidery held in place by brass candelabra containing church candles of yellowish wax. He had thrust his chest out, supporting his shoulders against the mantel and resting his weight on one large patent-leather foot. As Archer entered, he was smiling and looking down upon his hostess, who sat on a sofa placed at right angles to the chimney. A table banked with flowers formed a screen behind her, and against the orchids and azaleas—which Archer recognized as tributes from the Beaufort hot-houses—Madame Olenska sat half-reclined, her head propped on a hand, her wide sleeve leaving her arm bare to the elbow.

It was customary for ladies receiving in the evenings to wear "simple dinner dresses": a close-fitting armor of whale-boned silk, slightly open at the neck with lace ruffles filling the gap, and tight sleeves with a flounce uncovering just enough wrist to display an Etruscan gold bracelet or a velvet band. But Madame Olenska, heedless of tradition, was attired in a long robe of red velvet bordered about the chin and down the front with glossy black fur. Archer remembered, on his last visit to Paris, seeing a portrait by the new painter Carolus Duran, whose works were the sensation of the Salon, depicting a lady in one of these bold, sheath-like robes with her chin nestling in fur. There was something perverse and provocative in the notion of fur worn in the evening within a heated drawing-room, and in the combination of a muffled throat and bare arms; yet the effect was undeniably pleasing.

"Lord love us—three whole days at Skuytercliff!" Beaufort exclaimed in his loud, sneering voice as Archer entered. "You'd better take all your furs, and a hot-water-bottle."

"Why? Is the house so cold?" she asked, holding out her left hand to Archer in a manner mysteriously suggesting she expected him to kiss it.

"No; but the missus is," Beaufort said, nodding carelessly to the young man.

"But I thought her so kind. She came herself to invite me. Granny says I must certainly go."

"Granny would, of course. And I say it's a shame you're going to miss the little oyster supper I planned for you at Delmonico's next Sunday, with Campanini and Scalchi and a lot of jolly people."

She looked doubtfully from the banker to Archer.

"Ah—that does tempt me! Except the other evening at Mrs. Struthers's, I haven't met a single artist since I've been here."

"Painters? I know one or two painters, very good fellows, that I could bring to see you if you'd allow me," Archer said boldly.

"Painters? Are there painters in New York?" Beaufort asked, in a tone implying that there could be none since he did not buy their pictures; and Madame Olenska said to Archer, with her grave smile, "That would be charming. But I was really thinking of dramatic artists, singers, actors, musicians. My husband's house was always full of them."

She said the words "my husband" as if no sinister associations were connected to them, and in a tone that seemed almost to sigh over the lost delights of her married life. Archer looked at her perplexedly, wondering if it were lightness or dissimulation that enabled her to touch so easily on the past at the very moment she was risking her reputation to break with it.

"I do think," she continued, addressing both men, "that the *imprévu* adds to one's enjoyment. It is perhaps a mistake to see the same people every day."

"It is confoundedly dull, anyhow; New York is dying of dullness," Beaufort grumbled. "And when I try to liven it up for you, you go back on me. Come—think better of it! Sunday is your last chance, for Campanini leaves next week for Baltimore and Philadelphia; and I have a private room, a Steinway, and they'll sing all night for me."

"How delicious! May I think it over, and write to you tomorrow morning?"

She spoke amiably, yet with the slightest hint of dismissal in her voice. Beaufort evidently felt it, and being unused to dismissals, stood staring at her with an obstinate line between his eyes.

"Why not now?"

"It is too serious a question to decide at this late hour."

"Do you call it late?"

She returned his glance coolly. "Yes; because I still have to discuss business with Mr. Archer for a little while."

"Ah," Beaufort snapped. There was no appeal in her tone, and with a slight shrug he recovered his composure, took her hand, which he kissed with practiced ease, and calling out from the threshold: "I say, Newland, if you can persuade the Countess to stay in town, of course you're included in the supper," left the room with his heavy, important step.

For a moment, Archer fancied that Mr. Letterblair must have informed her of his coming, but the irrelevance of her next remark made him change his mind.

"You know painters, then? You live in their milieu?" she asked, her eyes full of interest.

"Oh, not exactly. I don't know that the arts have a milieu here; they are more like a very thinly settled outskirt."

"But you care for such things?"

"Immensely. When I am in Paris or London, I never miss an exhibition. I try to keep up."

She looked down at the tip of the little satin boot that peeped from her long draperies.

"I used to care immensely too; my life was full of such things. But now I want to try not to."

"You want to try not to?"

"Yes: I want to cast off all my old life, to become just like everybody else here."

Archer reddened. "You'll never be like everybody else," he said.

She raised her straight eyebrows slightly. "Ah, don't say that. If you knew how I hate to be different!"

Her face had grown as sombre as a tragic mask. She leaned forward, clasping her knee in her thin hands, and gazing away from him into remote, dark distances.

"I want to get away from it all," she insisted.

He waited a moment and cleared his throat. "I know. Mr. Letterblair has told me."

"Ah?"

"That is the reason I have come. He asked me to—you see, I am in the firm."

She looked slightly surprised, and then her eyes brightened. "You mean you can manage it for me? I can talk to you instead of Mr. Letterblair? Oh, that will be so much easier!"

Her tone touched him, and his confidence grew with his self-satisfaction. He perceived that she had spoken of business to Beaufort simply to get rid of him, and to have routed Beaufort was something of a triumph.

"I am here to talk about it," he repeated.

She sat silent, her head still propped by the arm resting on the back of the sofa. Her face looked pale and extinguished, as if dimmed by the rich red of her dress. She struck Archer, suddenly, as a pathetic and even pitiful figure.

"Now we are coming to hard facts," he thought, conscious within himself of the same instinctive recoil that he had so often criticized in his mother and her contemporaries. How little practice he had had in dealing with unusual situations! Their very vocabulary was unfamiliar to him, seeming to belong to fiction and the stage. In the face of what was coming, he felt as awkward and embarrassed as a boy.

After a pause, Madame Olenska broke out with unexpected vehemence: "I want to be free
