When Archer walked down the sandy main street of St. Augustine toward the house designated as Mr. Welland's, and there he found May Welland standing beneath a magnolia, the sunlight catching in her hair like spun gold, a sudden, sharp ache seized him. He wondered, with a pang of regret, why he had waited so long to arrive.

Here was the truth, raw and undeniable; here was the reality he had been chasing; here was the life that was rightfully his. Yet, the man who prided himself on his disdain for arbitrary social restraints had hesitated, paralyzed by the fear of what the world might think of him for simply stealing a holiday from his desk.

Her first cry was, "Newland—has anything happened?" It struck him then that it would have been far more "feminine" if she had instantly read the answer in his eyes. But when he replied, "Yes—I found I had to see you," her happy blushes chased away the chill of her surprise. He saw immediately how easily he would be forgiven, how swiftly even Mr. Letterblair's mild disapproval would melt before the tolerant warmth of a family united by love.

Though early, the main street offered no privacy save for formal greetings, and Archer longed desperately to be alone with May, to pour out the tenderness and impatience that had built up within him. It was still an hour before the late Welland breakfast, and instead of inviting him inside, she proposed they walk to an old orange garden beyond the town. She had just returned from a row on the river, and the sun, netting the small waves with liquid gold, seemed to have caught her in its shimmering meshes. Across the warm brown of her cheeks, her blown hair glittered like silver wire; her eyes looked lighter, almost pale in their youthful limpidity. Walking beside Archer with her long, swinging gait, her face wore the vacant serenity of a young marble statue.

To Archer's strained nerves, this vision was as soothing as the sight of the blue sky and the lazy river. They sat on a bench beneath the orange trees, and he put his arm around her, kissing her. It felt like drinking from a cold spring bathed in sunlight. Yet, his pressure may have been more vehement than he intended; the blood rushed to her face, and she drew back as if startled.

"What is it?" he asked, smiling. She looked at him with surprise and answered, "Nothing."

A slight embarrassment settled between them, and her hand slipped from his. It was the only time he had kissed her on the lips since their fugitive embrace in the Beaufort conservatory, and he saw that she was disturbed, shaken out of her cool, boyish composure.

"Tell me what you do all day," he said, crossing his arms under his tilted-back head and pushing his hat forward to shield his eyes from the sun-dazzle. To let her speak of familiar, simple things was the easiest way to carry on his own independent train of thought. He listened to her chronicle of swimming, sailing, and riding, varied occasionally by a dance at the primitive inn when a man-of-war docked. A few pleasant people from Philadelphia and Baltimore were picnicking at the inn; the Selfridge Merrys had come down for three weeks because Kate Merry had suffered from bronchitis. They planned to lay out a lawn tennis court on the sands, though no one but Kate and May possessed racquets, and most of the guests had never even heard of the game.

All this kept her busy, leaving her no time to do more than glance at the little vellum book Archer had sent her the week prior—the "Sonnets from the Portuguese." Instead, she was learning by heart "How they brought the Good News from Ghent to Aix," because it was one of the first poems he had ever read to her. It amused her to inform him that Kate Merry had never even heard of a poet named Robert Browning.

Presently, she started up, exclaiming that they would be late for breakfast. They hurried back to the tumble-down house with its pointless porch and unpruned hedge of plumbago and pink geraniums, where the Wellands were installed for the winter. Mr. Welland's sensitive domesticity shrank from the discomforts of the slovenly southern hotel, and at immense expense, in the face of almost insuperable difficulties, Mrs. Welland was obliged, year after year, to improvise an establishment partly made up of discontented New York servants and partly drawn from the local African supply.

"The doctors want my husband to feel that he is in his own home; otherwise he would be so wretched that the climate would do him no good," she explained, winter after winter, to the sympathizing Philadelphians and Baltimoreans. Mr. Welland, beaming across a breakfast table miraculously supplied with the most varied delicacies, was presently saying to Archer, "You see, my dear fellow, we camp—we literally camp. I tell my wife and May that I want to teach them how to rough it."

Mr. and Mrs. Welland had been as surprised as their daughter by the young man's sudden arrival, but Archer had explained that he felt on the verge of a nasty cold. This seemed to Mr. Welland an all-sufficient reason for abandoning any professional duty.

"You can't be too careful, especially toward spring," he said, heaping his plate with straw-colored griddle-cakes and drowning them in golden syrup. "If I'd only been as prudent at your age, May would have been dancing at the Assemblies now, instead of spending her winters in a wilderness with an old invalid."

"Oh, but I love it here, Papa; you know I do. If only Newland could stay, I should like it a thousand times better than New York."

"Newland must stay till he has quite thrown off his cold," said Mrs. Welland indulgently. The young man laughed, saying he supposed there was such a thing as one's profession.

He managed, however, after an exchange of telegrams with the firm, to make his cold last a week. It shed an ironic light on the situation to know that Mr. Letterblair's indulgence was partly due to the satisfactory way in which his brilliant young junior partner had settled the troublesome matter of the Olenski divorce. Mr. Letterblair had let Mrs. Welland know that Mr. Archer had "rendered an invaluable service" to the whole family, and that old Mrs. Manson Mingott had been particularly pleased. One day, when May had gone for a drive with her father in the only vehicle the place produced, Mrs. Welland took occasion to touch on a topic she always avoided in her daughter's presence.

"I'm afraid Ellen's ideas are not at all like ours. She was barely eighteen when Medora Manson took her back to Europe—you remember the excitement when she appeared in black at her coming-out ball? Another of Medora's fads—really this time it was almost prophetic! That must have been at least twelve years ago; and since then Ellen has never been to America. No wonder she is completely Europeanized."

"But European society is not given to divorce: Countess Olenska thought she would be conforming to American ideas in asking for her freedom." It was the first time the young man had pronounced her name since he had left Skuytercliff, and he felt the color rise to his cheek.

Mrs. Welland smiled compassionately. "That is just like the extraordinary things that foreigners invent about us. They think we dine at two o'clock and countenance divorce! That is why it seems to me so foolish to entertain them when they come to New York. They accept our hospitality, and then they go home and repeat the same stupid stories."

Archer made no comment, and Mrs. Welland continued: "But we do most thoroughly appreciate your persuading Ellen to give up the idea. Her grandmother and her uncle Lovell could do nothing with her; both of them have written that her changing her mind was entirely due to your influence—in fact, she said so to her grandmother. She has an unbounded admiration for you. Poor Ellen—she was always a wayward child. I wonder what her fate will be?"

"What we've all contrived to make it," he felt like answering. "If you'd all of you rather she should be Beaufort's mistress than some decent fellow's wife, you've certainly gone the right way about it."

He wondered what Mrs. Welland would have said if he had uttered the words instead of merely thinking them. He could picture the sudden decomposure of her firm, placid features, to which a lifelong mastery over trifles had given an air of factitious authority. Traces still lingered on them of a fresh beauty like her daughter's, and he asked himself if May's face was doomed to thicken into the same middle-aged image of invincible innocence.

Ah, no, he did not want May to have that kind of innocence, the innocence that seals the mind against imagination and the heart against experience!

"I verily believe," Mrs. Welland continued, "that if the horrible business had come out in the newspapers it would have been my husband's death-blow. I don't know any of the details; I only ask not to, as I told poor Ellen when she tried to talk to me about it. Having an invalid to care for, I have to keep my mind bright and happy. But Mr. Welland was terribly upset; he had a slight temperature every morning while we were waiting to hear what had been decided. It was the horror of his girl's learning that such things were possible—but of course, dear Newland, you felt that too. We all knew that you were thinking of May."

"I'm always thinking of May," the young man rejoined, rising to cut short the conversation.

He had meant to seize the opportunity of his private talk with Mrs. Welland to urge her to advance the date of his marriage. But he could think of no arguments that would move her, and with a sense of relief he saw Mr. Welland and May driving up to the door.

His only hope was to plead again with May. On the day before his departure, he walked with her to the ruinous garden of the Spanish Mission. The background lent itself to allusions to European scenes, and May, who was looking her loveliest under a wide-brimmed hat that cast a shadow of mystery over her too-clear eyes, kindled into eagerness as he spoke of Granada and the Alhambra.

"We might be seeing it all this spring—even the Easter ceremonies at Seville," he urged, exaggerating his demands in the hope of a larger concession.

"Easter in Seville? And it will be Lent next week!" she laughed.

"Why shouldn't we be married in Lent?" he rejoined. But she looked so shocked that he saw his mistake.

"Of course I didn't mean that, dearest; but soon after Easter—so that we could sail at the end of April. I know I could arrange it at the office."

She smiled dreamily upon the possibility, but he perceived that to dream of it sufficed her. It was like hearing him read aloud from his poetry books the beautiful things that could not possibly happen in real life.

"Oh, do go on, Newland; I do love your descriptions."

"But why should they be only descriptions? Why shouldn't we make them real?"

"We shall, dearest, of course; next year." Her voice lingered over it.

"Don't you want them to be real sooner? Can't I persuade you to break away now?"

She bowed her head, vanishing from him under her conniving hat-brim.

"Why should we dream away another year? Look at me, dear! Don't you understand how I want you for my wife?"

For a moment she remained motionless; then she raised eyes of such despairing clearness that he half-released her waist from his hold. But suddenly her look changed and deepened inscrutably. "I'm not sure if I *do* understand," she said. "Is it—is it because you're not certain of continuing to care for me?"

Archer sprang up from his seat. "My God—perhaps—I don't know," he broke out angrily.

May Welland rose also; as they faced each other, she seemed to grow in womanly stature and dignity. Both were silent for a moment, as if dismayed by the unforeseen trend of their words; then she said in a low voice, "If that is it—is there some one else?"

"Some one else—between you and me?" He echoed her words slowly, as though they were only half-intelligible and he wanted time to repeat the question to himself. She seemed to catch the uncertainty of his voice, for she went on in a deepening tone: "Let us talk frankly, Newland. Sometimes I've felt a difference in you; especially since our engagement has been announced."

"Dear—what madness!" he recovered himself to exclaim.

She met his protest with a faint smile. "If it is, it won't hurt us to talk about it." She paused, and added, lifting her head with one of her noble movements: "Or even if it's true: why shouldn't we speak of it? You might so easily have made a mistake."

He lowered his head, staring at the black leaf-pattern on the sunny path at their feet. "Mistakes are always easy to make; but if I had made one of the kind you suggest, is it likely that I should be imploring you to hasten our marriage?"

She looked downward too, disturbing the pattern with the point of her sunshade while she struggled for expression. "Yes," she said at length. "You might want—once for all—to settle the question: it's one way."

Her quiet lucidity startled him, but did not mislead him into thinking her insensible. Under her hat-brim he saw the pallor of her profile, and a slight tremor of the nostril above her resolutely steadied lips.

"Well—?" he questioned, sitting down on the bench and looking up at her with a frown he tried to make playful.

She dropped back into her seat and went on: "You mustn't think that a girl knows as little as her parents imagine. One hears and one notices—one has one's feelings and ideas. And of course, long before you told me
