"Of course we must dine with Mrs. Carfry, dearest," Archer said, his voice steady despite the weight of the suggestion.

His wife, May, looked up from the breakfast table with a frown that tightened the delicate line of her mouth. Between them stood a massive, gleaming piece of Britannia ware, a monument to domestic order that seemed to amplify the tension in the small lodging-house room. Outside, London's autumn rain blurred the windows, turning the city into a gray, watery desert. Inside, the silence was heavy, broken only by the clink of silver and the distant murmur of the street.

In all of rainy, dreary London, there were only two souls the Newland Archers truly knew. And yet, here they were, facing the prospect of dining with them. It was a breach of the sacred, unspoken code of their people: the old New York tradition that it was undignified to force one's acquaintance upon strangers in foreign lands. To seek out friends abroad was to admit a lack of self-sufficiency, a failure of the social armor they had spent years polishing.

Mrs. Archer and her sister-in-law, Janey, had adhered to this principle with rigid, almost monastic devotion. During their months of travel, they had met the warm, eager advances of fellow travelers with an air of impenetrable reserve. They had managed, with remarkable success, to exchange not a single word with any "foreigner" save for the staff of hotels and railway stations. Their compatriots, save for those known from childhood or properly accredited, were treated with a disdain that bordered on the icy. Unless they stumbled upon a Chivers, a Dagonet, or a Mingott, their journeys were spent in a continuous, comfortable solitude.

But precautions, however meticulous, are not infallible. One night in Botzen, the fate of the Archers had collided with the misfortune of two English ladies in the room across the passage. Janey knew their names, their dress, and their social standing intimately. One of them had knocked on the door, asking if Mrs. Archer possessed a bottle of liniment. The other, the intruder's sister, Mrs. Carfry, had been seized by a sudden, violent attack of bronchitis. Mrs. Archer, who never traveled without a complete family pharmacy tucked away in her luggage, had produced the remedy with effortless grace.

Mrs. Carfry was gravely ill. Traveling alone with her sister, Miss Harle, they were profoundly grateful to the Archer ladies, who supplied ingenious comforts and whose efficient maid helped nurse the invalid back to health. When the Archers eventually left Botzen, they harbored no intention of ever seeing Mrs. Carfry or Miss Harle again. To Mrs. Archer, the idea of forcing oneself upon the notice of a "foreigner" to whom one had rendered an accidental service was the height of undignified behavior.

Yet, Mrs. Carfry and her sister, to whom such a point of view was utterly alien, felt themselves bound by an eternal gratitude to the "delightful Americans." With touching fidelity, they seized every opportunity to meet the Archer ladies during their continental travels, displaying a supernatural acuteness in tracking their movements across Europe. The intimacy became indissoluble. Whenever the Archers alighted at Brown's Hotel, they found themselves awaited by two affectionate friends who, like themselves, cultivated ferns in Wardian cases, practiced macramé lace, devoured the memoirs of the Baroness Bunsen, and held firm views on the occupants of London's leading pulpits.

As Mrs. Archer had remarked, knowing Mrs. Carfry and Miss Harle made "another thing of London." By the time Newland became engaged, the tie between the families was so firmly established that it was deemed "only right" to send a wedding invitation to the two English ladies. In return, they had sent a pretty bouquet of pressed Alpine flowers preserved under glass. And on the dock, as Newland and his wife sailed for England, Mrs. Archer's final instruction had been clear: "You must take May to see Mrs. Carfry."

Newland and his wife had had no intention of obeying this injunction. But Mrs. Carfry, with her usual acuteness, had run them down and sent an invitation to dine. It was over this invitation that May Archer was now wrinkling her brows, staring intently at her tea and muffins.

"It's all very well for you, Newland; you *know* them," she said, her voice tight. "But I shall feel so shy among a lot of people I've never met. And what shall I wear?"

Newland leaned back in his chair, a smile playing on his lips. She looked handsomer and more Diana-like than ever. The moist English air seemed to have deepened the bloom of her cheeks and softened the slight hardness of her virginal features; or perhaps it was simply the inner glow of happiness shining through her like a light beneath ice.

"Wear, dearest? I thought a trunkful of things had come from Paris last week."

"Yes, of course," she admitted, pouting slightly. "I meant to say that I shan't know *which* to wear. I've never dined out in London; and I don't want to be ridiculous."

He tried to enter into her perplexity. "But don't Englishwomen dress just like everybody else in the evening?"

"Newland! How can you ask such funny questions?" she retorted. "When they go to the theatre in old ball-dresses and bare heads."

"Well, perhaps they wear new ball-dresses at home," he rejoined, wondering what had suddenly awakened in her a morbid interest in clothes. "But at any rate, Mrs. Carfry and Miss Harle won't. They'll wear caps like my mother's—and shawls. Very soft shawls."

"Yes; but how will the other women be dressed?"

"Not as well as you, dear," he answered, surprised by the sudden intensity of her concern.

She pushed back her chair with a sigh. "That's dear of you, Newland; but it doesn't help me much."

Then he had an inspiration. "Why not wear your wedding-dress? That can't be wrong, can it?"

"Oh, dearest! If I only had it here!" Her eyes lit up with regret. "But it's gone to Paris to be made over for next winter, and Worth hasn't sent it back."

"Oh, well—" said Archer, rising. "Look here—the fog's lifting. If we made a dash for the National Gallery, we might manage to catch a glimpse of the pictures."

***

The Newland Archers were on their way home, returning from a three-month wedding tour which May, in her letters to her girl friends, had vaguely summarized as "blissful."

They had not gone to the Italian Lakes. On reflection, Archer had found he could not picture his wife in that particular setting. Her own inclination, after a month with the Paris dressmakers, had been for mountaineering in July and swimming in August. They had punctually fulfilled this plan, spending July at Interlaken and Grindelwald, and August at a little place called Étretat on the Normandy coast, recommended as quaint and quiet. Once or twice, in the mountains, Archer had pointed southward and said, "There's Italy." May, her feet resting in a bed of gentians, had smiled cheerfully and replied, "It would be lovely to go there next winter, if only you didn't have to be in New York."

But in reality, traveling interested her even less than he had expected. Once her clothes were ordered, she regarded the journey merely as an enlarged opportunity for walking, riding, swimming, and trying her hand at the fascinating new game of lawn tennis. When they finally returned to London—where they were to spend a fortnight while he ordered *his* clothes—she no longer concealed the eagerness with which she looked forward to sailing.

In London, nothing interested her but the theatres and the shops. She found the theatres less exciting than the Paris *cafés chantants*, where, under the blossoming horse-chestnuts of the Champs Élysées, she had had the novel experience of looking down from the restaurant terrace on an audience of *cocottes*, and having her husband interpret to her as much of the songs as he thought suitable for bridal ears.

Archer had reverted to all his old inherited ideas about marriage. It was less trouble to conform with the tradition and treat May exactly as all his friends treated their wives than to try to put into practice the theories with which his untrammeled bachelorhood had dallied. There was no use in trying to emancipate a wife who had not the dimmest notion that she was not free; and he had long since discovered that May's only use of the liberty she supposed herself to possess would be to lay it on the altar of her wifely adoration. Her innate dignity would always keep her from making the gift abjectly; and a day might even come, as it once had, when she would find strength to take it altogether back if she thought she were doing it for his own good. But with a conception of marriage so uncomplicated and incurious as hers, such a crisis could be brought about only by something visibly outrageous in his own conduct; and the fineness of her feeling for him made that unthinkable. Whatever happened, he knew, she would always be loyal, gallant, and unresentful; and that pledged him to the practice of the same virtues.

All this tended to draw him back into his old habits of mind. If her simplicity had been the simplicity of pettiness, he would have chafed and rebelled; but since the lines of her character, though so few, were cast in the same fine mold as her face, she became the tutelary divinity of all his old traditions and reverences.

Such qualities were scarcely of the kind to enliven foreign travel, though they made her so easy and pleasant a companion. He saw at once how they would fall into place in their proper setting. He had no fear of being oppressed by them, for his artistic and intellectual life would go on, as it always had, outside the domestic circle. Within it, there would be nothing small and stifling—coming back to his wife would never be like entering a stuffy room after a tramp in the open. And when they had children, the vacant corners in both their lives would be filled.

All these thoughts went through his mind during their long, slow drive from Mayfair to South Kensington, where Mrs. Carfry and her sister lived. Archer, too, would have preferred to escape their hospitality. In conformity with the family tradition, he had always traveled as a sight-seer and looker-on, affecting a haughty unconsciousness of the presence of his fellow beings. Once only, just after Harvard, he had spent a few gay weeks at Florence with a band of queer, Europeanized Americans, dancing all night with titled ladies in palaces and gambling half the day with the rakes and dandies of the fashionable clubs. But it had all seemed to him, though the greatest fun in the world, as unreal as a carnival. These queer cosmopolitan women, deep in complicated love affairs which they appeared to feel the need of retailing to everyone they met, and the magnificent young officers and elderly dyed wits who were the subjects or recipients of their confidences, were too different from the people Archer had grown up among. They were too much like expensive, rather malodorous hot-house exotics to detain his imagination long. To introduce his wife into such a society was out of the question; and in the course of his travels, no other had shown any marked eagerness for his company.

Not long after their arrival in London, he had run across the Duke of St. Austrey. The Duke, instantly and cordially recognizing him, had said, "Look me up, won't you?" But no proper-spirited American would have considered that a suggestion to be acted upon, and the meeting was without a sequel. They had even managed to avoid May's English aunt, the banker's wife, who was still in Yorkshire. In fact, they had purposely postponed going to London until the autumn so that their arrival during the season would not appear pushing and snobbish to these unknown relatives.

"Probably there'll be nobody at Mrs. Carfry's," Archer said to May, who sat at his side in the hansom. "London's a desert at this season, and you've made yourself much too beautiful."

May looked out at the passing gray streets, her sky-blue cloak edged with swansdown making her seem spotlessly splendid against the grime of the city. "I don't want them to think that we dress like savages," she replied, with a scorn that Pocahontas might have resented.

He was struck again by the religious reverence of even the most unworldly American women for the social advantages of dress. "It's their armour," he thought. "Their defence against the unknown, and their defiance of it." And he understood for the first time the earnestness with which May, who was incapable of tying a ribbon in her hair to charm him, had gone through the solemn rite of selecting and ordering her extensive wardrobe.

He had been right in expecting the party at Mrs. Carfry's to be a small one. Besides their hostess and her sister, they found, in the long, chilly drawing-room, only another shawled lady, a genial Vicar who was her husband, a silent lad whom Mrs. Carfry named as her nephew, and a small, dark gentleman with lively eyes whom she introduced as his tutor, pronouncing a French name as she did so.

Into this dimly-lit and dim-featured group, May Archer floated like a swan with the sunset on her. She seemed larger, fairer, more voluminously rustling than her husband had ever seen her. He perceived that the rosiness and rustlingness were the tokens of an extreme and infantile shyness.

"What on earth will they expect me to talk about?" her helpless eyes implored him, at the very moment that her dazzling apparition was calling forth the same anxiety in their own bosoms. But beauty, even when distrustful of itself, awakens confidence in the manly heart. The Vicar and the French-named tutor
