"Ol... ol... how do you spell it, anyhow?" asked the sharp-tongued young lady to whom Archer had just slid his wife's telegram across the brass ledge of the Western Union office.

"Olenska—O-len-ska," he repeated, pulling the message back to print the foreign syllables above May's sprawling script.

"It's a peculiar name for a New York telegraph office; at least, in this part of town," an unexpected voice remarked. Turning, Archer found Lawrence Lefferts standing at his elbow, tugging at an impassive mustache and pretending not to look at the paper.

"Hallo, Newland. Thought I'd catch you here. I just heard about old Mrs. Mingott's stroke, and since I was heading to the house, I saw you turning down this street and followed. Did you come from there?"

Archer nodded and shoved the telegram under the lattice.

"Very bad, eh?" Lefferts continued. "Wiring the family, I suppose. I gather it *is* bad, if you're including the Countess Olenska."

Archer's lips tightened. A savage urge surged within him to drive his fist into the long, vain, handsome face beside him.

"Why?" he asked.

Lefferts, a man known for avoiding discussion, raised his eyebrows in an ironic grimace that warned Archer of the watching girl behind the lattice. Nothing could be worse "form" than displaying temper in public. Archer had never been more indifferent to social propriety, yet his impulse to harm Lawrence Lefferts was fleeting. The thought of bandying Ellen Olenska's name with him at such a moment, under any pretext, was unthinkable. He paid for the telegram, and the two young men stepped out into the street together. Once his composure returned, Archer said, "Mrs. Mingott is much better; the doctor feels no anxiety whatever." Lefferts, expressing profuse relief, then asked if Archer had heard the beastly rumors swirling again about Beaufort.

That afternoon, the announcement of Beaufort's failure dominated every newspaper, eclipsing the report of Mrs. Manson Mingott's stroke. Only those aware of the mysterious link between the two events considered attributing old Catherine's illness to anything other than the accumulation of flesh and years. The entire city was darkened by the tale of Beaufort's dishonor. As Mr. Letterblair noted, there had never been a worse case in his memory, nor in the memory of the distant Letterblair who gave the firm its name. The bank had continued accepting deposits for a full day after its collapse was inevitable. Since many clients belonged to the ruling clans, Beaufort's duplicity seemed doubly cynical. Had Mrs. Beaufort not adopted the tone that such misfortunes were "the test of friendship," compassion for her might have softened the general indignation against her husband. As it was—and especially after the object of her nocturnal visit to Mrs. Manson Mingott became known—her cynicism was deemed to exceed his. She lacked the excuse, nor did her detractors find satisfaction in claiming she was "a foreigner." It offered some comfort (to those whose securities were safe) to remind themselves that Beaufort *was*; yet, if a Dallas of South Carolina took his view and glibly spoke of soon being "on his feet again," the argument lost its bite. There was nothing left but to accept this awful proof of the indissolubility of marriage. Society must manage without the Beauforts, and that was that—except for hapless victims like Medora Manson, the poor old Miss Lannings, and certain misguided ladies of good family who, if only they had listened to Mr. Henry van der Luyden...

"The best thing the Beauforts can do," declared Mrs. Archer, summing it up as if diagnosing a patient and prescribing a cure, "is to move to Regina's little place in North Carolina. Beaufort has always kept a racing stable; he should breed trotting horses. I'd say he possesses all the qualities of a successful horsedealer." Everyone agreed, though no one condescended to inquire what the Beauforts truly intended.

The next day, Mrs. Manson Mingott was significantly better. She recovered enough voice to order that no one mention the Beauforts to her again and, when Dr. Bencomb appeared, asked what in the world her family meant by making such a fuss about her health.

"If people of my age *will* eat chicken salad in the evening, what are they to expect?" she inquired. With the doctor opportunistically modifying her diet, the stroke transformed into an attack of indigestion. Yet, despite her firm tone, old Catherine did not fully regain her former attitude toward life. The growing remoteness of age, though it hadn't dimmed her curiosity about her neighbors, had dulled her never-very-lively compassion for their troubles. She seemed to have no trouble putting the Beaufort disaster from her mind. For the first time, she became absorbed in her own symptoms, developing a sentimental interest in certain family members to whom she had previously been contemptuously indifferent.

Mr. Welland, in particular, attracted her notice. Of her sons-in-law, he was the one she had most consistently ignored; all his wife's efforts to portray him as a man of forceful character and marked intellect (if he had only "chosen") had been met with a derisive chuckle. But his eminence as a hypochondriac now made him an object of engrossing interest. Mrs. Mingott issued an imperial summons for him to come and compare diets as soon as his temperature permitted, for old Catherine was now the first to recognize that one could not be too careful about temperatures.

Twenty-four hours after Madame Olenska's summons, a telegram announced she would arrive from Washington on the evening of the following day. At the Wellands', where the Newland Archers happened to be lunching, the question of who should meet her at Jersey City arose immediately. The material difficulties with which the Welland household struggled, as if it were a frontier outpost, lent animation to the debate. It was agreed that Mrs. Welland could not possibly go to Jersey City, as she was to accompany her husband to old Catherine's that afternoon, and the brougham could not be spared, since if Mr. Welland were "upset" by seeing his mother-in-law for the first time after her attack, he might need to be taken home at a moment's notice. The Welland sons would naturally be "down town," Mr. Lovell Mingott would be just returning from his shooting with his carriage engaged, and one could not ask May, at the close of a winter afternoon, to go alone across the ferry to Jersey City, even in her own carriage. Nevertheless, it might seem inhospitable—and contrary to old Catherine's express wishes—if Madame Olenska were allowed to arrive without any family member at the station. It was just like Ellen, Mrs. Welland's tired voice implied, to place the family in such a dilemma. "It's always one thing after another," the poor lady grieved, in one of her rare revolts against fate; "the only thing that makes me think Mamma must be less well than Dr. Bencomb admits is this morbid desire to have Ellen come at once, however inconvenient it is to meet her."

The words were thoughtless, as utterances of impatience often are, and Mr. Welland was upon them with a pounce.

"Augusta," he said, turning pale and laying down his fork, "do you have any other reason for thinking Bencomb is less reliable than he was? Have you noticed he has been less conscientious than usual in following up my case or your mother's?"

It was Mrs. Welland's turn to grow pale as the endless consequences of her blunder unrolled before her, but she managed to laugh and take a second helping of scalloped oysters before saying, struggling back into her old armor of cheerfulness: "My dear, how could you imagine such a thing? I only meant that, after the decided stand Mamma took about it being Ellen's duty to return to her husband, it seems strange she should be seized with this sudden whim to see her, when there are half a dozen other grandchildren she might have asked for. But we must never forget that Mamma, in spite of her wonderful vitality, is a very old woman."

Mr. Welland's brow remained clouded, and it was evident his perturbed imagination had fastened immediately on this last remark. "Yes: your mother is a very old woman; and for all we know, Bencomb may not be as successful with very old people. As you say, my dear, it's always one thing after another; and in another ten or fifteen years, I suppose, I shall have the pleasing duty of looking about for a new doctor. It's always better to make such a change before it's absolutely necessary." Having arrived at this Spartan decision, Mr. Welland firmly took up his fork.

"But all the while," Mrs. Welland began again as she rose from the luncheon table and led the way into the wilderness of purple satin and malachite known as the back drawing-room, "I don't see how Ellen is to be got here tomorrow evening; and I do like to have things settled for at least twenty-four hours ahead."

Archer turned from the fascinated contemplation of a small painting depicting two Cardinals carousing, framed in octagonal ebony set with onyx medallions.

"Shall I fetch her?" he proposed. "I can easily get away from the office in time to meet the brougham at the ferry, if May will send it there." His heart beat excitedly as he spoke.

Mrs. Welland heaved a sigh of gratitude, and May, who had moved to the window, turned to shower him with a beam of approval. "So you see, Mamma, everything *will* be settled twenty-four hours in advance," she said, stooping to kiss her mother's troubled forehead.

May's brougham awaited her at the door, and she was to drive Archer to Union Square, where he could catch a Broadway car to the office. As she settled into her corner, she said, "I didn't want to worry Mamma by raising fresh obstacles; but how can you meet Ellen tomorrow and bring her back to New York when you're going to Washington?"

"Oh, I'm not going," Archer answered.

"Not going? Why, what's happened?" Her voice was clear as a bell, full of wifely solicitude.

"The case is off—postponed."

"Postponed? How odd! I saw a note this morning from Mr. Letterblair to Mamma saying he was going to Washington tomorrow for the big patent case he was to argue before the Supreme Court. You said it was a patent case, didn't you?"

"Well—that's it: the whole office can't go. Letterblair decided to go this morning."

"Then it's *not* postponed?" she continued, with an insistence so unlike her that he felt blood rising to his face, as if he were blushing for her unwonted lapse from all traditional delicacies.

"No: but my going is," he answered, cursing the unnecessary explanations he had given when announcing his intention to go to Washington, and wondering where he had read that clever liars give details, but the cleverest do not. It did not hurt him half as much to tell May an untruth as to see her trying to pretend she had not detected him.

"I'm not going till later on: luckily for the convenience of your family," he continued, taking base refuge in sarcasm. As he spoke, he felt her looking at him and turned his eyes to hers to avoid appearing to evade them. Their glances met for a second, perhaps letting them into each other's meanings more deeply than either cared to admit.

"Yes; it *is* awfully convenient," May brightly agreed, "that you should be able to meet Ellen after all; you saw how much Mamma appreciated your offering to do it."

"Oh, I'm delighted to do it." The carriage stopped, and as he jumped out, she leaned toward him and laid her hand on his. "Good-bye, dearest," she said, her eyes so blue that he wondered afterward if they had shone on him through tears.

He turned away and hurried across Union Square, repeating to himself in a sort of inward chant: "It's all of two hours from Jersey City to old Catherine's. It's all of two hours—and it may be more."
