I walked to the railway station accompanied, it is needless to say, by Gabriel Betteredge. I had the letter in my pocket, and the nightgown safely packed in a little bag—both to be submitted, before I slept that night, to the investigation of Mr. Bruff. We left the house in silence. For the first time in my experience of him, I found old Betteredge in my company without a word to say to me. Having something to say on my side, I opened the conversation as soon as we were clear of the lodge gates. “Before I go to London,” I began, “I have two questions to ask you. They relate to myself, and I believe they will rather surprise you.” “If they will put that poor creature’s letter out of my head, Mr. Franklin, they may do anything else they like with me.

have abandoned my regular habits, on that night of all others.” Betteredge considered for a moment. “You did go out of your habits, sir,” he said. “And I’ll tell you how. You looked wretchedly ill—and we persuaded you to have a drop of brandy and water to cheer you up a little.” “I am not used to brandy and water. It is quite possible——” “Wait a bit, Mr. Franklin. I knew you were not used, too. I poured you out half a wineglass-full of our fifty year old Cognac; and (more shame for me!) I drowned that noble liquor in nigh on a tumbler-full of cold water. A child couldn’t have got drunk on it—let alone a grown man!” I knew I could depend on his memory, in a matter of this kind. It was plainly impossible that I could have been intoxicated.

Here again, I felt that Betteredge must be right. Neither at home nor abroad had my life ever been of the solitary sort. If I had been a sleep-walker, there were hundreds on hundreds of people who must have discovered me, and who, in the interest of my own safety, would have warned me of the habit, and have taken precautions to restrain it. Still, admitting all this, I clung—with an obstinacy which was surely natural and excusable, under the circumstances—to one or other of the only two explanations that I could see which accounted for the unendurable position in which I then stood. Observing that I was not yet satisfied, Betteredge shrewdly adverted to certain later events in the history of the Moonstone; and scattered both my theories to the wind at once and for ever. “Let’s try it another way, sir,” he said.

your journey’s end? Excuse me for saying it, Mr. Franklin, but this business has so upset you, that you’re not fit yet to judge for yourself. The sooner you lay your head alongside Mr. Bruff’s head, the sooner you will see your way out of the dead-lock that has got you now.” We reached the station, with only a minute or two to spare. I hurriedly gave Betteredge my address in London, so that he might write to me, if necessary; promising, on my side, to inform him of any news which I might have to communicate. This done, and just as I was bidding him farewell, I happened to glance towards the book-and-newspaper stall. There was Mr. Candy’s remarkable-looking assistant again, speaking to the keeper of the stall! Our eyes met at the same moment. Ezra Jennings took off his hat to me.

he sent a message to the ladies of his family, forbidding them to disturb us on any pretence whatever. These preliminaries disposed of, he first examined the nightgown, and then devoted himself to the reading of Rosanna Spearman’s letter. The reading completed, Mr. Bruff addressed me for the first time since we had been shut up together in the seclusion of his own room. “Franklin Blake,” said the old gentleman, “this is a very serious matter, in more respects than one. In my opinion, it concerns Rachel quite as nearly as it concerns you. Her extraordinary conduct is no mystery now . She believes you have stolen the Diamond.” I had shrunk from reasoning my own way fairly to that revolting conclusion. But it had forced itself on me, nevertheless. My resolution to obtain a personal interview with Rachel, rested really and truly on the ground just stated by Mr.

should like to know——” “You would like to know how I can justify it,” interposed Mr. Bruff. “I can tell you in two minutes. Understand, in the first place, that I look at this matter from a lawyer’s point of view. It’s a question of evidence, with me. Very well. The evidence breaks down, at the outset, on one important point.” “On what point?” “You shall hear. I admit that the mark of the name proves the nightgown to be yours. I admit that the mark of the paint proves the nightgown to have made the smear on Rachel’s door. But what evidence is there to prove that you are the person who wore it, on the night when the Diamond was lost?” The objection struck me, all the more forcibly that it reflected an objection which I had felt myself.

“As to this,” pursued the lawyer taking up Rosanna Spearman’s confession, “I can understand that the letter is a distressing one to you . I can understand that you may hesitate to analyse it from a purely impartial point of view. But I am not in your position. I can bring my professional experience to bear on this document, just as I should bring it to bear on any other. Without alluding to the woman’s career as a thief, I will merely remark that her letter proves her to have been an adept at deception, on her own showing; and I argue from that, that I am justified in suspecting her of not having told the whole truth.

and Rachel at variance for the rest of your lives. She had not decided on destroying herself, then , remember; and, having the opportunity, I distinctly assert that it was in her character, and in her position at the time, to take it. What do you say to that?” “Some such suspicion,” I answered, “crossed my own mind, as soon as I opened the letter.” “Exactly! And when you had read the letter, you pitied the poor creature, and couldn’t find it in your heart to suspect her. Does you credit, my dear sir—does you credit!” “But suppose it turns out that I did wear the nightgown? What then?” “I don’t see how the fact can be proved,” said Mr. Bruff. “But assuming the proof to be possible, the vindication of your innocence would be no easy matter. We won’t go into that, now.

started, in ungovernable agitation, to my feet. The lawyer’s question reminded me, for the first time since I had left England, that something had happened. In the eighth chapter of Betteredge’s Narrative, an allusion will be found to the arrival of a foreigner and a stranger at my aunt’s house, who came to see me on business. The nature of his business was this. I had been foolish enough (being, as usual, straitened for money at the time) to accept a loan from the keeper of a small restaurant in Paris, to whom I was well known as a customer. A time was settled between us for paying the money back; and when the time came, I found it (as thousands of other honest men have found it) impossible to keep my engagement. I sent the man a bill. My name was unfortunately too well known on such documents: he failed to negotiate it.

le   ) -  it  bayi al  here ed   just   this , .. , si caneaéerdrs ooen,,a,o,a ind,   is   de a  dddgd di de dadai add  inae  cy  isa is is  to .  has  s,sd as  gy gd is is has,  viae ,,, ,e y,g d,,g sei, dy ,dd,i,,., a,..,,m.e.d..oo.dd.d .eddveddeed

determined on seeing Rachel personally; and twice, having regard to his age and his character, I hesitated to take him by surprise at an unfavourable moment. “The grand difficulty is,” he resumed, “how to make her show her whole mind in this matter, without reserve. Have you any suggestions to offer?” “I have made up my mind, Mr. Bruff, to speak to Rachel myself.” “You!” He suddenly stopped in his walk, and looked at me as if he thought I had taken leave of my senses. “You, of all the people in the world!” He abruptly checked himself, and took another turn in the room. “Wait a little,” he said. “In cases of this extraordinary kind, the rash way is sometimes the best way.” He considered the question for a moment or two, under that new light, and ended boldly by a decision in my favour.

The question is—how are you to see her?” “She has been a guest of yours at this house,” I answered. “May I venture to suggest—if nothing was said about me beforehand—that I might see her here?” “Cool!” said Mr. Bruff. With that one word of comment on the reply that I had made to him, he took another turn up and down the room. “In plain English,” he said, “my house is to be turned into a trap to catch Rachel; with a bait to tempt her, in the shape of an invitation from my wife and daughters. If you were anybody else but Franklin Blake, and if this matter was one atom less serious than it really is, I should refuse point-blank. As things are, I firmly believe Rachel will live to thank me for turning traitor to her in my old age.

disinclined me to see any of my friends. We often hear (almost invariably, however, from superficial observers) that guilt can look like innocence. I believe it to be infinitely the truer axiom of the two that innocence can look like guilt. I caused myself to be denied all day, to every visitor who called; and I only ventured out under cover of the night. The next morning, Mr. Bruff surprised me at the breakfast-table. He handed me a large key, and announced that he felt ashamed of himself for the first time in his life. “Is she coming?” “She is coming today, to lunch and spend the afternoon with my wife and my girls.” “Are Mrs. Bruff, and your daughters, in the secret?” “Inevitably. But women, as you may have observed, have no principles. My family don’t feel my pangs of conscience.

of you which leads into the music-room. There, you will find Rachel—and find her, alone.” “How can I thank you!” “I will tell you how. Don’t blame me for what happens afterwards.” With those words, he went out. I had many weary hours still to wait through. To while away the time, I looked at my letters. Among them was a letter from Betteredge. I opened it eagerly. To my surprise and disappointment, it began with an apology warning me to expect no news of any importance. In the next sentence the everlasting Ezra Jennings appeared again! He had stopped Betteredge on the way out of the station, and had asked who I was. Informed on this point, he had mentioned having seen me to his master Mr. Candy. Mr. Candy hearing of this, had himself driven over to Betteredge, to express his regret at our having missed each other.

on the inner side, I own to having felt a certain guilty doubtfulness about what might happen next. I looked furtively on either side of me; suspicious of the presence of some unexpected witness in some unknown corner of the garden. Nothing appeared, to justify my apprehensions. The walks were, one and all, solitudes; and the birds and the bees were the only witnesses. I passed through the garden; entered the conservatory; and crossed the small drawing-room. As I laid my hand on the door opposite, I heard a few plaintive chords struck on the piano in the room within. She had often idled over the instrument in this way, when I was staying at her mother’s house. I was obliged to wait a little, to steady myself. The past and present rose side by side, at that supreme moment—and the contrast shook me.
