At the moment when I showed myself in the doorway, Rachel rose from the piano. I closed the door behind me. We confronted each other in silence, with the full length of the room between us. The movement she had made in rising appeared to be the one exertion of which she was capable. All use of every other faculty, bodily or mental, seemed to be merged in the mere act of looking at me. A fear crossed my mind that I had shown myself too suddenly. I advanced a few steps towards her. I said gently, “Rachel!” The sound of my voice brought the life back to her limbs, and the colour to her face. She advanced, on her side, still without speaking. Slowly, as if acting under some influence independent of her own will, she came nearer and nearer to me; the warm dusky colour flushing her cheeks, the light of reviving intelligence brightening every instant in her eyes.

into her presence; I forgot the vile suspicion that rested on my good name; I forgot every consideration, past, present, and future, which I was bound to remember. I saw nothing but the woman I loved coming nearer and nearer to me. She trembled; she stood irresolute. I could resist it no longer—I caught her in my arms, and covered her face with kisses. There was a moment when I thought the kisses were returned; a moment when it seemed as if she, too, might have forgotten. Almost before the idea could shape itself in my mind, her first voluntary action made me feel that she remembered. With a cry which was like a cry of horror—with a strength which I doubt if I could have resisted if I had tried—she thrust me back from her. I saw merciless anger in her eyes; I saw merciless contempt on her lips.

me as you have found it today? It seems a cowardly experiment, to try an experiment on my weakness for you. It seems a cowardly surprise, to surprise me into letting you kiss me. But that is only a woman’s view. I ought to have known it couldn’t be your view. I should have done better if I had controlled myself, and said nothing.” The apology was more unendurable than the insult. The most degraded man living would have felt humiliated by it. “If my honour was not in your hands,” I said, “I would leave you this instant, and never see you again. You have spoken of what I have done. What have I done?” “What have you done! You ask that question of me ?” “I ask it.” “I have kept your infamy a secret,” she answered. “And I have suffered the consequences of concealing it.

appeal to her; I never advanced an inch nearer to her chair. With a pride which was as obstinate as her pride, I told her of my discovery at the Shivering Sand, and of all that had led to it. The narrative, of necessity, occupied some little time. From beginning to end, she never looked round at me, and she never uttered a word. I kept my temper. My whole future depended, in all probability, on my not losing possession of myself at that moment. The time had come to put Mr. Bruff’s theory to the test. In the breathless interest of trying that experiment, I moved round so as to place myself in front of her. “I have a question to ask you,” I said. “It obliges me to refer again to a painful subject. Did Rosanna Spearman show you the nightgown?

this time?” I stopped her there. I could control myself no longer. “You have done me an infamous wrong!” I broke out hotly. “You suspect me of stealing your Diamond. I have a right to know, and I will know, the reason why!” “Suspect you!” she exclaimed, her anger rising with mine. “ You villain, I saw you take the Diamond with my own eyes! ” The revelation which burst upon me in those words, the overthrow which they instantly accomplished of the whole view of the case on which Mr. Bruff had relied, struck me helpless. Innocent as I was, I stood before her in silence. To her eyes, to any eyes, I must have looked like a man overwhelmed by the discovery of his own guilt. She drew back from the spectacle of my humiliation and of her triumph.

evidence of her own eyes, nothing—not even my conviction of my own innocence—was clear to my mind. I took her by the hand; I tried to speak firmly and to the purpose. All I could say was, “Rachel, you once loved me.” She shuddered, and looked away from me. Her hand lay powerless and trembling in mine. “Let go of it,” she said faintly. My touch seemed to have the same effect on her which the sound of my voice had produced when I first entered the room. After she had said the word which called me a coward, after she had made the avowal which branded me as a thief—while her hand lay in mine I was her master still! I drew her gently back into the middle of the room. I seated her by the side of me.

was the hope that she might have overlooked something in the chain of evidence—some mere trifle, perhaps, which might nevertheless, under careful investigation, be made the means of vindicating my innocence in the end. I own I kept possession of her hand. I own I spoke to her with all that I could summon back of the sympathy and confidence of the bygone time. “I want to ask you something,” I said. “I want you to tell me everything that happened, from the time when we wished each other good-night, to the time when you saw me take the Diamond.” She lifted her head from my shoulder, and made an effort to release her hand. “Oh, why go back to it!” she said. “Why go back to it!” “I will tell you why, Rachel. You are the victim, and I am the victim, of some monstrous delusion which has worn the mask of truth.

I think.” “Did you fall asleep?” “No. I couldn’t sleep that night.” “You were restless?” “I was thinking of you.” The answer almost unmanned me. Something in the tone, even more than in the words, went straight to my heart. It was only after pausing a little first that I was able to go on. “Had you any light in your room?” I asked. “None—until I got up again, and lit my candle.” “How long was that, after you had gone to bed?” “About an hour after, I think. About one o’clock.” “Did you leave your bedroom?” “I was going to leave it. I had put on my dressing-gown; and I was going into my sitting-room to get a book——” “Had you opened your bedroom door?” “I had just opened it.” “But you had not gone into the sitting-room?” “No—I was stopped from going into it.” “What stopped you?

the sitting-room door opened, and I saw——” “You saw?” “You.” “Dressed as usual?” “No.” “In my nightgown?” “In your nightgown—with your bedroom candle in your hand.” “Alone?” “Alone.” “Could you see my face?” “Yes.” “Plainly?” “Quite plainly. The candle in your hand showed it to me.” “Were my eyes open?” “Yes.” “Did you notice anything strange in them? Anything like a fixed, vacant expression?” “Nothing of the sort. Your eyes were bright—brighter than usual. You looked about in the room, as if you knew you were where you ought not to be, and as if you were afraid of being found out.” “Did you observe one thing when I came into the room—did you observe how I walked?” “You walked as you always do. You came in as far as the middle of the room—and then you stopped and looked about you.” “What did you do, on first seeing me?” “I could do nothing.

“When I was at the cabinet, my back must have been turned towards you. How did you see what I was doing?” “When you moved, I moved.” “So as to see what I was about with my hands?” “There are three glasses in my sitting-room. As you stood there, I saw all that you did, reflected in one of them.” “What did you see?” “You put your candle on the top of the cabinet. You opened, and shut, one drawer after another, until you came to the drawer in which I had put my Diamond. You looked at the open drawer for a moment. And then you put your hand in, and took the Diamond out.” “How do you know I took the Diamond out?” “I saw your hand go into the drawer. And I saw the gleam of the stone between your finger and thumb, when you took your hand out.” “Did my hand approach the drawer again—to close it, for instance?” “No.

was left alone in the dark.” “Did nothing happen—from that time, to the time when the whole house knew that the Diamond was lost?” “Nothing.” “Are you sure of that? Might you not have been asleep a part of the time?” “I never slept. I never went back to my bed. Nothing happened until Penelope came in, at the usual time in the morning.” I dropped her hand, and rose, and took a turn in the room. Every question that I could put had been answered. Every detail that I could desire to know had been placed before me. I had even reverted to the idea of sleep-walking, and the idea of intoxication; and, again, the worthlessness of the one theory and the other had been proved—on the authority, this time, of the witness who had seen me. What was to be said next? what was to be done next?

answering her I committed a fatal error—I let the exasperating helplessness of my situation get the better of my self-control. Rashly and uselessly, I reproached her for the silence which had kept me until that moment in ignorance of the truth. “If you had spoken when you ought to have spoken,” I began; “if you had done me the common justice to explain yourself——” She broke in on me with a cry of fury. The few words I had said seemed to have lashed her on the instant into a frenzy of rage. “Explain myself!” she repeated. “Oh! is there another man like this in the world? I spare him, when my heart is breaking; I screen him when my own character is at stake; and he —of all human beings, he —turns on me now, and tells me that I ought to have explained myself!

yet! It seems that I owe a justification of my conduct to you . You shall stay and hear it. Or you shall stoop to the lowest infamy of all, and force your way out.” It wrung my heart to see her; it wrung my heart to hear her. I answered by a sign—it was all I could do—that I submitted myself to her will. The crimson flush of anger began to fade out of her face, as I went back, and took my chair in silence. She waited a little, and steadied herself. When she went on, but one sign of feeling was discernible in her. She spoke without looking at me. Her hands were fast clasped in her lap, and her eyes were fixed on the ground. “I ought to have done you the common justice to explain myself,” she said, repeating my own words.

I refrained from alarming the house, and telling everybody what had happened—as I ought to have done. In spite of what I had seen, I was fond enough of you to believe—no matter what!—any impossibility, rather than admit it to my own mind that you were deliberately a thief. I thought and thought—and I ended in writing to you.” “I never received the letter.” “I know you never received it. Wait a little, and you shall hear why. My letter would have told you nothing openly. It would not have ruined you for life, if it had fallen into some other person’s hands. It would only have said—in a manner which you yourself could not possibly have mistaken—that I had reason to know you were in debt, and that it was in my experience and in my mother’s experience of you, that you were not very discreet, or very scrupulous about how you got money when you wanted it.

and empty all the morning. And I hoped—with all my heart and soul I hoped!—that you would take the opportunity, and put the Diamond back secretly in the drawer.” I attempted to speak. She lifted her hand impatiently, and stopped me. In the rapid alternations of her temper, her anger was beginning to rise again. She got up from her chair, and approached me. “I know what you are going to say,” she went on. “You are going to remind me again that you never received my letter. I can tell you why. I tore it up. “For what reason?” I asked. “For the best of reasons. I preferred tearing it up to throwing it away upon such a man as you! What was the first news that reached me in the morning? Just as my little plan was complete, what did I hear?

try if he can play it before me.’ Somebody told me you were on the terrace. I went down to the terrace. I forced myself to look at you; I forced myself to speak to you. Have you forgotten what I said?” I might have answered that I remembered every word of it. But what purpose, at that moment, would the answer have served? How could I tell her that what she had said had astonished me, had distressed me, had suggested to me that she was in a state of dangerous nervous excitement, had even roused a moment’s doubt in my mind whether the loss of the jewel was as much a mystery to her as to the rest of us—but had never once given me so much as a glimpse at the truth? Without the shadow of a proof to produce in vindication of my innocence, how could I persuade her that I knew no more than the veriest stranger could have known of what was really in her thoughts when she spoke to me on the terrace?

of innocence—just as you have looked at me today; just as you are looking at me now! I left you, that morning, knowing you at last for what you were—for what you are—as base a wretch as ever walked the earth!” “If you had spoken out at the time, you might have left me, Rachel, knowing that you had cruelly wronged an innocent man.” “If I had spoken out before other people,” she retorted, with another burst of indignation, “you would have been disgraced for life! If I had spoken out to no ears but yours, you would have denied it, as you are denying it now! Do you think I should have believed you? Would a man hesitate at a lie, who had done what I saw you do—who had behaved about it afterwards, as I saw you behave?

that I have wronged you!” If I had stayed a moment more, I know not what words might have escaped me which I should have remembered with vain repentance and regret. I passed by her, and opened the door for the second time. For the second time—with the frantic perversity of a roused woman—she caught me by the arm, and barred my way out. “Let me go, Rachel” I said. “It will be better for both of us. Let me go.” The hysterical passion swelled in her bosom—her quickened convulsive breathing almost beat on my face, as she held me back at the door. “Why did you come here?” she persisted, desperately. “I ask you again—why did you come here? Are you afraid I shall expose you? Now you are a rich man, now you have got a place in the world, now you may marry the best lady in the land—are you afraid I shall say the words which I have never said yet to anybody but you?

said. “Or you shall never see me again!” With those words, I left her. She started up from the chair on which she had dropped the moment before: she started up—the noble creature!—and followed me across the outer room, with a last merciful word at parting. “Franklin!” she said, “I forgive you! Oh, Franklin, Franklin! we shall never meet again. Say you forgive me! ” I turned, so as to let my face show her that I was past speaking—I turned, and waved my hand, and saw her dimly, as in a vision, through the tears that had conquered me at last. The next moment, the worst bitterness of it was over. I was out in the garden again. I saw her, and heard her, no more.
