("Dearest, thine own feet tread the world at night--
Treading, as moon-flakes step across a dark--
Kissing the very dew to holier light ...
Thy Voice a song past mountains, which to hark
Frightens my soul with an utter lost delight.")

One night, toward the end of the sixteenth hour, as I prepared for sleep, the aether thrummed with a strange, electric vitality. Within that vibration, the voice of Naani rang clear and distinct, vibrating not just in the air but deep within my own soul.

Though I recognized her, I did not answer immediately. Instead, I projected the Master-Word into the darkness. Instantly, the night resonated with the steady, rhythmic beat of the response. I questioned her: Why speak by the Instrument during the watch, when all slept? The Monstruwacans in the Little Pyramid were entering their rest at the eleventh hour; it was now five hours into their sleep cycle. She should have been resting, confined to the Tower of Observation with her father. Yet, her voice was piercingly clear in my mind.

She offered no verbal reply. Instead, a sensation of profound trembling seized me as she spoke words that began:

"Dearest, thine own feet tread the world at night--"

These words struck a chord of terrifying resonance. A memory-dream surged forth: I recalled speaking these exact lines to Mirdath the Beautiful in the long-gone Eternity, when she had died and left me alone in a world stripped of color. Weak with the tumult of this emotion, I called urgently to Naani, demanding an explanation for this utter turmoil in my heart.

Once more, she gave no direct answer. She repeated the words across the dark expanse of the world. Suddenly, the realization struck me: It was not Naani speaking. It was Mirdath the Beautiful, emerging from the everlasting night. I called out, "Mirdath! Mirdath!" into the void. Lo! the faint, distant voice answered again through the darkness of eternity, repeating those haunting lines. Though the voice belonged to Mirdath, it was also the voice of Naani. In my heart, I knew the truth: she had been reborn into this living time to mate once more with the Only One whose spirit and essence had been joined to mine through the ages. I called to Naani with all my strength, but there was no answer, no sign of hearing, though I called for hours.

Exhaustion claimed me, yet sleep refused to come. Eventually, I succumbed.

When I awoke, my first memory was of the wondrous event that had transpired in the sleep-time. None in this world could have known those words unless it were the spirit of Mirdath, my Beautiful One, looking down from above my shoulder in that lost time. The voice was Mirdath's; and Mirdath's voice was Naani's. What could anyone say to this but what lay in my heart?

Immediately, I called to Naani, once, then twice. Soon, the throbbing of the Master-Word filled the night, beating solemnly. I sent the word to offer assurance, and instantly, Naani's voice returned—a little weak, as it always was when she lacked the Instrument, transmitted instead through her brain-elements.

I answered her, questioning her eagerly about her words from the sleep-time. She disclaimed any knowledge, stating clearly that she had slept through the entire period and had merely dreamed a strange dream.

Confused and meditative, I soon realized that Naani's far voice was thrilling the aether around me, and she intended to recount the dream that had weighed heavily on her mind.

She described seeing a tall, dark man, built massive and dressed in unfamiliar clothing. He stood in a small room, sorrowful and lonesome. She had approached him. Presently, the man began to write to ease his sorrow. Naani could read the words, though the language was strange and unknown to her waking spirit. She could not recall what he wrote except for one short line: the word *Mirdath* appeared above it. She noted the strangeness of dreaming this name, suspecting I had implanted it during my initial calls.

With a tremor in my spirit, I asked Naani to recount what she remembered of the writing of that big, sorrowful stranger. In a moment, her far voice echoed around me:

"Dearest, thine own feet tread the world at night--"

No more did she remember. Yet, this was sufficient. With a mad, strange triumph in my soul, I projected the remaining words of the line into her mind. My spirit felt them strike against Naani's consciousness with the violence of a blow. For a moment, she stumbled, dumbfounded by such newness and certainty. Then her spirit awoke fully, and she nearly wept from the fright and sudden wonder of this revelation.

Immediately, her voice thrilled all around me. It was the voice of Mirdath and the voice of Naani intertwined. I heard the tears of her spirit purify the bewildered, growing gladness of her far voice. She asked me, as one who had suddenly opened the Gates of Memory, if she might truly be Mirdath. I, utterly weak and shaken by this splendour of fulfilment, could make no instant answer. She asked again, using my old love-name, with a sureness in her far voice. Still, I was strangely dumb, the blood thudding peculiarly in my ears, before speech finally came swift.

Thus was the meeting of our spirits across the everlasting night.

Picture this: Naani stood in the world of that far eternity, her spirit speaking with mine, looking back through the part-opened gates of her memory into the past of our life and Age. She saw more than was given to me in that Age; she had memory and sight of other instances, other comings together, which held some confusion and half-meanings for me. Yet, of our present Age and life, we spoke as of some yesterday, very hallowed.

As may be conceived, the wonder of this surety stirred me fiercely to its completion. All my heart and spirit cried out to be with that one who was Mirdath, now speaking with the voice of Naani.

Yet, how could this be won? None among the learned men of the Mighty Pyramid knew the position of the Lesser Redoubt. The Records and Histories of the World offered no such knowledge, only a general thought among Students and Monstruwacans that it lay between the North-West and North-East. No man had surety; none could conceive of the distance from us to that Refuge.

Counting all this, there remained the incredible danger and peril of the Night Land, and the hunger and desolation of the Outer Lands, sometimes named the Unknown Lands.

I spoke much with Naani concerning their position. Neither she nor her father, the Master Monstruwacan of that Refuge, knew our location. They only knew that the Builder of the Lesser Redoubt had come from the Southward World in the Beginning, as their Records indicated.

Naani's father set an ancient Compass to bear. As he explained through the Instrument, such a power of the Earth-Current must belong to us that it perhaps affected the pointer from steadfastness. Indeed, the needle swung in an arc between North and South, within the Westward arc. This it had done ever for them, rendering it a helpless guide. Save that, perhaps, as we thought, the force of the Earth-Current accompanying us had some power to pull the needle toward us. If this were true, we reckoned the Lesser Redoubt lay to the North; they likewise placed us to the South. Yet, it was all built upon the sand of guess-work; nothing to adventure life and soul upon.

Curious, though a million times this had been done in past ages, we set the compass before us, taken from the Great Museum. But, as ever in that age, it spun if we but stirred the needle, stopping nowhere with surety. The flow of the Earth-Current from the "Crack" beneath the Pyramid had power to affect it away from the North, setting it wandering. This may seem strange to this present Age, yet to that, it was most true to the seeming nature of things. Harder to believe was that it ever pointed steadfastly to prove a guide of sureness and unfailing trust.

Be it known, we knew the positions of the Land by tradition, coming from that ancient time when, in the Half-Gloom, they had builded the Pyramid. They had known the use of that ancient compass and, with sight of the Sun, had named the Positions. Though we of that far future day had forgotten the very beginnings of those Names of Direction, we used them because our fathers had done so a million years and more. Likewise, we did the same with the names of day, night, weeks, months, and years. Though of the visible markings of these there was nothing but the everlasting night, it seemed very natural to that people.

Naani, heedful of my constant questions, craved with an utter keen hunger that I might come to her. Yet she forbade it, deeming it better to live and commune in the spirit than to risk my soul, and perhaps die, in the foolishness of trying to find her in all the darkness of the dead world. Yet, no heed had I taken of her commands had I but known the surety of the *direction* in which she might be discovered, and gained some knowledge of the space between. This might be named by thousands of miles, or but by hundreds; though a great distance it was surely.

Yet, one other thing had point here. When I sent my speech out into the night using my brain-elements, I came to know that, whether I had knowledge of the North or not at the moment, I turned often with a sure instinct to that Direction. The Master Monstruwacan took very great note of this. He had me experiment many times and ways, enclosing me with screens or bandages across my eyes so that I could have no external knowledge to point me the way. Yet, I would turn Northwards very frequently by a certain feeling, seeming unable of speech if forced otherwise.

When we asked Naani if she had an unusualness in this matter, she could discover none. We could but take note curiously of what affected my habits, truly setting it to the attracting of her spirit. I had mind that she was somewhere out that way in the darkness of the world; yet this was no more than supposing, as you perceive.

The Master Monstruwacan wrote a study of this matter of my Northwardness, setting it out in the Hour-Slips of the Tower of Observation. Thus it was copied by the Hour-Slips of the great cities, causing much comment and calling up to me through the home instruments. With this, and the speech going about concerning my powers to hear, I was much in talk, diversely pleased and oft angered by overmuch attention and importunity.

Now, whilst I pondered this matter in all my spirit and being—how I should some way come to Naani—a very terrible thing befell.

It was at the seventeenth hour, when all the millions of the Mighty Pyramid slept, that I was with the Master Monstruwacan in the Tower of Observation taking my due turn. Suddenly, I heard the thrilling of the aether all about me, and the voice of Naani in my soul, speaking. I sent the Master-Word into the darkness of the world, and presently, I heard the solemn answer beating steadfastly in the night. Immediately, I called to Naani with my brain-elements to know what troubled her in her sleep.

Her voice came into my spirit, weak and far and faint, so that scarce I could make out the words. Yet, in a while, I gathered that all the peoples of the Lesser Redoubt were in very deadly trouble. The Earth-Current had failed suddenly and mightily. They had called her from her sleep to listen whether we answered their callings by the Instrument; but indeed, no calling had come to us.

Those who had been of late so joyful were now grown old with sorrow in but an hour or two. They feared that the fresh coming of the Earth-Current had been but the final flicker and outburst before the end. Even in this short while of our speech, it seemed to me that the voice of Naani grew further off. I felt like to have broken my heart with the trouble of this thing.

Through all that remained of that sleep-time, I conversed with Naani as might two lovers who shall presently part forever. When the cities awoke, the news went throughout them, and all our millions were in sorrow and trouble.

Thus was it for, maybe, a little month. In that time, the voice of Naani had grown so weak and far-off that even I, who had the Night-Hearing, could scarce make real its meaning. Every word was a treasure and a touch upon my soul. My grief and trouble before this certain parting drove me that I could not eat, nor have rest. The Master Monstruwacan took upon him to chide and correct me, for if any were to help, how should it be done if I, who had the Night-Hearing and heard even now that the recording Instruments were dumb, came to ill-health?

Because of this, and such wisdom as was mine, I made to eat and order my life that I might have my full powers. Yet this was beyond all my strength. Presently, I knew that the people of the Lesser Pyramid were threatened by the monsters that beset them. Later, I had knowledge from faint, far words whispered in my brain that there had been a fight with an outside Force that had harmed many in their minds. In madness, they had opened the gate and run from the Lesser Pyramid out into the darkness of the Lands about them. There had their physical bodies fallen to the monsters of those Lands; but of their souls, who may know?

We set this assuredly to the failure of the Earth-Current, which had robbed them of all force and power. So, in those few weeks, all life and joy of living had left them. Neither hunger nor thirst had they much, nor any great desire to live; but yet a new and mighty fear of death. This doth seem very strange.

As may be
