Down the mighty slope I descended, moving with a quiet, deliberate slowness into that absolute Darkness. I made my way cautiously, for now you must know me truly wrapped in a night that seemed to press upon my very soul—a darkness you have never seen nor felt. In its grip, I felt lost even to myself, appearing to move in an unreal fashion, passing onward forever through an everlasting void. At odd intervals, my mind would falter, making me feel as though I stepped no longer upon this earth but drifted off into the Void itself. Yet, each time this foolishness of the mind arose, reality would strike me back: I would kick against an upjutting rock or fall upon a great, unseen boulder, shaken instantly into a sound knowledge that I trod hard, actual ground, and had no true dealings with unreal matters.

I went downward, guided only by this relentless descent. Through the utter blackness, I made scarce a mile in an hour, sometimes taking two full hours to cover such a distance, growing bitter from my inability to stride freely. Soon, I devised a plan to light my path. I would spin the Diskos occasionally, watching the little way the strange glistening showed, fixing my route in my inward memory before moving forward again. Only when the darkness shook me once more, and I yearned for the blessedness of light to know my way, would I summon the Diskos again.

Truly, the light from the Diskos seemed astonishingly great, not because it was powerful, but because the surrounding darkness was so monstrous and eternal. I would go onward until the pain of my stumblings demanded that sweet shining once more. You shall perceive my going; it was sore and miserable to the heart, shaking the courage of the spirit. Yet in verity, I had come through much, and I gave way to no foolishness of thought. I used the Diskos only when I surely needed it, for it was not wisdom to waste such power save in extremity.

After six long, bitter hours—beyond the twentieth hour since my last slumber—I sat upon the Mighty Slope in the everlasting Dark. I ate two tablets, made water, and felt, hearkened, wondering if I did this thing right. When finished, I unfolded my cloak, wrapped it around me, placed my scrip and pouch under my head, took the Diskos to my side, and fell swiftly into sleep. Even then, I thought earnestly, though vaguely, of Naani.

I slept nearly six hours, waking suddenly in the utter dark. I propped myself up on my elbow, listening keenly. I had woken immediately, as if something had touched me or come nigh. Gripping the Diskos, I listened, but not a little sound came from all that night. Presently, assured that naught made harm about me, I sat up, reached for my scrip, and ate and drank there in the utter night, fumbling somewhat as you might expect. Done in a while, I gathered my gear, took the Diskos in hand, and stood to move forward.

All that day, a strange unease plagued my spirit. I stopped often to listen, as if my soul told of something near that followed very quietly. My ears perceived nothing, yet I always returned to go downward into the night that held the slope.

In the early part of the seventh hour, after eating and drinking, I had a very sore tumble against a sharp rock. I put my foot suddenly into a small hole and pitched. The fall shook me utterly; I lay quiet for a time, for the rock had surely ripped my body but for the armor. Renewed somewhat in strength and spirit, I decided I should go no more upon my feet, but upon my hands and knees. Thus I could feel the way I went and have less need of the Diskos, which I shone rarely, guessing more than I perceived.

So I crept all that day, a bitter way of travel, though I had done many a sore mile thus through the Night Land. After eighteen hours of downward journeying, eating and drinking thrice, I ceased labor and felt about in the darkness for a level place to rest. I found a spot not so bad, pushing and casting away small boulders that might have irked me. I ate, drank, and composed myself to sleep. Many thoughts of Naani drifted into slumber, mixed with memories of the strange half-fear that had accompanied me all day—the sensation that something went constantly near in the Dark. Twice I rose to my elbow to listen, hearing no sound to trouble me, trusting it was but fancy. Yet I came to a slumber that was not over-restful; truly, I listened even as I slept.

Waking again very suddenly after scarce six hours, just as before, I believed something was anigh. I gripped the Diskos and hearkened, yet there was no sound my ears knew, nor anything the spirit could surely know. All that day was as the day before, save that about the eighth hour I nearly fell into a monstrous pit in the Great Slope. I fell only with my breast upon the edge, drew back, and crawled all around it in the dark to reach the lower side safely. I was shaken and put more in trouble of spirit than before, fearful of how I should proceed, knowing not whether I had come among such things or if I had few to sorrow me.

You shall perceive that I went over-cautious for a great while in that utter dark. Finally, I thought upon a plan to go with more surety and speed. I needed a cord, but I had none. If a boy is no boy who has none about him, shall not the same be said of any man? This I thought as I searched myself, for the sayings of that day ran many like this. Yet in the end I compassed my plan. I buckled the scrip and pouch together, taking one strap from the pouch. It was long and thin, well suited to my purpose. I fixed a stone to the end of the strap, buckled it there, and cast the stone before me as I went upon my hands and knees. Holding the hither end, I could gain some knowledge of whether there lay any great deepness immediately before me, striving thus not to fall down some monstrous cliff in the night.

So I went, casting the stone continually to my front down the slope. You shall think this a cumbersome fashion of travel, yet I was in better case than at any time since I began to go downward the Mighty Slope in the everlasting darkness.

At the eighteenth hour I slept, and was wakened strangely before the sixth hour, just as before. This put always upon me a new wonder and unease. Yet no harm seemed to come unto me, and I strove to have no needful trouble of mind. But that something was always nigh in the dark, I do truly believe; yet I have no knowing that it was evil, for it harmed not me.

Three days more I journeyed thus, never ceasing to creep downward wearily upon my hands and knees. The Diskos remained at my hip, and you shall know how I carried it. By this, I had been on the Great Slope six days of utter Dark, having no wotting but that I went unto some dire and dreadful place; surely, I had gone forever downward a monstrous way.

Here, before telling further, I must set down how the cold was much gone from the air upon the slope. The air had grown, as it seemed, very heavy unto my chest. Concerning this, I should say something. If I do mind me, I have said not overmuch concerning the air of the Night Land and the Mighty Pyramid. Truly, I have been set to tell my story of all that I did truly see and adventure upon. Yet, though I have said but little, you will surely have perceived that the air of that far and chill time was not as the air of this; it was thin and keen within the Night Land, lying not, as I do think, to a great height above the land, but only nigh to the earth.

As you know through my tellings, there was a wondrous difference between the air within the Mighty Pyramid and that which lay without around the base. Upward beyond that, I understood there was no outward air any should breathe; so the Pyramid was sealed in certain wise in all the upper Cities forever. Whether it was sealed utterly from the outward air at the base, I do not surely remember, if in truth I did ever bother my head to such matters.

Yet, if I be set proper in memory and understanding, we drew air from the Underground Fields. Whether they gained any change or newness of air from the Night Land, I have no knowledge, and I lament that I have no sure knowing. Yet, as you shall believe, I could surely write a hundred books upon that Wonder of the Future and still be lacking in the half of all that there is to be told. So I try to have courage to this my task, and have no over-trouble because I do tell but a little of a Great Tale.

Here in this place, I set down how the Peoples of the Pyramid were greater to the chest, methinks, than we of this age. Yet I have no oversurety in the matter; for well it may be that the Reason of *this* age doth blind within me somewhat the Knowledge I have concerning *that*. In verity, is it not but a natural thing to believe those Peoples to be great of the chest, so that they should make a proper dealing with the thin air of that place and that time? And yet, as I strive to make plain unto you, because this thing should be by the making of my Reason, I do the more distrust that Reason shall make foolish my Knowledge; for even a fool should suppose that which I have told, and the truth may be even otherwise.

Yet that the Peoples of the *Upper* Cities had great chests, I do well know; for this was common knowledge, even as we of this age acknowledge the Peoples of Africa to be of blackness, or those of Patagonia to be of great stature. By this one thing should any know a man of the Upper Cities from a man of the Lower Cities. Because this difference grew among the Peoples, there had been once, as any could learn from the Histories, a plan whereby the Peoples should be moved upward and downward through the great height of the Mighty Pyramid, from this city unto that. Yet it met with great disfavour and was put out of force; this is easy to be seen as the natural way of the human heart.

It doth occur unto me that it was like enough to be a plan for health, beside training of the mind, that each youth and maid was put to travel through all the cities of the Mighty Pyramid, which did take three years and two hundred and twenty-five days, as I have told before. By this plan, they were made to breathe the air of every height, mayhaps unto the good of their developing, and to discover that air which was best to their need.

Concerning the air of the Night Land, you shall know that there was in all that Land no flying thing, because the air was grown very thin. Yet, as the Records did show, there had once been monstrous flying-brutes that went over the Land in mighty bounds; but this was in a long-gone age, and we could but suppose that the Records gave truth.

Here you shall know that when the Monstruwacans learned I would journey through the Night Land in search of Naani, there had been some foolish and well-intended talk among them that I take a small flying-ship from the Great Museum beside the models of the Great Ships. Truly, this machine was yet sound to go; it was made of the grey metal of the Mighty Pyramid that did seem to have no power to cease. Yet in verity, I had no skill to manage it, neither had it flown through an hundred thousand years. None did know the mastership of that art, which was learned but by constant practice, and oft made uneasy by fallings that did wreck the machine, as I did know from the Book of Flying. Moreover, as I have told, the air of the Night Land was grown over-weak to uphold such a thing, which I doubt not had made the Peoples of the Pyramid cease from flyings quite so much as they did fear the Forces of Evil in the night.

If there had been air and skill sufficient unto this purpose of flying, yet I had been wicked with foolishness that I should work to be hung upward in the night for all the Evil of the Night Land to behold. And though I had gone up some great way, the machine had surely made a great noise in the quietness of the eternal night, as you shall suppose.

Now indeed am I gone weary that I should need to tell so much concerning the air of that Time and Place; for surely I do seem to make this my story as that I did make a lecturing upon matters of chemistry. So I cast about that I may not bother to tell more upon this matter. Yet in truth, a little more of my thinkings and observings had I better set down here and be done with it. But you shall have patience with me, and know that had this my story been no more than an idle tale, I had been free to make no labour with such matters.

Now there doth a wonder come to me why the Road Makers, who were of that far-off Age before the Age of the Mighty Pyramid, did not *fly* downward from the upper world into the deep of the monstrous valley, but did instead build a road.

Yet it may be that the air of the upper world had grown thin a great age, so that they had truly forgot that once man did have power to fly. But even if they did have proper machines to this purpose, surely it were a wondrous and fearful thing to fly downward an hundred great miles; for they surely would have a dread that they never to rise again through so huge a deep.

Moreover, the downward world that was the bottom of the Great Valley was full of monsters, as was told in the little metal book. The monsters were very strange and unknown, foreign to the whole world that had never come unto the deep of the Valley. The Valley had come, as you shall mind, when the earth did split. This thing was, in truth, like to be thought that same Ending of the World which all Nations have been taught to believe shall come. For in verity, when the world did split and burst
