I carried the Maid an hour further down the Gorge, as I mentioned. By then, I was so exhausted that I nearly collapsed with every step, stumbling constantly because my footing had grown unsteady, a sign of my utter depletion.

I realized I needed to find a place for sleep immediately, or I would likely fall headlong with the Maid, for I was on the verge of falling asleep while walking.

I began to pay attention to the sides of the Gorge. It became clear that I had spent that entire hour in a dream-like state; I was only freshly awakened when I forced my will to perceive anything. Once I regained the power to attend, I knew I had been walking like a sleepwalker. The Gorge seemed entirely new to me, as if I had suddenly woken to find myself walking in this strange, narrow place.

Soon, I recognized my location. I recalled my outward journey, and I possess a strong ability to remember paths I have traveled. I saw a great, reddish fire-hole nearby. I was certain I had passed certain caves in the wall of the Gorge near that fire on my upward journey, and at that time, I had felt a mighty longing to bring Mine Own safely out of peril and secure her in such a place for slumber along our backward route.

I tell you this as a child in pleasure, for truly it was a wondrously happy matter that my desire was about to find its true ending, provided my memory served me correctly.

I proceeded a bit further, and there they were—the little caves, just past the great fire-hole. There were seven of them on the left side of the great cliff of the Gorge, and one appeared particularly cozy and a place of sure safety if we could reach it.

Truly, as I conceived, we had come safe from the Evil Forces of that Land. Yet, I remembered there was no absolute certainty in this. I did not know that no Monster might come downward from the Gorge, out of that Land, and work our deaths while we slept if we lacked a secure place for slumber. Indeed, I had wished we had gone further down the Gorge, but this was impossible; I was completely adrift with weariness. If we reached the topmost cave, however, few Monsters would have the power to reach us before we were warned of their approach. Afterward, they would likely come upward against the Diskos, which would indeed be a difficult endeavor.

It was necessary to wake the Maid. I kissed her as she lay in my arms. Surely, that dear one kissed back in her sleep and remained asleep. Truly, I loved her with all my being. I kissed her again and shook her very gently until she achieved wakefulness, telling her we had arrived at a place fit for our slumber.

She looked around, very sleepy, as I set her to her feet. Then she upbraided herself for having overslept while I labored with her carrying. In verity, I kissed her again as she stood, trying to steady herself, looking so pretty with the sleep still lingering in her eyes. She kissed me very dearly and wholly, and even then, she was scarcely fully awake. She spoke with a little dear abandon, saying she loved me utterly and forever.

Afterward, I climbed to the topmost of the caves, telling Mine Own as she walked up and down a little, so that she might achieve full wakefulness. I was careful to do this because she would need all her powers to come safely upward to the cave.

When I reached the cave, lo! it was so sweet and dry that it made my heart glad. There was a warmth inside the cave, as if a fire burned somewhere through the rocks nearby. The light from the fire-hole reflected inward, making it seem a safe and fitting place for our slumbering.

I came down to Naani, calling that the cave was very proper for our use. Presently, I gave her aid in climbing, and so we came safely into the cave. Truly, we felt very safe and happy.

Yet, before we slept, I released the scrip and the pouch, took the straps, and went downward again into the Gorge. I gathered a good boulder, heavy as I could carry, strapped it to my back, and came upward again to the cave. The Maid was grave and anxious, fearing I might slip and hurt myself. When I returned to the cave, I placed the boulder in the mouth of the cave and balanced it lightly upon the edge, so that a touch would send it rolling downward.

By this device, I conceived that any Beast or Monstrous thing climbing upward while we slept would likely set the rock adrift. Perhaps the rock would harm such a creature, but the chief end was that I would be swiftly woken by the noise.

Then we turned to our slumber. Lo! the Maid had spread the cloak upon the rock for us to sleep on, for truly there was no need for it as a covering, since the cave was so warm as I had described.

Surely, there was no cause for me to use the cloak as a bed; how could I perceive any softness through the sternness of my armor? Yet, I saw that the Maid had made a couch for the two of us, so sweet and natural to lie by me. Still, she preserved her sweet modesty, doing the thing with no thought save that it was natural to our hearts, and that she always longed to be near me, perhaps scarcely fully conscious that her heart prompted her in this.

In verity, I loved her very dearly.

Naani showed me where I should lie upon my side. When I obeyed, she knelt, kissed me on the lips very soberly and lovingly, and lay down upon the cloak beside me. Truly, we both fell asleep in one little minute, as I think.

Now I was woken twelve great hours later by the fizzing of the water. Lo! when I looked, the Maid was not beside me, but was making ready our simple eating and drinking. She laughed at me, very sweet and tender, because she loved me so and was glad to have me awake to her. She came over and kissed me, very brightly and lovingly upon the lips.

After kissing me, she knelt beside me and looked at me very dear and tender. So I knew in a moment that she had woken a while ago and watched me, somehow motherlike, as I slept. How I knew this, I am not sure, save that my spirit knew, or that her thoughts had tongues unto mine.

Truly, I needed to be so loved, and all of you to say like with me. I put up my arms to her as I lay, and she did not deny me. She came into my arms and snuggled there so sweetly, happily, and gladly, with such true delight that it was plain how she loved in all her body and spirit to be near me, as I to her. Yet, truly, as you mind, the armor was upon me. So I feared to take her very strongly in my arms, lest I hurt the dear Maid. Surely, the armor was a stern matter for her to nestle against, but perhaps its sternness pleased her womanheart, and yet, again, perhaps it lacked.

Presently, she made to go from me, and I loosened my arms from her very readily, because I did heed always that she have full sweet liberty of her dear Maidenhood. I was to be watchful sufficient unto this end, yet always honest and wholesome, not over-pondering even in this care. This proper intending you shall ever perceive, if your hearts strive to hearken unto my heart, which speaks alway before you.

The Maid went from me, over to where she had placed the cup of water and the tablets. I made to rise to check that the boulder was safe and untouched in the mouth of the cave. But she called unto me to lie back, for she meant gently to spoil me that once. She said I had no heed to the boulder or whether there was any Monster or Beast near in the Gorge, for the boulder was safe as I had balanced it, and there was no Creature to sight in the Gorge, for she had looked often since waking to this end.

Truly, I obeyed, lay back, and liked that I should be spoiled, as we say. Naani brought the cup of water and the tablets over to me. She took them from the scrip before I had it to my pillow, in that while when I had gone downward for the boulder. Surely, even when she brought the cup, she would not have me rise. She took my head upon her knees, kissed me once very daintily on the lips, and I was very happy to be so loved, wishing no otherwise.

She took a tablet, kissed it, and gave it to me. Afterward, she touched another to my lips and kept that for her own. So we ate and were very glad and happy, somewhat as children are happy, our hearts all at ease.

Presently, we ate each our second tablet in the same wise as the first. Truly, I was kissed more than once. Afterward, we drank each of the water.

When we had made an end, Naani told me to move to stand. Surely, I wondered. I stood up, and lo! I nearly cried out with the pains of my bruising. I was all gone stiff from sleep, and as sore as ever, because I had fought again, as you know, and surely had been hurt more by the Four-Armed Man than I had known.

I perceived then that Naani had supposed I should be thus pained and had given dear thought to the matter. Truly, she had the pot of ointment ready, if I were very bad, to rub me.

She gave me aid with my armor and afterward eased me with my garments. Surely, I was utterly bruised in the body by reason of the violence of the Yellow Beast-Man. The Maid had something so tender and sweet in her eyes as she looked upon the bruising that I was very happy and glowed with contentment.

She had me lie and made me comfortable with the cloak, so loving and grave, that I was as a child cared for by his mother. She rubbed me very skillfully and gently for a great hour until I was all refreshed. In verity, she was a lovely wise maid.

As the Maid ministered unto me, I lay very restful and harkened to the low sound of the muttering of the fire-hole at the bottom of the Gorge. Alway I felt as an happy child clothed in love and guided in wisdom.

Presently, when the Maid had ended her dear care, she put aside the ointment and gave me her hands very daintily to aid me to rise. Surely, when I came again to my feet, I was all eased and had movement with no great pain. This made me wondrous pleased and felt newly courageous, for I had been troubled that I should be so helpless, being the Protector of Mine Own.

When I had tried my limbs and found them in command and ready, I looked about for my garments. Lo! the Maid brought me my spare body-vest from the Pouch, holding it on her arm to give to me. But surely she denied me a moment, standing before me with an admiring and wonder, very sweet and honest, because my arms were so great and hard with muscles.

Indeed, I was very strong, as you have perceived. I was always in affection of the Exercises taught in the Upbringing of all the Peoples of the Mighty Pyramid. By this explaining, you shall understand that I was likely to be strong; but indeed, I owed the straightness and shaping of my body to the Mother that bore me. Afterward, in all my life, I had taken pride in my body being of health and having strength; surely this is a matter very fit for pride, and to be told bravely and with honesty.

The admiring of the Maid was very sweet to me, and in verity, I was to deceive if I said otherwise. In a moment, she dropped my body-vest and put out her hands that I take her into my arms.

I took the Maid into my arms with great gladness and with somewhat of humility that I was nowise good enough to hold her, for my heart was young, and I loved her very dear and youthful. She lay there very quiet and happy a little while. Surely, I found presently that she kissed the great muscling of my breast very sweetly and slyly, where her face pressed against it. Lo! in a moment, she came free of my arms, gave me aid with my garments, and afterward with my armor.

When this was done, she stood off from me. She looked at me, half shy and half of sweetness and naughtiness. She came then in a moment, put her hands upward to my shoulders, and stood her eyelids something down over her eyes, stealing a little look up, this time and that. Lo! in a sudden moment, before I did wot, she was to her knees before me and did weep. I went very swift to kneel with her.

I asked not why she wept. I perceived that she had joy and glad happiness and sweet trouble of her man. She was a true woman, and one part of the woman did worship, so that she was strangely humble and nigh to be shy; another did love and needed to be near me; and a third had calm wisdom. All did now tremble together in her heart. I knew that I was truly an hero to her, though but usual to all others. My heart was wondrous proud and wondrous humble, so that I was in the same moment upraised and to feel dreadfully unworthy. But I made no pretense to discredit myself to her, but only resolved to win alway her dear respect. I was natural and truthful in my manner, without foolish denial of her sweet worship, for she was utter Mine Own, and it would be a pitiful thing if I seemed otherwise than an hero unto her.

But of you I ask kind understanding, and to call me not a thing of conceit because I did understand. Truly, I knew my faults even so well as you, that know all of my going. You to look backward upon the love-days and mind how your maid did ever make you great in manhood with her dear
