Behold, I drew near unto the towering bulk of the Great Pyramid, and my sanctuary, that vast abode of sweet life and safety, ascended higher into the endless night. It appeared to me then as a mountain of immense proportions, a terrifying majesty that ought to have filled me with awe anew. Yet, such was the grip of despair and exhaustion upon my spirit that I felt no wonder at its scale. All that mattered to me was the presence of Mine Own Maid within the refuge of that colossal shelter. And it remained distant, impossibly far.

So I pressed forward across the desolate land with a heavy, determined stride. As I passed a sunken hollow where a fire-hole burned with a sickly heat, something emerged from the depths. It crawled upward, rising into the darkness, revealing itself to be a great, hairy man. He looked upon me, then advanced, his hands thrusting forward with frantic eagerness. In the gloom of the fire-hole, I beheld these hands clearly; they were monstrous, armored with terrible, jagged claws, capable of rending flesh like a wild beast.

With a swift motion, I dropped my burden to the ground. I cared not for life, nor for anything else; this creature delayed me, and my despair flared into a fierce rage that nothing should hinder me. Leaping forward with cold fury, I struck at the giant, but he sidestepped instantly, vanishing into the shadow cast by the dancing fire. Before I could recover, he flung out his massive arm from the half-light, snatching my helmet from my head with brutish strength and casting me down a dozen feet onto the hard earth. Yet, I suffered no mortal harm, only severe shaking and bruises. I rose immediately, closing in upon the giant, swinging the Diskos as it roared and blazed in my hands. I brought the weapon down upon his midsection, and the Diskos glutted itself, piercing through the giant as if he were non-existent, despite his size and strength. His shoulders twisted as he fell, his upper body crashing to the earth while his legs and trunk stood stark in the light of the fire-hole, blood gushing upward like a fountain into the night.

I made no pause, leaping to reclaim Mine Own Maid, holding her tight in my arms, and surged onward past the fallen carcass, which gave a final, horrible groan. Suddenly, the night seemed to swell with astonishment and uplifted spirits; the spiritual cries of the Millions swarmed around me, telling me they had witnessed this, pouring their love and delight into me, generating a vast excitement.

Scarcely a mile further, however, two vague shapes emerged from a dark recess where rocks jutted upward. I smote them with the Diskos and pressed on, but I never learned what manner of beings they were. After that, it seemed I was smiting forever. Strange things crept from the bushes and rocks, time and again, as if the entire land teemed with foul and monstrous life. I moved as in a dream, smiting and speeding forward with an increasingly fierce despair, for surely the end of our lives had arrived, and I lacked the power to save Mine Own Maid.

All the land rang with grim, monstrous roarings and odd, deadly, lowering sounds. Once, I heard the thunderous tread of giants running. The night was pure evil. By what miracle I was not slain by some dread force, I could not know, save perhaps because I had been burned free of all weakness that an Evil Power could exploit, having endured a bitter, monstrous training.

Then, again, the deep and dreadful baying of the Night-Hounds echoed from the South-East, growing nearer. I knew then that no strength of my own could protect Mine Own. From the upper reaches of the night, where the Last Light lingered, a strange blue flash descended, striking the land toward the South-East. Again it flashed, perhaps a score of times, accompanied by a peculiar crackling sound—less than the thunder of this age, yet louder than any other sound ever heard. I knew then that the Humans were beginning to fight for me, to ensure I brought Mine Own safely home.

It seemed as if all the wakefulness of the land had been mere sleep compared to the awakening now coming. Surely the night rocked with the roarings of the Monsters and the stirring of Great Forces. Over the land went the yowling of that strange, dreadful laughter issuing from the hidden country of the lost East. The hoarse, dreadful baying of the Hounds became constant, signaling a mighty pack abroad. They seemed no more than a mile away to the South-East, and I stood alone, save for the dying Maid clutched in my arms. I looked vainly and with despair for the Hundred Thousand who had been prepared to come to my aid, descending as you know they did. Truly, there was nothing to be seen but strange lights and shadows, the movement of monstrous life here and there. The Hounds drew nearer with every passing moment, and I knew death was very near.

I ceased not from my stride; I began to run. The Pyramid was not far off in the night, and the shine of the Circle surrounding it was plainly visible, save where it was hidden strangely. A despairing hope flamed within me that I might yet reach the safety of the Circle with Mine Own. The baying of the Hounds grew ever nearer. It was a doubly hideous bitterness to lose My Dear One so near to Home; the great Mountain of my Home rose upward before me into the night, seeming so close that I was almost there, yet perhaps two great miles away. Behold, I cried out in vain despair, calling for aid, asking why none came to help me in this extremity. The Hounds bayed now but half a mile to my left, surely having scent of me by their dreadful cries.

Truly, the Millions felt an anguish of sympathy for me; the spiritual noise of their emotion was plain to my spirit. They surely saw and interpreted the way I looked about me, appearing to call out in despair. There came all about me in a moment the companionship of a great and sweet spiritual force, born of their quick going with me in their understanding and love. They perceived how I was unto the end of hope, and the Hounds were almost upon me.

In this moment, there came afresh to my hearing the shaking beat of the Earth-Current. I knew the Humans were taking desperate measures to save us. To my left, a vast pack of Hounds appeared, running at a great pace, their heads low, so great as horses, seen plainly and again in shadow in the same moment as they approached. In verity, I knew that we two would be dead indeed within a minute if the Humans did not haste. I stood where I was; there was no use to run. I looked from the Hounds to the Mighty Pyramid, and again to the Hounds. Again I looked with hope gone to the Pyramid, for the Hounds were scarce two hundred fathoms off, and there were hundreds of the mighty beasts. Even as I looked that last time toward the Pyramid, a monstrous bursting flame rushed downward from the sealed lower part of the Mighty Pyramid. The flame smote downward upon the land where the Hounds ran, and all the night was lost from my sight in the brightness and strangeness of that mighty flame. I saw no more the Pyramid or anything else, only the shining, dreadful glory of that flame. The Flame made a blast in the night, a hotness that seemed to wither me even where I stood apart from it. I perceived that the Humans had truly turned loose the Earth-Current upon the Hounds to save us. There went a constant great thundering over the land, as the Earth-Force rended and split the air and tore up the earth. The roaring of the monsters was hushed and lost in that mighty sound. I saw no place where the Hounds were, only flames and broken lands where the Earth-Force had struck; great rocks were hurled everywhere with a vast noise. Truly, it was a mercy I was not slain a hundred times by the failings and burstings of great rocks and boulders.

Lo! in a moment the Humans cut off the Earth-Force, regaining control. There seemed now a great silence upon the land, an utter dark, save for flames and noise coming from where the Current had struck. Very speedily I freed myself from the daze that held me and resumed my running. For truth, it seemed I should yet be allowed to win unto safety with Mine Own. My eyes grew present to their accustomed use, and I looked all ways about me, lest something come upon me to work our deaths. For a good time there was naught that I saw anywhere, nor the wakeful sounds of the land, save only the grim and horrid laughter from afar in the dead East.

Oft as I ran, I stared hunger-hearted upward at the Mighty Pyramid. Surely it always now seemed less bright than before. At first, I set this to the count that my eyes were yet dazed by the great Flame of the Earth-Force; but soon I perceived it was otherwise—that there was truly a lessening of the light shining throughout all the Mighty Redoubt. This lack I conceived owed to the great using of the force and power of the Earth-Current that had been loosed to save us. I had this new thought cold upon my heart: truly, if the Force of the Current were made over low, there would be a danger for all the Humans that lived, even for all the great Millions of the Mighty Refuge. This, surely, was known by the Masters, who would have no more power
