Major Pendennis ambled home, his boots thudding rhythmically against the cobbles, until the familiar façade of the George Inn loomed ahead. There, stationed like a sentinel at the threshold, stood his devoted valet, Mr. Morgan. Seeing his master approach with a candle tucked under his arm, ready for the bedroom, the valet interceded with his characteristic air of knowing deference.

"I think, sir," Morgan intoned, "if you'd venture into the coffee-room, there sits a young gentleman you'd be pleased to encounter."

"Is Mr. Arthur here?" the Major demanded, his brow furrowing in genuine irritation.

"No, sir, but his bosom buddy, Mr. Foker," the valet corrected gently. "Lady Agnes Foker's lad is ensconced there. He's been nodding off in that coffee-room since lunch, just rang for his coffee, and I daresay you'd find a word or two to exchange with him."

Morgan ushered the door open, and the Major stepped inside. Indeed, there sat Mr. Foker, the sole inhabitant of the dim chamber. He was vigorously rubbing the sleep from his eyes, seated before a table cluttered with empty decanters and the skeletal remains of a heavy dessert. He had intended to attend the theatre, but a copious repast and subsequent somnolence had stolen away his theatrical ambitions; instead, he had propped his legs upon the bench and succumbed to a deep nap.

The Major, pondering how to initiate the interview, found himself preempted by the youth.

"Wish to peruse the evening papers, sir?" Mr. Foker offered, already holding *The Globe* aloft with an affable grin. "Here, let me oblige."

"The Major bowed gratefully. "Much obliged. If my memory serves, I am addressing Mr. Henry Foker, son of Lady Agnes. I hold the honor of knowing her ladyship, and you certainly wear the visage of a Rosherville."

"Hullo!" Mr. Foker exclaimed, lowering the paper. "Pardon me, I mistook you for some commercial sort." He paused, regaining his composure. "But truly, to whom do I have the privilege?"

"To a relation of a friend and schoolchum of yours," the Major explained, settling onto a chair. "Arthur Pendennis, my nephew, speaks of you in high regard. I am Major Pendennis, the guardian mentioned in his letters. Might I share your soda-water? I recall dining at your grandfather's table with great pleasure."

"Sir, you flatter me," Foker replied with exaggerated politeness. "So, you are Arthur's uncle?"

"And guardian," the Major added.

"He's a capital fellow," Foker declared warmly. "And sharp, too—I'm a simpleton, I admit, but I spot the clever ones and like 'em."

"You display both taste and humility," the Major observed. "Arthur praises your talents highly."

"Not book-smart," Foker confessed, shaking his head. "Never could crack the codes. Pendennis, however, could churn out verses for half the lads. Yet—" the youth broke in, his candor unguarded, "since you're his guardian, I'll be blunt: I think he's what we call 'flat.'"

The Major was instantly seized by the thrill of a secret. "Flat, how?" he asked, smiling.

"About the ladies, sir," Foker whispered conspiratorially, winking. A wink so bold it might have been bestowed upon the Duke of Wellington himself, born of a state of absolute absence, candor, and fearlessness induced by a couple of bottles of wine. "You know Pen's flat. It's mostly my fault. One night we hit the play—I was reading for my small role in *The Long*, though I dash over from Baymouth often in my drag. Pen got smitten all of a heap with Miss Fotheringay. Her real name is Costigan; she's a beauty, I assure you. Next morn, I introduced him to the General, whom we dub 'Old Scamp' due to his affinity for whisky-and-water. Now, Pen's besotted, and I'm blessed if he hasn't popped the question."

Slapping his hand down on the table, he sent the remaining dessert rattling. "What! You know the score?"

"Don't I? And the gossips, too!" Foker laughed. "We were chaffing Derby Oaks at mess yesterday until the Baronet was raving like a hatter. Know Sir Derby Oaks? We dined together recently. Remember when you slipped past us to dinner?"

"I recall Sir Thomas Oaks, his sire, back when he dwelt in Cavendish Square and served Queen Charlotte."

"The young one is spinning money fast," Foker noted. "And is Sir Derby Oaks another suit?"

"Another what?" Foker queried innocently.

"Another suitor?"

"Lord bless you! We call him Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, while Pen claims Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday. Mind you, no harm done! Miss F. is far too wide-awake for that trick. She plays one off against the other; she's strung with two bows."

"Pendennis laughed. "You seem quite wide-awake yourself, Mr. Foker."

"Pretty well, thanks, sir," Foker replied imperturbably. "Not clever, perhaps, but 'downy.' Friends say I keep track of the hour fairly well. Shall I tell you the time?"

"On my word," the Major blurted, delighted, "you could be of immense service. A man of the world, easy to deal with. Our family is, alas, not amused by this absurd intrigue."

"Fancy that!" Foker agreed. "Connection ineligible. Too much beer brewed on the premises. No Irish need apply. That seems to be your drift."

"It is precisely so," the Major admitted, though he failed to grasp Foker's deeper irony. He pressed the youth for particulars on the amiable Costigan household. To his credit, Foker spoke favorably of their morals. "The General loves a jovial bowl," Foker conceded, "so I wouldn't bet on his pockets, but he watches his daughter like a hawk. Neither he nor she stands for anything but honor. Pen's attentions are the talk of the company. I hear from a young lady close to Miss F., whose family I occasionally tea with. This Miss Rouncy says Sir Derby Oaks has hung around ever since his regiment dropped anchor here, but Pen has cut him out, driving the Baronet nearly to propose. Wish he would! Then you'd see which one Miss F. would leap at."

"I thought as much," the Major said, relieved. "You bring me joy, Mr. Foker. I wish I'd met you sooner."

"Ain't liked sticking my oar in," Foker shrugged. "Don't speak till asked. Heard your man was hankering after my maid-servant; didn't know the full tale till Miss F. and Miss R. had a row over the ostrich plumes. Miss R. spilled the beans."

"Miss Rouncy, then, was the confidante?"

"Confidant? I believe so. She's twice as clever as Fotheringay, literary and all, whereas Miss Foth can barely read."

"She can write," the Major reminded him, recalling the contents of Pen's breast pocket.

Foker burst into a sardonic "Hee-hee! Rouncy pens her letters," he declared. "Every single one! Since they feuded, she doesn't know how to function. Miss Rouncy's a stunning hand, unlike the old girl, who makes dreadful work of spelling when Bows aren't nearby. Rouncy has been setting her copies lately; her script is beautiful."

"I assume you know it well," the Major teased archly.

Foker winked again. "I'd pay a fortune for a sample of her handiwork," the Major continued, his eyes gleaming. "Surely you could spare me one?"

"No, no, that would be wicked," Foker protested. "Perhaps I shouldn't've said so much. Miss F.'s writin' isn't terrible, I dare say; she just had Miss R. do the first letter and hasn't stopped since. But mark my words: till they're friends again, the letters halt."

"I hope they never reconcile," the Major said sincerely. "As a man of the world, you must see how fatal this step is for my nephew's future. How eager we are to liberate him from this pair of schemers! Love on her side is out of the question."

"If Pen hadn't two thousand a year when he turned twenty—"

"If Pen hadn't what?" the Major gasped.

"Two thousand a year! Doesn't he have two thousand? The General swears he does."

"My dear friend!" the Major shrieked, seizing the revelation with desperate fervor. "Thank you! Thank you! I see now! Two thousand a year! His mother earns but five hundred. She'll live to eighty, and Arthur has not a shilling save what she allows."

"What! Not rich, then?" Foker asked.

"On my honor, not a penny more."

"And you're leaving him nothing?"

The Major had squandered every scrap he could scrape onto an annuity, naturally leaving Pen destitute, but he held his tongue. "How much do
