Every man, regardless of whether his time at school was brief or glorious, tends to look back on his university days with a soft, nostalgic warmth. Life is just starting for the young man; the leash has been snapped, and the air tastes sweet with the promise of liberty. He knows nothing yet of worry, ill-health, deceit, poverty, or tomorrow's disappointments. The play hasn't been staged enough to tire him. While the hangover of later years turns sour and bitter, that first sip of pleasure remains crystal clear and brilliant. How eagerly the boy rushes to the cup, draining it with wild intensity! Even old connoisseurs, restricted to poached eggs and plain water, find a strange joy in watching others feast with appetite. And just as it is delightful to watch one's children enjoy a pantomime, I hope no amount of age or wisdom ever hardens a man's heart so completely that he cannot smile at the sight of happy youth.

Returning recently from Oxford, where my friend Arthur Pendennis spent some of his early years, I traveled by train alongside a young student of Saint Boniface. He had somehow secured permission to leave and was determined to spend a day in London. From the moment we boarded until the journey ended—which felt far too short—I never ceased to chatter and laugh with him. His honesty and cheerful wit were infectious, and I found myself exhausted simply by listening to his jokes. Upon arriving at the terminus, nothing satisfied him but a hansom cab, so he could rush into town and dive straight into whatever pleasures awaited him. Off he went, whirlwind-like, joy illuminating his open face. As for me, carrying a mere carpet-bag, I perched on the exterior of an omnibus, sitting contentedly sandwiched between a Jewish peddler smoking foul cigars and a footman attending to a poodle dog. Once we gathered our "fated" complement of passengers and luggage, the coachman drove off leisurely. We were in no particular haste to reach the city, nor did either of us feel eager to rush into that nearby "smoking Babylon," dine at a club, or dance at the casino. Yet, in a few years, my young friend from the railway would likely feel no different.

Railroads did not exist when Arthur Pendennis attended the famous University of Oxford; instead, he traveled there in a well-appointed coach, crammed inside and out with dons, gown-wearers, fresh undergraduates, and their guardians. A portly old gentleman from the City, dressed in grey stockings, sat beside Major Pendennis. This man held his pale-faced son opposite and was terrified when he learned the coach had been driven for several miles by a young Mr. Foker of Saint Boniface College. Mr. Foker, known as the "friend of all men"—including coachmen—could drive as well as anyone else, and perhaps better. Pen sat atop the coach, examining the vehicle, the passengers, and the countryside with immense delight and curiosity. His heart leaped with pleasure as the university appeared on the horizon, revealing a magnificent vista of ancient towers, soaring pinnacles, towering elms, and the gleaming river.

Before setting out, Pen had spent a few days with his uncle at the Major's lodgings in Bury Street. The Major believed Pen's wardrobe needed refreshing, and Arthur was anything but resistant to plans involving new coats and waistcoats. The self-sacrificing uncle made endless concessions for his nephew's benefit. London felt desolate; the Pavement of Pall Mall was empty, even the red-coated guards had departed, and scarcely a face could be seen in the bow-windows of the clubs. The Major escorted his nephew into one or two of these deserted mansions and inscribed the lad's name onto the candidate list of a club. Pen's pleasure at this gesture of respect from his guardian was overwhelming. He read his name and title in the parchment volume—"Arthur Pendennis, Esquire, of Fairoaks Lodge..."—proposed by the Major and seconded by "Viscount Colchicum," feeling a thrill of intense gratification. "You will come in for ballot in about three years, by which time you will have taken your degree," the guardian told him. Pen longed for those three years to pass instantly, surveying the stucco halls, vast libraries, and drawing-rooms as if they were already his private domain. The Major chuckled softly at the pompous airs of the simple young fellow as he strutted out of the building. Later, the Major and Foker drove down in the latter's cab to Grey Friars to renew acquaintance with some old comrades. Boys swarmed around the cab near the gates, admiring the chestnut horse and the gravity of Stoopid, the tiger. As the bell for afternoon school rang, they swaggered about the playground chatting with old friends. Then the dreadful Doctor appeared, holding his grammar book. Foker slunk away uneasily at his presence, but Pen approached, blushing slightly, and shook the dignitary's hand. He laughed inwardly, remembering how well-remembered Latin Grammars had boxed his ears many times before. Generous, good-natured, and, in a word, perfectly conceited and satisfied with himself, Pen embodied the spirit of the season.

Next, they drove to the parental brewery. Foker's "Entire" consisted of an enormous pile of buildings near Grey Friars, with the name gilded on countless public-house signs tended by local vassals. The venerable junior partner and manager honored the young lord of the vats and his friend, serving them silver flagons of brown stout so strong that it seemed both the young men and Mr. Harry Foker's horse, Stoopid, were affected by its potency. Indeed, Stoopid rushed home to the west end at a frantic pace, endangering pie-stalls and pedestrians, causing the cab steps to collide with posts, and swinging wildly on his boards.

The Major was thoroughly pleased to see Pen with his young acquaintance, listened intently to Mr. Foker's artless stories, treated the two boys to a fine dinner at a Covent Garden coffee-house, and then proceeded to the theater. However, he was above all delighted when Mr. and Mrs. Agnes Foker, who happened to be in London, invited Major Pendennis and Mr. Arthur Pendennis to dinner at Grosvenor Street. "Having obtained entry into Lady Agnes Foker's house," he told Pen with an affectionate solemnity fitting the occasion, "it behooves you, my dear boy, to keep it. You must mind and never neglect to call there when you return to London. I recommend you to read carefully in Debrett the alliances and genealogy of the Earls of Rosherville, and if you can, make some trifling allusions to the family—something historical, neat, and complimentary—that you, with your poetic fancy, can execute well. Mr. Foker himself is a worthy man, though not of high extraction or extensive education. He always ensures some of the family porter is served round after dinner, which you will on no account refuse, and which I shall drink myself, though all beer disagrees with me confoundedly." And the heroic martyr did indeed sacrifice himself, as promised, on the day of the dinner, enduring the effects while old Mr. Foker, seated at the head of the table, delivered his usual joke about "Foker's Entire." I am sure we would all have enjoyed witnessing the Major's grin as the worthy old gentleman cracked his time-honored joke.

Lady Agnes, wrapped entirely in her devotion to Harry and considered the fondest of mothers (albeit one of the most good-natured but not the wisest), received her son's friend with great cordiality. She astonished Pen by detailing the rigorous course of studies her darling boy was pursuing, expressing fears that it might injure his delicate health. Mr. Foker the Elder burst into a horse-laugh at some of these remarks, and the heir winked knowingly at his friend. Lady Agnes then recounted her son's history from his earliest days, listing his miraculous survival of measles and whooping cough, his narrow escape from drowning, and the terrifying tyrannies practiced upon him at the horrid school where Mr. Foker had sent him because he, too, had been raised there. She vowed never to forgive that disagreeable doctor, prattling incessantly for an hour about her son. Finally, she voted the two Messieurs Pendennis to be most agreeable men. When pheasants arrived with the second course—which the Major correctly identified as coming from Logwood—her ladyship hoped they would both visit there at Christmas or during the holidays when dear Harry was home.

"My dear boy," Pen said to Arthur as they lit candles in Bury Street for bed, "you made that little allusion to Agincourt, where one of the Roshervilles distinguished himself, very neatly and well, although Lady Agnes did not quite grasp it: but it was exceedingly well for a beginner—though you ought not to blush so, by the way—and I beseech you, my dear Arthur, to remember through life that with an entrée—with a *good* entrée, mind—it is just as easy for you to have good society as bad, and that it costs a man, when properly introduced, no more trouble to maintain a footing in the best houses in London than to dine with a lawyer in Bedford Square. Bear this in mind when you are at Oxford, and for heaven's sake be very particular in the acquaintances you make. The premier step in life is the most important of all—did you write to your mother today? No? Well, do, before you go, and ask Mr. Foker for a frank—they like it.
