To any soul versed in the arcane arts of Heraldry and the Peerage, it is common knowledge that the noble house to which Lady Helen Pendennis belongs displays, upon their crest, a nest teeming with tiny pelicans, diligently pecking at the bleeding bosom of a larger, maternal bird. By the legends of heraldry, this great mother feeds her brood upon the blood she willingly sheds. Now, surely, female pelicans enjoy such self-mutilation beneath the greedy beaks of their offspring? It is a certainty that human women do likewise. There exists some peculiar delight, unknown to the masculine sex, that accompanies the agony of being scarified; indeed, I suspect some ladies would endure actual torture rather than deny it. They derive a strange joy from sacrificing themselves for the objects their instincts dictate they love. Whether it be a reckless husband, a profligate son, or a darling rogue of a brother, their hearts are instantly opened to pour out their finest treasures for the sake of the cherished individual. And what a feast of such sacrifice we men on the other side are prepared to serve these gentle creatures! Scarce a man reading this has not, at some point, administered such pleasure to his womankind, treating them to the luxury of forgiveness. They care naught for their own living standards; but when the prodigal returns, they hold a jubilee, slaughter the fattened calf, and prepare their festival. At the mere whisper of the sinner's return, the kind angels set the table, and Mercy and Forgiveness smile out to greet him. May it ever thus remain for all of us; if Justice is all we have to look to, Heaven help us!

In the latter days of Pen's tenure at Oxford, his Uncle Major's partiality for the lad had swelled to intoxicating proportions. The Major, a proud bachelor of the old school, adored Arthur for his high spirits, frank demeanor, and genuine gentility. It delighted the old London lion to see Pen strolling with the young patricians of the university. Though his stinginess was a byword among the club wags—who envied his endless engagements yet refused to acknowledge his poverty—he was charmed to treat his nephew and the young lords to snug dinners at his lodgings, regaling them with choice claret and his finest *bons mots*. Some of his tales were so delicate that repetition would injure them, while others were so crude that repeating them would benefit no one. Yet he poured them out, paying court to their parents through the boys and courting himself through their company. He visited Oxford frequently, where the young fellows amused themselves by entertaining the elderly gentleman, throwing parties and breakfasts to both joke him and honor him. He plied them with stories, becoming juvenile and hilarious in their presence. He attended Pen at a grand debate at the Union, crowing and cheering, tapping his stick in rhythm with the students, and marveling at the boy's fiery eloquence. He believed he had secured a young Pitt for a nephew. His affection bordering on the paternal, he wrote letters brimming with playful advice and town gossip. He boasted at his clubs, introducing Arthur with great pleasure, claiming, "Egad, the young fellows are putting the old ones to the wall!" He spoke of Young Lord Plinlimmon, a friend of his boy, and Young Lord Magnus Charters, a chum of his scapegrace, predicting they would eclipse their fathers' achievements. He begged permission to bring Arthur to a grand fête at Gaunt House, watching with ineffable satisfaction as he danced with the sisters of those young noblemen. He labored mightily to secure invitations for the lad, acting as if he were a mother seeking a marriage match for a daughter, rather than a half-pay officer in a wig. Everywhere he boasted of Pen's towering talents and oratorical prowess, writing repeatedly to Helen to confirm that Lord Runnymede would appoint him to an embassy or the Duke would seat him in Parliament. And Helen, for her part, was too eager to believe any tale spoken in favor of her son.

Yet, all this pride and affection from uncle and mother had been trampled into dust by Pen's wicked extravagance and idleness! One cannot envy Pen's feelings as he contemplated his actions. He had slept, and the tortoise had won the race. He had ruined at the start what might have been a brilliant career. He had dipped ungenerously into a generous mother's purse, basely and recklessly spilling her small cruse. Oh, it was a coward's hand that could strike and rob a creature so tender! If Pen felt the wrong he had done others, surely a vain young gentleman felt the shame he had brought upon himself even more keenly. Let us be assured that no remorse is more cruel, and no groans more piteous than those of wounded self-love. Like Joel Miller's friend, the Senior Wrangler, who bowed to the audience from his box merely because he and the King entered the theater simultaneously—a fatuity by no means agreeable to himself—poor Arthur Pendennis was convinced that all England would remark the absence of his name from the examination lists and gossip endlessly about his misfortune. His wounded tutor, the many debt collectors ("duns"), the skip and bed-maker who served him, the undergraduates of his own time and those below whom he had patronized or scorned—how could he bear to look any of them in the face? He fled to his rooms, locking himself inside, and there penned a letter to his tutor, overflowing with thanks, regards, remorse, and despair. He requested his name be struck from the college books and intimated a wish that death would swiftly end the woes of the disgraced Arthur Pendennis.

Then he slipped out, scarcely knowing where he was going, mechanically taking the unfrequented lanes behind the colleges until he cleared the university precincts and reached the banks of the Cam, now deserted but once alive with boat races and cheering gownsmen. He wandered on until he found himself miles from Oxford, or rather, was discovered by acquaintances leaving the city. As Pen climbed a hill, a drizzling January rain battering his face, his ragged gown fluttering behind him—he had not removed his academic garb since morning—a post-chaise rattled up the road. A servant sat on the box, while within, or rather half-out of the window, sat a young gentleman smoking a cigar and loudly encouraging the postboy. It was our young acquaintance from Baymouth, Mr. Spavin, who had earned his degree and was driving home in triumph in his yellow post-chaise. He spotted the figure, gesticulating madly as it struggled up the hill, and beheld poor Pen's pale, ghastly face as the chaise whirled past.

"Wo!" roared Mr. Spavin to the postboy. The horses halted in their frantic career, and the carriage drew up some fifty yards before Pen. Presently, he heard his own name shouted and saw the upper half of Mr. Spavin's body thrust out of the side window, beckoning Pen vehemently.

Pen stopped, hesitated, nodded his head fiercely, and pointed onward as if wishing the postilion to depart. He said nothing, but his countenance must have looked terribly desperate. Young Spavin, staring with an expression of blank alarm, jumped out, ran toward Pen, and grasping his hand, exclaimed, "I say—hullo, old boy, where are you going, and what's the row now?"

"I'm going where I deserve to go," said Pen, with an imprecation.

"This ain't the way," smiled Mr. Spavin. "This is the Fenbury road. I say, Pen, don't take on because you're plucked. It's nothing when you're used to it. I've been plucked three times, old boy—and after the first time I didn't care. Glad it's over, though. You'll have better luck next time."

Pen looked at his early acquaintance—who had been plucked, rusticated, and who, despite repeated failures and learning to read and write correctly only late in life, had attained the honor of a degree. "This man has passed," he thought, "and I have failed!" It was almost too much to bear.

"Good-bye, Spavin," said he. "I'm very glad you are through. Don't let me keep you; I'm in a hurry—I'm going to town tonight."

"Gammon," said Mr. Spavin. "This ain't the way to town; this is the Fenbury road, I tell you."

"I was just going to turn back," Pen said.

"All the coaches are full with the men going down," Spavin noted. Pen winced. "You'd not get a place for a ten-pound note. Get into my yellow; I'll drop you at Mudford, where you have a chance of the Fenbury mail. I'll lend you a hat and a coat; I've got lots. Come along; jump in, old boy—go it, leathers!" Thus, Pen found himself in Mr. Spavin's post-chaise, riding with that gentleman as far as the Ram Inn at Mudford, fifteen miles from Oxford, where the Fenbury mail changed horses, and where Pen finally secured a seat to London.

The next day, immense excitement swept through Boniface College, Oxford. For some time, a rumor had terrified Pen's tutor and tradesmen: Pendennis, maddened by the loss of his degree, had made away with himself. A battered cap, in which his name was almost discernible, together with a seal bearing his crest of an eagle looking at a now-extinct sun, had been found three miles on
