A Ball of Ball-practising

Arthur Pendennis elected to adopt a visage of profound gloom and to stand concealed behind a curtain of calico draperies, peering into the shaded recess of a window. From this vantage point, he observed Miss Bell executing her inaugural quadrille with Mr. Pynsent as her partner. The gentleman, a model of English solemnity on such occasions, traversed the floor with the rigid gravity of a man approaching his pew at church; his face was unsmiling, his attention fixed with the severity of a judge presiding over a court of law, refusing to let any outward circumstance distract him from his grave duty. Conversely, Miss Laura's countenance was radiant with pleasure and good nature. The interplay of lights, the throng, and the music enlivened her spirits. As she unfurled her white robes and executed her steps, smiling broadly with her brown ringlets cascading over her fair shoulders from her honest, rosy face, she became the object of admiration for many a gentleman in the room. Lady Fogey, who maintained a London residence and affected considerable airs of fashion whenever visiting the country, consulted Lady Rockminster regarding the identity of this young person. Comparing her to a reigning beauty in London, Lady Fogey opined that Laura possessed a certain resemblance and, in her ladyship's judgment, "would do."

Lady Rockminster, who would have been astonished if any of her protégés failed to "do," marveled at Lady Fogey's audacity in rendering a verdict. Surveying Laura through the lens of her eyeglass, the Dowager bestowed majestic glances upon the girl. She was charmed by Laura's artless appearance and gay, innocent demeanor. "Her manner is very good," Lady Rockminster mused internally. "Her arms are rather red, but that is merely a defect of youth." Her tone, she noted, was vastly superior to that of the little pert Miss Amory, currently dancing opposite her.

Indeed, Miss Blanche stood as Miss Laura's *vis-à-vis*. She smiled with killing effect upon her dearest friend, nodding and conversing with her whenever their paths crossed during the quadrille's intricate evolutions, lavishing her upon her with obvious favoritism. Miss Blanche's shoulders were the whitest in the entire assembly; they seemed restless within her frock, shifting constantly. Her eyes rolled incessantly, and her petite figure seemed to broadcast a message to everyone present: "Behold me! Not that pink, healthy, bouncing country lass, Miss Bell, who scarcely knows how to dance until I taught her. Observe this true Parisian manner—this is the prettiest little foot in the room, and the finest *chaussure* as well. Gaze upon it, Mr. Pynsent. Gaze upon it, Mr. Pendennis, you who are scowling behind the curtain; I know you are longing to dance with me."

Laura continued her dance, maintaining a vigilant eye upon Mr. Pen in the window embrasure. He did not abandon this secluded post until the second quadrille, when the benevolent Lady Clavering beckoned him forward to the dais, the seat of honor reserved for the dowagers. To this destination, Pen advanced with a blush and an air of extreme awkwardness, typical of the most conceited young fellows. He offered a haughty salutation to Lady Rockminster, who barely acknowledged his bow, before proceeding to pay his respects to the widow of the late Amory. She was resplendent in diamonds, velvet, lace, feathers, and a dazzling array of millinery and goldsmith's ware.

Young Mr. Fogey, then a student in the fifth form at Eton and ardently anticipating both a beard and a commission in a dragoon regiment, was the second partner honored with Miss Bell's hand. He was completely entranced by the young lady. "I like you much better than the French girl," he candidly confessed to her, referring to Miss Amory with whom he had previously danced. Laura laughed, appearing more good-humored than ever; in the midst of her mirth, she caught sight of Pen, who, on his side, continued to look absurdly pompous and sullen. The next dance was a waltz. Young Fogey sighed, admitting his inability to waltz, and vowed to secure a master during the ensuing holidays.

Mr. Pynsent again claimed Miss Bell's hand for this dance. Pen beheld her, in a fury, twirling around the room, her waist encircled by that gentleman's arm. He had never known anger like this before. On summer evenings at Clavering Park, when the chairs and tables were cleared and the governess descended to play the piano, he and the Chevalier Strong—a splendid performer capable of the British hornpipe, the German waltz, or the Spanish fandango if required—along with the two young ladies, Blanche and Laura, often improvised little balls. Laura enjoyed such dancing immensely, her animation sometimes infectious enough to lift even Mr. Pynsent. However, Miss Blanche, though a beautiful dancer, was plagued by an unlucky partner: Captain Broadfoot of the Dragoons, stationed at Chatteris. Though devoted to the endeavor, Captain Broadfoot lacked the requisite timing to complete his turns and, lacking an ear for music, remained oblivious to the fact that his movements were painfully slow.

Consequently, in both the waltz and the quadrille, Miss Blanche perceived that her dear friend Laura held the honors of the dance and was by no means pleased with the latter's success. After a couple of turns with the heavy dragoon, Blanche feigned fatigue, requesting to return to her place near her mother, to whom Pen was speaking. She questioned him on why he had not asked her to waltz, leaving her to the mercy of that "great odious man" in spurs and a red coat.

"I thought spurs and scarlet were the most fascinating objects in the world to young ladies," Pen replied. "I never should have dared to put my black coat in competition with that splendid red jacket."

"You are very unkind and cruel and sulky and naughty," said Miss Amory, accompanied by another shrug of her shoulders. "You had better go away. Your cousin is looking at us over Mr. Pynsent's shoulder."

"Will you waltz with me?" asked Pen.

"Not this waltz. I cannot, having just sent away that good Captain Broadfoot. Look at Mr. Pynsent; have you ever seen such a creature? Yet I shall dance the next waltz with you, and the quadrille too. I am promised, but I will inform Mr. Poole that I have forgotten my engagement to you."

"Women forget very readily," Pendennis remarked.

"But they invariably return, repented and sorrowful for their actions," Blanche countered. "Look, here comes the Poker, and dear Laura leaning upon him. How pretty she appears!"

Laura approached, extending her hand to Pen, to whom Pynsent rendered a bow that appeared no more graceful than the domestic instrument to which Miss Amory had compared him. Yet Laura's face overflowed with kindness. "I am so glad to have come, dear Pen," she said. "I can speak to you now. How is mamma? The three dances are concluded, and I am engaged to you for the next, Pen."

"I have just engaged myself to Miss Amory," Pen declared. Miss Amory nodded and executed her customary little curtsey. "I do not intend to give him up, dearest Laura," she added.

"Well, then, he shall waltz with me, dear Blanche," the other suggested. "Won't you, Pen?"

"I promised to waltz with Miss Amory."

"Provoking!" exclaimed Laura, returning a curtsey herself before positioning herself beneath the ample wing of Lady Rockminster.

Pen was delighted with his mischief. The two prettiest girls in the room were quarreling over him. He flattered himself he had successfully penalized Miss Laura. Leaning in a dandified posture with his elbow resting on the wall, he chatted with Blanche, mercilessly quizzing every male in the room—from the heavy dragoons in their tight jackets to the country dandies in their peculiar attire, not to mention the strange toilets of the ladies. One seemed to harbor a bird's nest atop her head; another bore six pounds of grapes in her hair alongside her false pearls. "It is a coiffure of almonds and raisins," Pen observed, "and might be served up for dessert." In short, he was exceedingly satirical and amusing.

Throughout the quadrille, he sustained this conversation with unflinching bitterness and vivacity, keeping Blanche in a constant state of laughter, both at his wickedness and his jokes—which were undeniably good—and because Laura remained their *vis-à-vis*, able to witness and overhear how merry and confidential they were.

"Arthur is charming tonight," she whispered to Laura, crossing Cornet Perch's shell-jacket as Pen performed a *cavalier seul*, drawingling through the figure with a thumb tucked into the pocket of each waistcoat.

"Who?" asked Laura.

"Arthur," Blanche answered, in French. "Oh, it is such a pretty name!" And now the young ladies moved to Pen's side, while Cornet Perch, in his turn, executed a *pas seul*. Lacking a waistcoat pocket into which to conceal his hands, they appeared large and swollen, dangling before him from the tight arms of his jacket.

During the interval
