On the appointed day, Pen and Warrington presented themselves at Mr. Bungay's door in Paternoster Row. They avoided the public entrance, where booksellers' lads swarmed with sacks of volumes and timid aspirants clutched virgin manuscripts hoping for a sale to Sultan Bungay. Instead, they sought the private door, the exit for the splendid Mrs. Bungay, who would soon mount her chaise, settle comfortably on cushions, and cast looks of defiant superiority at Mrs. Bacon's windows directly opposite—a residence currently occupied by a chaise-less woman.

On such occasions, usually wroth at her sister-in-law's ostentation, Mrs. Bacon would fling up her drawing-room sash and stare out at the chaise with her four children, sending a silent message akin to, "Behold these four darlings! Flora Bungay! This is precisely why I cannot drive in a carriage; you would give a coach-and-four just to have the same excuse." It was with these verbal arrows that Emma Bacon shot at Flora Bungay as she sat in her chariot, envying the motherhood and despising the childlessness.

As Pen and Warrington approached Bungay's threshold, a carriage and a cab pulled up simultaneously before Bacon's door. Old Dr. Slocum descended heavily from the first vehicle; his equipage was as ponderous as his style, yet both produced a fine, sonorous effect upon the local publishers. From the cab emerged a couple of dazzling white waistcoats.

Warrington chuckled. "You see, Bacon has his dinner-party as well. That is Dr. Slocum, author of 'Memoirs of the Poisoners.' You would hardly recognize our friend Hoolan in that gallant white waistcoat. As for Doolan, he is one of Bungay's men, and faith, here he steps out." Indeed, Messrs. Hoolan and Doolan had arrived from the Strand in the same cab, tossing a coin to decide who should pay the shilling. Mr. Doolan emerged from the other side, arrayed in black with a large pair of white gloves spread wide upon his hands, which he regarded with evident pleasure.

Inside the passage of Mr. Bungay's house, porters in evening coats and gentlemen sporting gloves as large as Doolan's, yet crafted from the famous Berlin web, bustled about receiving hats and coats and shouting names up the stairs. Some guests had already arrived, but there was only one representative of her own charming sex present: Mrs. Bungay, clad in red satin and a turban. She curtsied to each newcomer as they entered the drawing-room, though her mind was clearly preoccupied by extraneous thoughts. The fact was, Mrs. Bacon's rival dinner-party was disturbing her equilibrium. As soon as she received each individual of her own company, Flora Bungay retreated to the embrasure of the window, from where she could rake over the carriages of Emma Bacon's friends as they rattled up the Row. The sight of Dr. Slocum's large carriage, drawn by gaunt job-horses, crushed Flora completely; no hack cabs had dared approach her door that day.

The gathering comprised several literary gentlemen, though Pen remained unaware of their specific identities. There was Mr. Bole, the real editor of the magazine wherein Mr. Wagg served as nominal chief; Mr. Trotter, who, having burst onto the world as a poet of a tragic and suicidal cast, had since subsided into one of Mr. Bungay's back shops as a reader; and Captain Sumph, an ex-beau reader about town, related in some indistinct manner to Literature and the Peerage. He was said to have written a book once, to have been a friend of Lord Byron, and to be related to Lord Sumphington. Anecdotes of Byron formed his staple fare, and he seldom spoke without invoking that poet or his contemporaries. "I remember poor Shelley, at school being sent up for good for a copy of verses, every line of which I wrote, by Jove!" he would proclaim, or recall offering to bet gamba with Byron at Missolonghi. Pen observed that this gentleman was listened to with great attention by Mrs. Bungay; his tales of the aristocracy, of which he was a middle-aged member, delighted the publisher's lady, making him seem almost a greater man than the great Mr. Wagg in her eyes. Had he arrived in his own carriage, Mrs. Bungay would have ordered Mr. Bungay to purchase any volume from his pen.

Mr. Bungay circulated among his guests with much cordiality. "How are you, sir? Fine day, sir. Glad to see you year, sir. Flora, my love, let me have the honour of introducing Mr. Warrington to you. Mr. Warrington, Mrs. Bungay; Mr. Pendennis, Mrs. Bungay. Hope you've brought good appetites with you, gentlemen. You, Doolan, I know have, for you've always had a deuce of a twist."

"Lor, Bungay!" exclaimed Mrs. Bungay.

"Faith, a man must be hard to please, Bungay, who can't eat a good dinner in this house," Doolan retorted, winking and stroking his lean chops with his large gloves, while making flattering appeals to Mrs. Bungay that the honest woman refused with scorn. "She couldn't abide that Doolan," she confided to her friends. Indeed, all his flattery failed to win her favor.

As they conversed, Mrs. Bungay surveyed the street from her window when a magnificent vision of an enormous grey cab-horse appeared, nearing rapidly. Visible behind it were a pair of white reins held by small white gloves, a pale face richly decorated with a chin-tuft, and the bobbing head of an exiguous groom. These bright things delighted Mrs. Bungay. "The Honourable Percy Popjoy's quite punctual, I declare," she announced, sailing to the door to await the nobleman's arrival.

"It's Percy Popjoy," said Pen, looking out the window as an individual in extremely lacquered boots descended from the swinging cab. Indeed, it was that young nobleman, Lord Falconet's eldest son, who had come to dine with his publisher of the Row.

"He was my fag at Eton," Warrington remarked. "I ought to have licked him a little more." He and Pen had engaged in some bouts at the Oxbridge Union debates, in which Pen had enjoyed considerable success against Percy, who presently appeared with his hat under his arm and a look of indescribable good-humour and fatuity in his round, dimpled face. Upon this visage, Nature had burst forth with a chin-tuft but, exhausted by the effort, had left the rest of the countenance bare of hair.

"The temporary groom of the chambers bawled out, 'The Honourable Percy Popjoy,'" causing that gentleman some discomposure at hearing his title announced.

"What did the man want to take away my hat for, Bungay?" he asked the publisher. "Can't do without my hat—wanted it to make my bow to Mrs. Bungay. How well you look, Mrs. Bungay, today. Haven't seen your carriage in the Park: why haven't you been there? I missed you; indeed, I did."

"I'm afraid you're a sad quiz," said Mrs. Bungay.

"Quiz! Never made a joke in my—" hullo! who's here? "How d'ye do, Pendennis? How d'ye do, Warrington? These are old friends of mine, Mrs. Bungay. I say, how the doose did you come here?" he asked the two young men, turning his lacquered heels upon Mrs. Bungay, who, respecting her husband's two young guests now that she discovered they were intimates of a lord's son, softened slightly.

"What! do they know him?" she asked rapidly of Mr. B.

"High fellers, I tell you—the young one related to all the nobility," said the publisher, and both ran forward, smiling and bowing, to greet almost as great personages as the young lord himself—no less characters, indeed, than the great Mr. Wenham and the great Mr. Wagg, who were now announced.

Mr. Wenham entered, wearing the usual demure look and stealthy smile with which he commonly surveyed the tips of his neat, little, shining boots, a gaze he rarely brought to bear upon the person addressing him. Conversely, Wagg's white waistcoat spread out with profuse brilliancy; his burly, red face shone resplendent above it, lighted up with the thoughts of good jokes and a good dinner. He liked to make his entry into a drawing-room with a laugh, and when he departed at night, to leave a joke exploding behind him. No personal calamities or distresses (of which that humourist had his share in common with the unjocular part of mankind) could altogether keep his humour down. Whatever his griefs might be, the thought of a dinner rallied his great soul; and when he saw a lord, he saluted him with a pun.

Wenham advanced with a smug smile and whisper to Mrs. Bungay, looking at her from under his eyes and showing her the tips of his shoes. Wagg declared she looked charming and pushed straight at the young nobleman, whom he called Pop, instantly relating a funny story seasoned with *gros sel*. He was delighted to see Pen as well,
