Mr. Pen had long since occupied himself, during his stay at home following his defeat at Oxford, with various literary pursuits. Among these, he had composed the greater part of a novel. Written under the heavy influence of youthful embarrassments—both romantic and financial—the book was a fiercely gloomy and passionate affair. It was steeped in Byronic despair, Wertherian despondency, and the mocking bitterness of Mephistopheles from *Faust*. For our young protagonist had recently been studying German and, like many clever lads, had imitated his favorite poets. Passages in the volumes he once loved, now read so rarely, still bore the distinct marks of the pencil with which he had annotated them in those turbulent days. Tears had fallen onto the leaves, perhaps blistering the pages as the impassioned youth dashed his thoughts down. Yet, when he revisited the books later, he possessed neither the ability nor the wish to sprinkle those leaves with the "early dew" of former times. His pencil was no longer eager to score its marks of approval. However, as he scanned the pages of his manuscript, memories of the overflowing emotions that had caused him to blot out lines returned, along with the pain that had inspired them. If one could write the secret history of books, noting the author's private thoughts alongside the story, how many insipid volumes would become interesting, and how many dull tales would excite the reader! A bitter smile often crossed Pen's face as he read his novel, recalling the specific time and feelings that gave it birth. Some grand passages seemed pompous now; others, where he thought he had poured out his full heart, appeared woefully weak. He recognized that certain pages were merely imitations of a then-favorite author, whereas he had convinced himself he was writing entirely original material. As he mused over specific lines, he recollected the exact place and hour of their creation; the ghost of the dead feeling returned, causing him to blush at reviewing the faint image. And what of those blots on the page? Like coming across camel tracks in desert clay, traces of withered herbage, you know water was once there; so the place in Pen's mind was no longer green, and the fountain of tears was thoroughly dried up.

One morning, he used this simile to explain his state to Warrington, who sat over his pipe and book. Pen, gesticulating with his wonted excitement when stirred, thumped his manuscript onto the table, rattling the tea-things and making the blue milk dance in the jug. The previous night, he had unearthed the manuscript from a long-neglected chest filled with old shooting jackets, scribbled Oxbridge notebooks, his ancient surplice, and a battered cap and gown—all memorials of youth, school, and home. He had read the volume in bed until sleep overtook him, for the beginning of the tale was somewhat dull, and he had returned home weary from a London evening party.

"By Jove!" exclaimed Pen, slamming down his papers. "When I reflect that these were written but a few short years ago, I am ashamed of my memory. I wrote this believing myself eternally in love with that little coquette, Miss Amory. I used to carry verses down to her and hide them in the hollow of a tree, dedicating them 'Amori.'"

"That was a sweet little play upon words," Warrington remarked, puffing. "'Amory'—'Amori.' It showed proof of scholarship. Let us hear a bit of the rubbish." Stretching over from his easy-chair, he snatched Pen's manuscript with the fire-tongs he had been using to feed his pipe. Holding the volume, he began to read aloud from the *Leaves from the Life-book of Walter Lorraine*:

"'False as thou art beautiful! heartless as thou art fair! mockery of Passion!' Walter cried, addressing Leonora; 'what evil spirit hath sent thee to torture me so? O Leonora...'"

"Cut that part!" cried Pen, lunging at the book, though his comrade held fast. "Well! Don't read it out at any rate. That's about my other flame, my first—Lady Mirabel, who is now. I saw her last night at Lady Whiston's. She invited me to a party at her house, saying that, as old friends, we ought to meet oftener. She has been seeing me around town for two years without inviting me, but seeing Wenham talking to me, and Monsieur Dubois, the French literary man who had a dozen orders and might have passed for a Marshal of France, she condescended to ask me. The Claverings are to be there that evening too. Won't it be exciting to meet one's two flames at the same table?"

"Two flames! Two heaps of burnt-out cinders," Warrington observed. "Are both beauties in this book?"

"Both, or something like them," Pen replied. "Leonora, who marries the Duke, is the Fotheringay. I drew the Duke from Magnus Charters, with whom I was at Oxford; it's a little like him. And Miss Amory is Neaera. By gad, that first woman! I thought of her as I walked home from Lady Whiston's in the moonlight, and the whole early scene came back to me as if it were yesterday. When I got home, I pulled out the story I wrote about her and the others three years ago. Do you know, outrageous as it is, it has some good stuff in it, and if Bungay won't publish it, I think Bacon will."

"That's the way of poets," said Warrington. "They fall in love, get jilted, or jilt someone; they suffer and cry out that they suffer more than any other mortal. Then, having experienced enough feelings, they note them down in a book and take it to market. All poets are humbugs; all literary men are humbugs. Directly a man begins to sell his feelings for money, he becomes a humbug. If a poet gets a pain in his side from eating too well, he bellows 'Ai Ai' louder than Prometheus."

"I suppose a poet has a greater sensibility than another man," Pen countered with spirit. "That is what makes him a poet. He sees and feels more keenly; that is why he speaks of what he feels and sees. You speak eagerly enough in your leading articles when you spot a false argument in an opponent or detect a quack in the House. Paley, who cares for nothing else in the world, will talk for an hour about a legal question. Give another the privilege you take yourself, the free use of his faculties, and let him be what nature has made him. Why shouldn't a man sell his sentimental thoughts as well as you sell your political ideas, or Paley his legal knowledge? Each is a matter of experience and practice. It isn't money that causes you to perceive a fallacy or Paley to argue a point, but a natural or acquired aptitude for that kind of truth. A poet sets down his thoughts and experiences upon paper just as a painter paints a landscape or a face upon canvas, to the best of his ability, according to his particular gift. If I ever think I have the stuff in me to write an epic, by Jove, I will try. If I only feel that I am good enough to crack a joke or tell a story, I will do that."

"Not a bad speech, young one," Warrington admitted, "but that doesn't prevent all poets from being humbugs."

"What—Homer, Aeschylus, Shakespeare, and all?"

"Their names are not to be breathed in the same sense as yours, you pigmies," Mr. Warrington declared sternly. "There are men and men, sir."

"Well, Shakespeare was a man who wrote for money, just as you and I do," Pen answered, which confused Warrington momentarily. The publisher resumed his pipe and his manuscript.

There was no doubt that the document contained a vast amount of Pen's personal experiences, and *Leaves from the Life-book of Walter Lorraine* would never have been written but for Arthur Pendennis's own private griefs, passions, and follies. Since we have become acquainted with these in the first volume of his biography, it is unnecessary to make large extracts from the novel of *Walter Lorraine*, wherein the young gentleman depicted those aspects of his life he deemed likely to interest the reader or suitable for his story.

Though he had kept it in his box for nearly half the period required, according to the Horatian maxim, for a work of art to lie ripening—a maxim whose truth may be questioned—a man who pens a composition with the intention of burying it for ten years before giving it to the world, or exercising his own mature judgment upon it, had best be very sure of the original strength and durability of the work. Otherwise, upon withdrawing it from its crypt, he may find, like small wine, that it has lost its flavor and is only tasteless when opened. There are works of all tastes and smacks, the small and the strong, those that improve by age, and those that won't bear keeping at all, being pleasant only at the first draught when they refresh and sparkle.

Pen had never, even in the time of his youthful inexperience and fervor of imagination, thought that the story he was writing was a masterpiece of composition, nor that he was the equal of the great authors he admired. Now, however, as he reviewed his little performance, he was keenly alive to its faults and modest regarding its merits. It was not very good, he
