Early the following morning, after the grand dinner at Grosvenor Place where Colonel Altamont had made his dramatic entrance, the Colonel emerged from his attic chamber at Shepherd's Inn. He stepped into Captain Strong's sitting room, where the Chevalier sat comfortably in his chair, a newspaper spread before him and a cigar glowing lazily in his hand. Captain Strong was a man who managed to make his temporary quarters feel like home wherever he pitched his tent. Long before Altamont arrived, he had already conquered the breakfast table, devouring a copious serving of fried eggs and broiled rashers prepared by Mr. Grady *secundum artem*.

Good-natured, talkative, and possessing a constitution that defied the rigors of the road, Strong preferred any company to solitude. Though he harbored no affection for his fellow lodger and would not have mourned the misfortune Sir Francis Clavering wished upon him, he maintained a civil exterior. Having tucked Altamont into bed with friendly gestures the night prior and snatched away his candle to prevent fires, Strong had later discovered a spirit bottle unexpectedly empty. Satisfied with a glass of water over his pipe, he had drifted soundly into sleep, emerging next morning with a clear head and a hearty appetite, ready for whatever struggles or pleasures awaited.

The Colonel's first act was to roar for Grady to fetch a pint of pale ale. Grady obliged, pouring it into a pewter flagon before transferring it to the Colonel's lips. The tankard returned empty, the Colonel drew a massive breath, wiped his mouth with his dressing gown, and declared himself "immensely refreshed."

"Nothing like that beer," the Colonel remarked, his eyes gleaming, "when the coppers are hot. Many a day I've drunk a dozen of Bass at Calcutta, and—and..."

"And at Lucknow, I suppose?" Strong interjected with a chuckle. "I fetched the beer specifically for you, anticipating your needs after last night."

Thus encouraged, the Colonel launched into a rambling account of his exploits from the previous evening. "I cannot help myself!" he exclaimed, thumping his temple with a large hand. "I'm a madman once the liquor gets on board. Ain't fit to trust a spirit bottle. Once I start, I can't stop 'til it's empty, and then Lord knows what I say or what I don't say. I dined quietly at home; Grady gave me just two tumblers, and I intended to spend the evening at the Black and Red as sober as a parson. Why did you leave that confounded sample-bottle of Hollands out in the cupboard, Strong? Grady had to step out, and I couldn't keep away from it. I washed it all down, sir, by Jove! And I'm convinced I had more later at that infernal thieves' den."

"What, were you there too?" Strong asked, lighting a fresh cigar. "Before you reached Grosvenor Place? That was beginning betimes."

"Early hours for drinking and clearing out before nine, eh? But so it was. Like a great big fool, I went there. Found the fellows dining—Blackland, young Moss, and two or three other rogues. If we'd tried Rouge et Noir, I surely would have won. But we stuck to hazard on the dining table. They were too cunning for me. That rascal Blackland got the bones out, and I dropped every penny I had from you this morning. It set me wild, and I suppose I was burning with fever in the head, for I went off determined to get more money from Clavering. Then—and then I don't much remember waking up until this morning, hearing old Bows playing on his pianoforte."

Strong mused silently as he lit his cigar. "I should like to know, Colonel," he said finally, "how you manage to draw money from Clavering."

The Colonel burst into a laugh. "Ha, ha! He owes it to me," he declared.

"I don't know that that is a sufficient reason for Frank to pay," Strong countered. "He owes many more debts to others."

"Well, he pays me because he is so fond of me!" the Colonel retorted with a grinning sneer. "He loves me like a brother, you know he does, Captain. —No? Oh, well, perhaps he doesn't. And if you ask me no questions, perhaps I'll tell you no lies, Captain Strong—put that in your pipe and smoke it, my boy."

"But I'll give up that confounded brandy bottle," the Colonel continued after a pause. "I must give it up, or it'll be the ruin of me."

"It makes you say queer things," Strong observed, fixing Altamont with a hard stare. "Remember what you said last night at Clavering's table."

"Say? What did I say?" the other asked hastily. "Did I split anything? Dammy, Strong, did I split anything?"

"Ask me no questions, and I will tell you no lies," the Chevalier replied. Strong recalled the words Altamont had used and his abrupt departure from the Baronet's house upon recognizing Major Pendennis. Yet, Strong resolved to investigate these matters separately and chose not to dredge the memory of them from Altamont. "No," he said, "you didn't 'split,' Colonel. It was merely a trap of mine to see if I could make you speak. But you said not a word anyone could comprehend—you were far too far gone."

So much the better, Altamont thought, heaving a sigh of relief. Strong noted the emotion but took no notice. Being in a communicative mood, the Colonel continued.

"Yes, I own to my faults," the Colonel confessed. "There are three things I simply cannot resist, no matter what I try: a bottle of brandy, a box of dice, and a beautiful woman. No man of pluck and spirit, no man worth his salt, ever could. There's hardly a country in the world where those three haven't gotten me into trouble."

"In truth?" Strong asked.

"Yes, since the age of fifteen, when I ran away from home to become a cabin-boy on an Indiaman, until now, at nearly fifty, these women have always been my ruin. Why, it was one of them—with such black eyes and jewels around her neck, dressed in ermine like a duchess—that swept off the best part of the thousand pounds I carried off from Paris. Didn't I ever tell you of it? Well, I don't mind. At first, I was cautious, keeping my money close and living like a gentleman—Colonel Altamont at Meurice's Hotel, and so forth. I rarely played, except at public tables, and usually won more than I lost.

"Well, sir, I spotted a chap at the hotel and the Palace Royal, a regular swell fellow with white kid gloves and a tuft to his chin. His name was Bloundell-Bloundell, and somehow we became acquainted. He invited me to dinner and took me to Madame the Countess de Foljambe's soirées. Such a woman, Strong! Her eye! Her hand at the piano! Lor bless you, she'd sit down and sing to you, gazing at you, until she warbled your soul out of your body almost. She asked me to attend her evening parties every Tuesday. Didn't I buy opera boxes and treat her to dinners at the restaurateur? But I had a streak of luck at the tables, and it wasn't in the dinners or boxes that poor Clavering's money vanished. No, be hanged to it, it was swept away another way.

"One night at the Countess's, several of us were at supper—Mr. Bloundell-Bloundell, the Honourable Deuceace, the Marquis de la Tour de Force—all tip-top nobility, the height of fashion. After supper, champagne flowed freely, followed by some of that confounded brandy. I demanded it—I pressed for it. The Countess mixed punch for me, and after supper we played cards as well as grog. I played and drank until I knew not what I did. I was like last night. I was taken away and put to bed, never waking until the next day to a roaring headache and seeing my servant inform me that the Honourable Deuceace wished to see me.

"'How are you, Colonel?' he said, entering my bedroom. 'How long did you stay last night after I departed? The play was getting too high for me, and I'd lost enough to you for one night.'"

"'To me?' I said. 'How's that, my dear fellow? For though he was an Earl's son, we were as familiar as you and me.' He told me he had borrowed thirty louis of me at *vingt-et-un*, giving me an I.O.U. the night before, which I had placed in my pocket-book before he left. I produced my card-case—which the Countess had worked on—and there lay the I.O.U., sure enough. He paid me thirty louis in gold upon the table at my bedside. So I said he was a gentleman and asked if he needed anything, when my servant should bring it. But the Honourable Deuceace didn't drink in the morning and departed for some business.

"Presently, another ring at the outer door. This time it was Bloundell-Bloundell and the Marquis. 'Bonjour, Marquis,' I said. 'Good morning—no headache
