Every day, following the entertainments at Grosvenor Place and Greenwich, the worthy Major Pendennis's friendship for the Clavering family seemed to deepen with a fervor that bordered on the absurd. His calls were incessant, and his attentions to the lady of the house unremitting. As an elderly gentleman of the town, he possessed the rare fortune of being received wherever a lady of Lady Clavering's distinction appeared. "Would her ladyship not like to grace the grand entertainment at Gaunt House?" he would suggest, or extoll the "very pretty breakfast ball" at Viscount Marrowfat's in Fulham. "Everybody will be there, including august personages of the highest rank," he'd assure her, promising a Watteau quadrille where Miss Amory would surely look charming. To these and other diversions, the obsequious old gentleman kindly offered to conduct Lady Clavering, positioning himself as a utility ready to serve the Baronet in any agreeable capacity.

Yet, despite his current station and fortune, the world maintained a frosty demeanor toward Clavering, trailing strange suspicions in his wake. He was blackballed from two clubs in quick succession. Within the House of Commons, he confined his conversations to a select circle of the most disreputable members, possessing a natural knack for choosing bad society and adapting to it with the ease others reserve for the company of their superiors. To name every senator with whom Clavering consorted would be invidious; suffice it to say, there was Captain Raff, the honorable member for Epsom, who retired after the last Goodwood races under the guise of a mission to the Levant; Hustingson, the patriotic member for Islington, whose voice had fallen silent on corruption since his appointment as Governor of Coventry Island; and Bob Freeny of the Booterstown line, a marksman of no small repute. Of all these gentlemen, with whom Mr. Hotspur, the Whip, was professionally compelled to associate, none inspired in him a deeper contempt or dislike than Sir Francis Clavering, the representative of an ancient race who had sat for their borough time out of mind.

"If that man is wanted for a division," Hotspur declared, "ten to one he'll be found in a hell. Educated in the Fleet, he hasn't heard the end of Newgate yet, take my word for it. He'll muddle away the Begum's fortune at thimble-rig, get caught picking pockets, and finish on board the hulks." Yet, if the high-born Hotspur could maintain civility towards Clavering for professional reasons, why should not Major Pendennis, armed with his own motives, attend to this unlucky gentleman?

"He has a very good cellar and a very good cook," the Major remarked. "As long as he remains silent, he is not offensive, and he very seldom speaks. If he chooses to frequent gambling tables and lose his money to blacklegs, what matters to me? 'Don't look too curiously into any man's affairs, Pen, my boy,' I say. Every fellow has some cupboard in his house, begad, which he wouldn't like you or me to peep into. Why should we try when the rest of the house is open to us? And a devilish good house, too, as you and I know." He paused, admiring the domestic arrangement. "If the man of the family isn't all one could wish, the women are excellent. The Begum is not over-refined, but as kind a woman as ever lived and devilish clever. And as for the little Blanche, you know my opinion, you rogue. You know my belief is that she is sweet on you and would have you for the asking. But you're growing such a great man, I suppose you won't be content under a Duke's daughter—Hey, sir? I recommend you to ask one of them and try."

Perhaps Pen was somewhat intoxicated by his recent successes, and it may have entered the young man's mind, encouraged by his uncle's perpetual hints, that Miss Amory was tolerably well-disposed to renew the flirtation carried on in the early days by the banks of the rural Brawl. However, he was little disposed to marriage at that moment. Adopting some of his uncle's worldly tone, he spoke rather contemptuously of the institution and in favor of a bachelor life.

"You are very happy, sir," said he, "and you get on very well alone, and so do I. With a wife at my side, I should lose my place in society; and I don't, for my part, much fancy retiring into the country with a Mrs. Pendennis, or taking my wife into lodgings to be waited upon by a servant-of-all-work. The period of my little illusions is over. You cured me of my first love, who certainly was a fool, and would have had a fool for her husband, and a very sulky discontented husband too if she had taken me. We young fellows live fast, sir; and I feel as old at five-and-twenty as many of the old fellows—the old bachelors—whom I see in the bow-window at Bays's. Don't look offended, I only mean that I am blasé about love matters, and that I could no more fan myself into a flame for Miss Amory now than I could adore Lady Mirabel over again. I wish I could; I rather like old Mirabel for his infatuation about her, and think his passion is the most respectable part of his life."

"Sir Charles Mirabel was always a theatrical man, sir," the Major said, annoyed that his nephew should speak flippantly of anyone of Sir Charles's rank and station. "He has been occupied with theatricals since his early days. He acted at Carlton House when he was Page to the Prince; he has been mixed up with that sort of thing: he could afford to marry whom he chooses; and Lady Mirabel is a most respectable woman, received everywhere—everywhere, mind. The Duchess of Connaught receives her, Lady Rockminster receives her—it doesn't become young fellows to speak lightly of people in that station. There's not a more respectable woman in England than Lady Mirabel:—and the old fogies, as you call them, at Bays's, are some of the first gentlemen in England, of whom you youngsters had best learn a little manners, and a little breeding, and a little modesty." And the Major began to think that Pen was growing exceedingly pert and conceited, and that the world made a great deal too much of him.

The Major's anger amused Pen. He studied his uncle's peculiarities with a constant relish, and was always in a good humor with his worldly old mentor. "I am a youngster of fifteen years' standing, sir," he said adroitly, "and if you think that we are disrespectful, you should see those of the present generation. A protégé of yours came to breakfast with me the other day. You told me to ask him, and I did it to please you. We had a day's sights together, and dined at the club, and went to the play. He said the wine at the Polyanthus was not so good as Ellis's wine at Richmond, smoked Warrington's cavendish after breakfast, and when I gave him a sovereign as a farewell token, said he had plenty of them, but would take it to show he wasn't proud."

"Did he?—did you ask young Clavering?" cried the Major, appeased at once—"fine boy, rather wild, but a fine boy—parents like that sort of attention, and you can't do better than pay it to our worthy friends of Grosvenor Place. And so you took him to the play and tipped him? That was right, sir, that was right:" with which mentor he quitted Telemachus, thinking that the young men were not so very bad, and that he should make something of that fellow yet.

As Master Clavering grew into years and stature, he became too strong for the authority of his fond parents and governess; rather governing them than permitting himself to be led by their orders. With his papa he was silent and sulky, seldom making his appearance in the neighborhood of that gentleman; with his mamma he roared and fought when any contest arose regarding the gratification of his appetite; and in his disputes with his governess over his books, he kicked that quiet creature's shins so fiercely that she was entirely overmastered and subdued. He would have so treated his sister Blanche, too, and did on one or two occasions attempt to prevail over her; but she showed an immense resolution and spirit, boxing his ears so soundly that he forbore from molesting Miss Amory, as he did the governess and his mamma's maid.

At length, when the family came to London, Sir Francis gave forth his opinion that "the little beggar had best be sent to school." Accordingly, the young son and heir of the house of Clavering was despatched to the Rev. Otto Rose's establishment at Twickenham, where young noblemen and gentlemen were received preparatory to their introduction to the great English public schools.

It is not our intention to follow Master Clavering in his scholastic career; the paths to the Temple of Learning were made more easy to him than they were to some of us of earlier generations. He advanced towards that fane in a carriage-and-four, so to speak, and might halt and take refreshment almost whenever he pleased. He wore varnished boots from the earliest period of youth, and had cambric handkerchiefs
