Could Helen have foreseen that as Pen's strength returned, his foolish infatuation for little Fanny would reignite? Though she never uttered a syllable concerning the girl after her talk with the Major, and though she appeared to treat Fanny as non-existent, Mrs. Pendennis kept a hawk-like eye on Master Arthur. Under the guise of his fragile health, she barely allowed him out of her sight and was determined to spare him the trouble of any correspondence for the present. Likely, Arthur trembled as he glanced at his own letters; likely, receiving them at the family table while feeling his mother's gaze fixed intently on her teacup or book, he waited daily for a scrap of handwriting he had never seen, his heart pounding with anticipation. Was he more pleased or annoyed that day after day his hopes were unfulfilled? Was his mind relieved that no letter from Fanny arrived? Though, no doubt, when Lovelace tires of Clarissa (or vice versa), it is best for both to break at once and pursue separate paths through life, solitude notwithstanding, our self-love, pity, or sense of decency cannot stomach such sudden bankruptcy. Before announcing to the world that "Lovelace & Co." cannot meet its obligations, we strive for compromises; we hold mournful partner meetings; we delay putting up the shutters and making the dreary announcement of failure. It must come, however: we pawn our jewels merely to keep the show running a little longer. On the whole, I suspect Pen was rather irritated that he received no remonstrances from Fanny. What! Could she depart from him and not even glance back? Could she sink without holding out a small hand or crying, "Help, Arthur?" Well, well: not everyone who ventures on that voyage goes down. A few drown when the ship founders, but most are merely dunked before scrambling ashore. As for whether A. Pendennis, Esquire, of the Upper Temple, belonged to the class of persons likely to sink or swim, the reader's experience will surely decide.

Though Pen was still too weak to walk half a mile and could not be trusted to take a carriage drive alone without a nurse, Helen could not keep watch over Mr. Warrington. She lacked the authority to prevent him from traveling to London if business called, and indeed, if he had stayed, perhaps the widow, for reasons of her own, would have been content. However, she quelled these selfish wishes as soon as she acknowledged them, remembering Warrington's great regard and constant friendship for her boy, and treating him as a member of her family with her usual melancholy kindness. Yet, one morning when his affairs summoned him to town, she divined his errand: he had gone to London to gather news about Fanny for Pen.

Arthur had discussed his adventures with Fanny—which the reader already knows—and his feelings regarding her, with his friend. He was thankful he had escaped the great dangers to which Warrington assented heartily. He confessed he had no great fault to reproach himself with regarding his behavior, but if they parted, as they must, he wished to say a God bless her and hope she would remember him kindly. Speaking with so much gravity and emotion, George Warrington—who had strongly advocated for the separation—began to fear his friend was not so well cured as he boasted, worrying that if they reunited, the danger and temptation might have to be fought again. With what result? "It is hard to struggle, Arthur, and easy to fall," Warrington observed. "And the best courage for us poor wretches is to fly from danger. I would not be what I am now had I practiced what I preach."

"And what did you practice, George?" Pen asked eagerly. "I knew there was something. Tell us about it, Warrington."

"There was something that can't be mended, and that shattered my whole fortunes early," Warrington answered. "I said I would tell you about it some day, Pen: and will, but not now. Take the moral without the fable now, Pen, my boy; and if you want to see a man whose whole life has been wrecked by an unlucky rock against which he struck as a boy—here he is, Arthur: and so I warn you."

Meanwhile, we have seen how Mr. Huxter, writing home to his Clavering friends, mentioned a fashionable club in London where he met an Irish officer of distinction who provided intelligence regarding Pendennis. This club was none other than the Back Kitchen, where the disciple of Saint Bartholomew met the General. The peculiarities of the General's brogue, appearance, disposition, and conversation greatly amused the young gentlemen who used the Back Kitchen for nightly entertainment. Huxter, possessing a fine natural genius for mimicry, whether of actors, cocks, or corkscrews, studied the General with gusto, twanging his poor old long bow whenever drink, a hearer, and an opportunity occurred. A bait of sixpennyworth of brandy-and-water was always enough to make the worthy old man swallow, and under its influence, who was happier than he to tell stories of his daughter's triumphs and his own exploits in love, war, drink, and polite society? Thus, Huxter presented many pictures of Costigan to his friends: of Costigan fighting a jewel in the Phoenix, of his interview with the Duke of York, of his son-unlaw's table surrounded by the nobility of his country, and of Costigan, when crying drunk, lamenting his daughter's ingratitude and stating that his grey hairs were hastening to a premature grave. Through these tales, Huxter attracted a number of young fellows to the Back Kitchen, who consumed the landlord's liquors while relishing the General's peculiarities, so that the host pardoned many of the latter's foibles in consideration of the good they brought to his house. Not the highest position in life was this, certainly, nor one we would wish for an old man if we revered him, but of this aged buffoon it may be mentioned that he had no particular idea his condition was low, nor did he harbor a black drop in his whiskied blood or a bitter feeling in his muddled brains against any mortal being. Even his cruel child, Emily, he would have taken to his heart and forgiven with tears; and what more can one say of Christian charity than that a man is ready to forgive those who have done him every kindness and with whom he is wrong in a dispute!

Some among the young men who frequented the Back Kitchen believed the Captain made a mystery regarding his lodgings, fearing debt collectors or desiring privacy, and lived in some wonderful place. Nor would the landlord, when questioned, answer inquiries, maintaining his maxim that he only knew gentlemen in that room, and when they quit, his communication with them ceased, making it impertinent curiosity to ask where any other gentleman lived. Costigan, in his most intoxicated and confidential moments, also evaded replies. There was no particular secret, as we have seen who have entered his apartments, but in the vicissitudes of a long life, he had resided in houses where privacy was necessary to his comfort, where the appearance of visitors would bring nothing but displeasure. Hence, legends arose: that he slept habitually in a watch-box in the City; in a cab at a mews, where a proprietor gave him shelter; in the Duke of York's Column, etc.—wild theories put abroad by the facetious and imaginative Huxter. For Huxey, when not silenced by the company of "swells" and when in the society of his own friends, was a very different fellow from the youth cowed by Pen's impertinent airs, and adored by his family at home, was the life and soul of the circle he met, either round the festive board or the dissecting table.

On one brilliant September morning, as Huxter regaled himself with coffee at a stall in Covent Garden, having spent a delicious night dancing at Vauxhall, he spied the General reeling down Henrietta Street, with a crowd of hooting blackguard boys at his heels, who had left their beds under the river arches betimes and were prowling for breakfast. The poor old General was not in a condition where the sneers of these young beggars had little effect. The cabmen and watermen at the stand knew him and commented, the policemen gazed after him and warned the boys off with looks of scorn and pity. What did the scorn and pity of men, the jokes of ribald children, matter to the General? He reeled along with glazed eyes, having just sense enough to know whither he was bound and to pursue his accustomed beat homewards. He went to bed not knowing how he had reached it, as often as any man in London. He woke and found himself there, asked no questions, and continued tacking about on this daily though perilous voyage, when, from his station at the coffee-stall, Huxter spied him. To note his friend, to pay his twopence (indeed, he had but eightpence left, or he would have had a cab from Vauxhall), was with the eager Huxter the work of an instant—Costigan dived down the alleys by Drury Lane Theatre, where gin-shops, oyster-shops, and theatrical wardrobes abound, the proprietors of which were now asleep behind their shutters as the pink morning lighted up their chimneys; and through these courts Huxter followed the General until he reached Oldcastle Street, wherein lies the gate of Shepherd's Inn.

Just as he was within sight of home,
