Our benevolent Begum, initially so incensed by yet another instance of her husband's duplicity and foolishness, flatly refused to assist Sir Francis Clavering in meeting his debts of honor. She declared her intention to separate from him, leaving him to face the dire consequences of his incorrigible weakness and squandering ways. Following that disastrous day at the Derby, the unfortunate gambler was in such a state of mental turmoil that he sought to avoid everyone. He fled from his turf associates, whom he feared he might not be able to pay, and especially from his wife, his long-suffering banker, whose credit he now doubted.

When Lady Clavering inquired the following morning if Sir Francis was home, she learned he had not returned. Instead, he had dispatched a messenger to his valet, instructing him to forward clothes and letters via the bearer. Strong, knowing that his patron would soon require assistance, secured a note begging him to visit his "distracted" friend F.C. at Short Hotel, Blackfriars, specifically asking for "Mr. Francis." The Baronet possessed a peculiar mental trait: he would rather utter a falsehood than admit defeat, and invariably began a contest with fortune by fleeing and hiding.

The Bootboy of Mr. Short's establishment, who delivered Clavering's message to Grosvenor Place and retrieved his carpet-bag, instantly recognized its owner. He whispered this intelligence to the footman setting the breakfast table, who relayed it to the servants' hall, where it reached Mrs. Bonner, the lady's housekeeper and confidante, who finally informed her mistress. Thus, every soul within the Grosvenor Place establishment knew that Sir Francis was in hiding under the alias of "Francis" at an inn in the Blackfriars Road. Furthermore, Sir Francis's coachman spread the news to other gentlemen's drivers, who shared it with their masters and the neighboring Tattersalls, where gloomy rumors circulated that Sir Francis Clavering was preparing for a lengthy tour in the Levant.

Throughout the day, the volume of correspondence addressed to Sir Francis Clavering, Bart., that accumulated on his hall-table was remarkable. The French cook submitted his account to the lady; tradesmen supplying her table, along with Messrs. Finer and Gimcrack, the mercers and ornamental dealers, and Madame Crinoline, the eminent milliner, all forwarded their bills, alongside Miss Amory's substantial private accounts from each establishment.

By the afternoon of the day after the Derby, when Strong visited Grosvenor Place to conduct business as usual, he found his principal's study littered with these suspicious documents. After a brief, tearful colloquy with the manager at Short's Hotel, whom he found sobbing and drinking Curacao, Strong opened the papers with a rueful countenance.

Just as he was examining them, Mrs. Bonner descended upon him. As a devoted part of the family, essential to her mistress as the Chevalier was to Sir Francis, she stood firmly on Lady Clavering's side, angering far more deeply than her ladyship herself due to her sense of duty.

"He won't pay if I advise it," Mrs. Bonner declared. "Go back to Sir Francis, Captain—and tell him we refuse to pay his debts anymore. He's skulking around a low public house and doesn't dare face his wife like a man! We raised him from gaol, paid his debts repeatedly, set him up in Parliament, gave him a town and country house. Yet here he is, a shabby sneak, where he dares not show his face! We've provided the horse he rides, the dinner he eats, and the clothes on his back. From now on, we give nothing more. Our remaining fortune belongs to ourselves; we shall not waste another penny on this ungrateful man. We'll provide enough to keep him alive and then let him go. Tell him that from Susan Bonner."

Hearing of Strong's arrival, Lady Clavering summoned him, hoping to find her factotum less rigid than Mrs. Bonner. Often before, the Chevalier had successfully softened his mistress's heart with pleas for his client. This time, however, he painted a dismal picture of Sir Francis's plight, fearing terrible consequences if his engagements could not be met.

"Let him kill himself," Mrs. Bonner laughed. "Dying would be the finest thing he could do." Strong swore he had found the Baronet with razors on the table, but Lady Clavering laughed bitterly at this. "He'll do himself no harm as long as there's a shilling left for him to rob a poor woman. His life is quite safe, Captain; you may depend on it. Ah! What a bad day it was when I first set eyes on him!"

"He's worse than a man," cried the lady's aide-de-camp. "He was a wild devil, yes, but he had the courage of a man. Whereas this fellow? What use is it for my lady to pay his bills, sell her diamonds, and forgive him? Next year, the moment he gets a chance, he'll be cheating her again, robbing her. Her money goes to keep a pack of rogues and swindlers—I don't mean you, Captain; you've been a good friend, barring the wish we'd never have met you."

The Chevalier noticed from Mrs. Bonner's slip of the tongue regarding the diamonds that the kind-hearted Begum was willing to relent, at least temporarily, offering hope for his principal.

"Upon my word, ma'am," he said, feigning deep sympathy and admiration for her untiring generosity—"any criticism of Clavering or complaint from Mrs. Bonner is deserved, and it was indeed an unlucky day for you when you encountered either. He has behaved cruelly. If you were not the most generous and forgiving woman in the world, there would be no hope for him. But you cannot let the father of your son be disgraced, sending little Frank into the world with such a stain. Bind him; tie him down with any promises you like. I vouch for him; he will sign them."

"And break 'em," retorted Mrs. Bonner.

"And keep 'em this time!" cried Strong. "If you could have seen how he wept, ma'am! 'Oh, Strong,' he said to me, 'it's not for myself I feel now: it's for my boy—it's for the best woman in England, whom I have treated basely—I know I have.' He didn't intend to bet on this race, ma'am—he didn't. He was cheated into it; the entire ring was taken. He thought he could gamble safely, without risk. And it will be a lifelong lesson to him. To see a man cry—oh, it's dreadful."

"He doesn't think much of making my dear missus cry," said Mrs. Bonner, pointing to the ceiling. "Poor dear soul! Look if he does, Captain."

"If you have the soul of a man, Clavering," Strong told his principal later, recounting the scene, "you will keep your promise this time. So help me Heaven, if you break word with her, I will turn against you and tell all."

"What all?" cried Mr. Francis, to whom his ambassador brought the news back at Short's Hotel, where Strong found the Baronet weeping and drowning his sorrows in Curacao.

"Pshaw! Do you suppose I am a fool?" burst out Strong. "Do you suppose I could live so long in this world, Frank Clavering, without keeping my eyes open? You know I have but to speak, and tomorrow you are a beggar. And I am not the only man who knows your secret."

"Who else does?" gasped Clavering.

"Old Pendennis does, or I am very much mistaken. He recognized the man the first night he saw him, when he came drunk into your house."

"He knows it, does he?" shrieked Clavering. "Damn him—kill him."

"You'd like to kill us all, wouldn't you, old boy?" said Strong, sneering and puffing his cigar.

The Baronet dashed his weak hand against his forehead; perhaps the other had interpreted his wish correctly. "Oh, Strong!" he cried, "if I dared, I'd put an end to myself, for I'm the damnedest miserable dog in all England. It's that misery that makes me so wild and reckless. It's that which drives me to drink"—and he drained a bumper of his fortifier with a trembling hand—"and to live about with these thieves. I know they're thieves, every one of 'em, damned thieves. And how can I help it? And I didn't know it, you know—and, by Gad, I'm innocent—and until I saw the damned scoundrel first, I knew no more about it than the dead—and I'll fly, and I'll go abroad out of reach of these confounded hells, and I'll bury myself in a forest, by Gad! and hang myself up to a tree—and, oh!I'm the most miserable beggar in all England!" With more tears, shrieks, and curses, the impotent wretch vented his grief, deplored his unhappy fate, and, amidst groans, despair, and blasphemy, vowed his miserable repentance.

The honored proverb that an ill wind blows no good to anyone proved true in the case of Sir Francis Clavering, as well as for another occupant of Mr. Strong's chambers in Shepherd's Inn. The man was "good," by
