In Which the Major Neither Yields His Money Nor His Life

Early the following morning, the heavy iron shutters of the lodging house at Bury Street clicked open. Inside, the air was thick with the scent of boiled cabbage and stale tobacco, broken only by the sharp, metallic tang of a razor being oiled. Standing by the window, a figure moved with the stiff, jerky precision of a clockwork toy that had seen better days. This was Mr. James Morgan, the old gentleman's valet, though "valet" felt like a generous title for a man whose soul seemed to have been replaced by a ledger book. He held a silver dressing-case in one hand and a can of water in the other, his face a mask of grave, unblinking respect.

From the bed, where he lay swathed in blankets like a mummy, came the voice of Old Pendennis. It was a gravelly rumble, the sound of a cannon that had fired too many times in its day. "It's you, is it?" the Major croaked. "I shan't take you back again, you understand."

Morgan turned slowly, his movements deliberate, as if calculating the cost of every step. "I ave not the least wish to be took back agin, Major Pendennis," he declared, his voice dripping with a dignity that bordered on the absurd. "Nor to serve you nor hany man. But as I wish you to be comftable as long as you stay in my house..." He trailed off, clearing his throat, "...I came up to do what's nessary." With a theatrical flourish, he laid out the silver case, unscrewed the top, and strapped the shining razor with a tension that suggested it might explode if not handled with absolute reverence.

"These offices concluded," Morgan murmured, addressing the Major with an indescribable solemnity, "thinkin' that you would most likely be in want of a respectable pusson, until you suited yourself, I spoke to a young man last night, who is 'ere.'"

"Indeed!" grunted the warrior in the tent-bed.

"He ave lived in the fust famlies," Morgan continued, his eyes darting around the room as if expecting witnesses, "and I can wouch for his respectability."

"You are monstrous polite," grinned the old Major, a spark of amusement lighting his weary eyes. The truth was, after the chaotic events of the previous evening, Morgan had retreated to his own club, *The Wheel of Fortune*. There, amidst the clinking of glasses and the hum of gossip, he had encountered Frosch, a courier and valet fresh from a foreign tour with young Lord Cubley. Morgan, feeling the tremors of retirement approaching, had pitched his story to Frosch with dramatic flair: he claimed to be having "a devil of a blow hup with his own Gov'rner," planned to retire entirely, and needed a temporary replacement immediately. If Frosch wanted a job, he was told to apply in Bury Street.

"You are very polite," said the Major, feigning admiration. "And your recommendation, I am sure, will have every weight."

Morgan flushed red, feeling the sting of his former master's mockery. "The man have awaited on you before, sir," he stammered, regaining his composure. "Lord De la Pole... gave him to his nephew, young Lord Cubley... He have been with him on his foring tour... Not wishing to go to Fitzurse Castle, which Frosch's chest is delicate, and he cannot bear the cold in Scotland, he is free to serve you or not, as you choose."

"I repeat, sir, that you are exceedingly polite," the Major said, straightening up. "Come in, Frosch—you will do very well—Mr. Morgan, will you have the great kindness to—"

"I shall show him what is nessary, sir," Morgan interjected, stepping forward with a stern air. "What is customry for you to wish to ave done. Will you please to take breakfast 'ere or at the Club, Major Pendennis?"

"With your kind permission, I will breakfast here, and afterwards we will make our little arrangements."

"If you please, sir."

"Will you now oblige me by leaving the room?"

Morgan bowed deeply and withdrew. The excessive politeness of his ex-employer, coupled with the Major's biting sarcasm, had ignited a small fire of anger within him, though he masked it quickly with a grim smile. As the old gentleman began his mysterious toilet, brushing his hair with the fervor of a man preparing for battle, we will also modestly retreat to observe the unfolding drama.

***

After breakfast, the atmosphere in the room shifted from domestic tranquility to military efficiency. Major Pendennis and his new aide-de-camp, Frosch, set about packing for departure. The establishment of the old bachelor was surprisingly streamlined. He possessed no useless wardrobe; his collection of worldly goods was curated with the eye of a collector. There sat a Bible belonging to his mother, a road book, Pen's novel bound in calf skin, and the Duke of Wellington's Despatches. Scattered around were prints, maps, and portraits of illustrious generals, sovereigns, consorts, and specifically the General under whom the Major had served in India. He was a man always ready to march at a few hours' notice.

The cases in which he had brought his property into his lodgings fifteen years prior, originally stored in the lofts, were miraculously still intact and ample enough to hold everything again. A young woman named Betty, who performed the duties of a housekeeper, assisted under the watchful gaze of the "terrible" Mr. Morgan. Her demeanor was subdued, her hands moving with mechanical precision as she dusted and cleaned. Morgan stood guard, his expression guarded and solemn. He had spoken no words to Mrs. Brixham regarding his threats from the night before, but his eyes betrayed a predatory intent, and the poor widow trembled, awaiting her fate.

Old Pendennis, armed with his cane, supervised the packaging of his goods and chattels under Frosch's capable hands. Meanwhile, the "Slavey"—Betty—burned such of the Major's papers as he deemed unnecessary, flung open doors and closets until they were utterly empty. Soon, all boxes and chests were sealed tight, save for one specific item: the Major's desk, which stood ready to receive the final accounts of Mr. Morgan.

That individual now made his entrance, balancing a stack of books. "As I wish to speak to you in privick," he announced, "peraps you will ave the kindness to request Frosch to step downstairs."

"Bring a couple of cabs, Frosch, if you please—and wait downstairs until I ring for you," commanded the Major. Morgan watched Frosch descend the stairs, vanish onto the street, and return with the vehicles. Then, producing his books and accounts—which were simple, clean, and easily settled—he cleared his throat.

"And now, sir," he said, pocketing the cheque his former employer handed him and signing his name with a flourish, "and now that accounts is closed between us, sir," he raised his voice, "I porpose to speak to you as one man to another." Morgan loved the sound of his own voice; whenever an opportunity arose, whether at the Club or in the housekeeper's room, he indulged in public speaking. "And I must tell you, that I'm in possession of certing infamation."

"And may I inquire of what nature, pray?" asked the Major, feigning ignorance.

"It's valuble information, Major Pendennis, as you know very well," Morgan intoned. "I know of a marriage as is no marriage—of a honourable Baronet as is no more married than I am; and which his wife is married to somebody else, as you know too, sir."

At once, the pieces fell into place for Pendennis. "Ha! this accounts for your behaviour. You have been listening at the door, sir, I suppose," the Major said, looking very haughty. "I forgot to look at the keyhole when I went to that public-house, or I might have suspected what sort of a person was behind it."

"I may have my schemes as you may have yours, I suppose," Morgan countered, his chin lifting. "I may get my information, and I may act on that information, and I may find that information valuble as anybody else may. A poor servant may have a bit of luck as well as a gentleman, mayn't he? Don't you be putting on your aughty looks, sir, and comin' the aristocrat over me. That's all gammon with me. I'm an Englishman, I am, and as good as you."

"To what the devil does this tend, sir? and how does the secret which you have surprised concern me, I should like to know?" demanded the Major, with great majesty.

"How does it concern me, indeed! how grand we are!" Morgan exclaimed, pacing slightly. "How does it concern my nephew, I wonder? How does it concern my nephew's seat in Parlyment: and to subornation of bigamy? How does it concern that? What, are you to be the only man to have a secret, and to trade on it? Why shouldn't I go halves, Major Pendennis? I've found it out too. Look here! I ain't goin' to be unreasonable with you. Make it worth my while, and I'll keep the thing close. Let Mr. Arthur take his seat, and
