When Pen, clad in his dressing-gown, ascended the stairs to Warrington's chambers the following morning to report on the previous evening's interview with his uncle and solicit George's counsel, he discovered only Mrs. Flanagan, the laundress. Her charge, George, had departed, having packed a carpet-bag bound for his brother's house in Suffolk. Several packages addressed to the newspaper and reviews for which he labored lay upon the table, waiting for collection.

"He found the dear gentleman at the table!" Mrs. Flanagan chirped. "He was writing at his papers, and one candle had burned quite out. Hard as his bed is, he didn't touch it all night, sir."

Indeed, having endured the Club's brawl until it became insufferable, George had returned home. He had spent the night, and then some, hammering away at a piece of work he was commissioned to complete, bending his youthful spine to the task with singular intensity. By the time the tardy November dawn crept through the window, the labor was finished. Somewhere along the line, perhaps lost in the fog of exhaustion, the young man had succumbed to slumber. Now, however, he was gone, leaving behind the relics of his genius: two or three reference books, fragments of torn manuscripts, open drawers, pens, an inkstand, lines barely visible on blotting paper, and a twist of sealing wax bitten into sundry pieces.

Pen threw himself into George's empty chair, noting the scene with his usual acumen, though perhaps also in spite of himself. There was a gap in the bookcase, right beside the old College Plato and the Boniface Arms, where Helen's Bible usually resided. *He has taken that,* Pen realized. *Of course he has.* He knew why his friend was gone.

"Oh, dear, dear old George!" Pen murmured, rubbing his hand over his eyes. *How much wiser, how much better, how much nobler he is than I!* Where was such a friend? Where could he find such a brave heart again? Where would he hear such a frank voice, or witness such kind laughter? Where would he see such a true gentleman? It was no wonder she loved him. God bless him! Compared to this titan, what was Pen? What choice did she have but to love him? They would remain brothers unto the end, as fate decreed they could never be more. They would serve as her knights, waiting in attendance; and when they grew old, they would recount how deeply they had loved her. *Dear, dear old George!*

Descending to his own chambers, Pen glanced at the letter-box of his outer door, a feature he had previously overlooked. Nestled within was a little note addressed to A.P., Esq., penned in George's familiar hand. George had slipped it in just as he departed.

"Dear Pen,—I shall be half-way home when you breakfast, and intend to stay over Christmas, in Norfolk, or elsewhere.
*I have my own opinion of the issue of matters about which we talked in J——— St. yesterday; and think my presence de trop.*
*Give my very best regards and adieux to your cousin.*"

And so, George was gone, leaving Mrs. Flanagan to rule over his empty rooms.

Naturally, Pen felt compelled to visit his uncle the day after their conversation. Being denied admission, he turned instead to Lady Rockminster's apartments. The old lady immediately demanded Bluebeard, insisting that he join them for dinner.

"Bluebeard is gone," Pen replied, producing poor George's scrap of paper and handing it to Laura. She examined it, cast no look at Pen in return, and passed the paper back, walking away silently. Pen rushed into an eloquent eulogy of his dear old George for Lady Rockminster, who was stunned by his fervor. She had rarely heard him so warm in praise of anyone; indeed, she frankly confessed that she couldn't imagine it being in his nature to care so deeply for any other soul.

Later, as Mr. Pendennis strolled through Waterloo Place on his daily pilgrimage to the hotel where Laura resided, he spotted an old acquaintance emerging from Messrs. Gimcrack's celebrated shop. This gentleman was trailed by an obsequious shopman carrying parcels. The man wore the deepest mourning, as did his brougham, driver, and horse. Grief, cushioned by ease and supported by the softest springs, was perfectly typified by the equipage and its diminutive owner.

"What, Foker! Hail, Foker!" cried Pen, recognizing Arthur's schoolfellow, the heir to the late lamented John Henry Foker, Esq., master of Logwood and co-partner in the great brewery of Foker and Co.—the greater portion of Foker's Entire.

A little hand, gloved in deep ebony and framed by a snowy wristband of three inches, extended to meet Arthur's salute. The other little hand clutched a small morocco case containing, undoubtedly, something precious recently acquired at Gimcrack's. Pen's keen eyes and satirical turn instantly discerned the errand; he recalled the heir in Horace pouring forth the gathered wine of his father's vats, realizing that human nature remained remarkably consistent whether in Regent Street or the Via Sacra.

"*Le Roi est mort. Vive le Roi!*" Arthur declared.

"Ah!" said the other. "Yes. Thank you—very much obliged. How do you do, Pen?—very busy—good-bye!" And he leaped into the black brougham, sitting like a little black Care behind the black coachman. Having blushed upon seeing Pen, he displayed other signs of guilt and perturbation, which Pen attributed to the novelty of his situation and began to speculate upon in his usual sardonic fashion.

"Yes: so wags the world," Pen mused. "The stone closes over Harry the Fourth, and Harry the Fifth reigns in his stead. The old ministers at the brewery come and kneel before him with their books; the draymen, his subjects, fling up their red caps, and shout for him. What a grave deference and sympathy the bankers and lawyers show! There was too great a stake at issue between those two for them ever to love each other cordially. As long as one man keeps another out of twenty thousand a year, the younger must always hunger after the crown, and the wish becomes the father of the thought of possession. Thank Heaven, there was no thought of money between me and our dear mother, Laura."

"There never could have been. You would have spurned it!" Laura cried. "Why make yourself more selfish than you are, Pen; and allow your mind to entertain, for even an instant, thoughts of such... such dreadful meanness? You make me blush for you, Arthur: you make me..." Her eyes completed the sentence, and she wiped them with a handkerchief.

"There are some truths which women will never acknowledge," Pen observed, "and from which your modesty always turns away. I do not claim to have known the feeling myself, merely that I am glad I lacked the temptation. Is there any harm in that confession of weakness?"

"We are all taught to pray to be delivered from evil, Arthur," Laura whispered. "I am glad if you were spared from that great crime; and only sorry to think that you could, by any possibility, have been led into it. But you never could; and you don't think you could. Your acts are generous and kind: you disdain mean actions. You took Blanche without money, without a bribe. Yes, thanks be to Heaven, dear brother. You could not have sold yourself away; I knew you could not when the day arrived, and you did not. Praise be—where praise is due. Why does this horrid scepticism pursue you, my Arthur? Why doubt and sneer at your own heart—at everyone's? Oh, if you knew the pain you give me—how I lie awake thinking of those hard sentences, dear brother, wishing them unspoken, unthought!"

"Do I cause you many thoughts and many tears, Laura?" Arthur asked. The fullness of innocent love beamed from her in reply. A smile of heavenly purity, a glance of unutterable tenderness, sympathy, and pity illuminated her face. All these indications of love and purity Arthur beheld and worshipped in her, watching them as one watches a child, or as one imagines regarding an angel.

"I—I don't know what I have done," he said simply, "to merit such regard from two such women. It is like undeserved praise, Laura—or too much good fortune, which frightens one—or a great post when a man feels unfit for it. Ah, sister, how weak and wicked we are; how spotless, and full of love and truth, Heaven made you! I think for some of you there has been no fall," he said, gazing at the charming girl with an almost paternal look of admiration. "You can't help having sweet thoughts, and doing good actions. Dear creature! they are the flowers which you bear."

"And what else, sir?" asked Laura. "I see a sneer coming over your face. What is it? Why does it come to drive all the good thoughts away?"

"A sneer, is there? I was thinking, my dear, that Nature did very well in making you so good and loving: but—"

"But what? What is that wicked 'but,' and why are you always summoning it up?"

"But will come in spite
