"Dearest Blanche," Arthur wrote, "you are perpetually reading and dreaming up pretty dramas and exciting romances in real life; are you now prepared to enact a part of one? And not the pleasantest role, my dear Blanche, wherein the heroine seizes possession of her father's palace and wealth, welcoming her husband to loyal retainers and faithful vassals, greeting her happy bridegroom with 'All of this is mine and thine'—but the other character, that of the unluckiest lady imaginable. A woman who suddenly discovers she is not the Princess's wife, but Claude Melnotte's, the beggar. That of Alnaschar's wife, who bursts in just as her husband has kicked over the tray of porcelain that was to be the making of his fortune. But wait; Alnaschar, who kicked down the china, was not a married man. He had cast his eye on the Vizier's daughter, and his hopes of her crashed to the floor with the shattered bowls and tea-cups.

"Will you be the Vizier's daughter, refusing and laughing Alnaschar to scorn, or will you be the Lady of Lyons, falling for the penniless Claude Melnotte? I will act that part if you like. I will love you my best in return. I will do my utmost to make your humble life happy—for humble it will be. At least, the odds are heavily stacked against any other conclusion. We shall live and die in a poor, prosaic, humdrum way. There will be no stars and epaulettes for the hero of our story. I shall write one or two more stories, which will presently be forgotten. I shall be called to the Bar and try to climb the ladder of my profession; perhaps some day, if I am very lucky and work very hard (which is absurd), I may secure a colonial appointment, and you may become an Indian Judge's lady. Meanwhile, I shall buy back *The Pall Mall Gazette*; the publishers are weary of it since the passing of poor Shandon and will sell it for a trifling sum. Warrington will be my right hand, writing it up to a respectable sale. I will introduce you to Mr. Finucane, the sub-editor, and I know who in the end will be Mrs. Finucane—a very nice, gentle creature who has lived sweetly through a sad life. We will jog along, I say, and look out for better times, earning our living decently. You shall have the opera boxes and superintend the fashionable intelligence, breaking your little heart in the poet's corner. Shall we live over the offices?—there are four very good rooms, a kitchen, and a garret for Laura in Catherine Street in the Strand; or would you prefer a house in Waterloo Road? It would be very pleasant, only there is that halfpenny toll at the bridge. The boys may go to King's College, mayn't they? Does all this read to you like a joke?"

"Ahh, dear Blanche, it is no joke, and I am sober and telling the truth. Our fine daydreams have vanished. Our carriage has whirled out of sight like Cinderella's; our house in Belgravia has been whisked away into the air by a malevolent genius, and I am no longer a Member of Parliament any more than I am a Bishop on his bench in the House of Lords, or a Duke with a garter at his knee. You know pretty well what my property is, and your own little fortune. We may have enough with those two to live in decent comfort—to take a cab sometimes when we go out to see friends, and not to deny ourselves an omnibus when we are tired. But that is all: is that enough for you, my little dainty lady? I doubt sometimes whether you can bear the life which I offer you—at least, it is fair that you should know what it will be. If you say, 'Yes, Arthur, I will follow your fate whatever it may be, and be a loyal and loving wife to aid and cheer you'—come to me, dear Blanche, and may God help me so that I may do my duty to you. If not, and you look to a higher station, I must not bar Blanche's fortune—I will stand in the crowd, and see your ladyship go to Court when you are presented, and you shall give me a smile from your chariot window. I saw Lady Mirabel going to the drawing-room last season: the happy husband at her side glittered with stars and cordons. All the flowers in the garden bloomed in the coachman's bosom. Will you have these and the chariot, or walk on foot and mend your husband's stockings?"

"I cannot tell you now—afterwards I might, should the day come when we may have no secrets from one another—what has happened within the last few hours which has changed all my prospects in life: but so it is, that I have learned something which forces me to give up the plans which I had formed, and many vain and ambitious hopes in which I had been indulging. I have written and dispatched a letter to Sir Francis Clavering, stating that I cannot accept his seat in Parliament until after my marriage; in like manner, I cannot and will not accept any larger fortune with you than that which has always belonged to you since your grandfather's death and the birth of your half-brother. Your good mother is not in the least aware—I hope she never may be—of the reasons which force me to this very strange decision. They arise from a painful circumstance, attributable to none of our faults; but, having once befallen, they are as fatal and irreparable as that shock which overset honest Alnaschar's porcelain and shattered all his hopes beyond the power of mending. I write gaily enough, for there is no use in bewailing such a hopeless mischance. We have not drawn the great prize in the lottery, dear Blanche: but I shall be contented enough without it, if you can be so; and I repeat, with all my heart, that I will do my best to make you happy."

"And now, what news shall I give you? My uncle is very unwell and takes my refusal of the seat in Parliament in sad dudgeon; the scheme was his, poor old gentleman, and he naturally bemoans its failure. But Warrington, Laura, and I had a council of war: they know this awful secret and back me in my decision. You must love George as you love what is generous and upright and noble; and as for Laura—she must be our Sister, Blanche, our Saint, our good Angel. With two such friends at home, what need we care for the world without; or who is member for Clavering, or who is asked or not asked to the great balls of the season?"

To this frank communication came back the letter from Blanche to Laura, and one to Pen himself, which perhaps his own letter justified. "You are spoiled by the world," Blanche wrote; "you do not love your poor Blanche as she would be loved, or you would not offer thus lightly to take her or to leave her, no, Arthur, you love me not—a man of the world, you have given me your plighted troth, and are ready to redeem it; but that entire affection, that love whole and abiding, where—where is that vision of my youth? I am but a pastime of your life, and I would be its all;—but a fleeting thought, and I would be your whole soul. I would have our two hearts one; but ah, my Arthur, how lonely yours is! how little you give me of it! You speak of our parting with a smile on your lip; of our meeting, and you care not to hasten it! Is life but a disillusion, then, and are the flowers of our garden faded away? I have wept—I have prayed—I have passed sleepless hours—I have shed bitter, bitter tears over your letter! To you I bring the gushing poesy of my being—the yearnings of the soul that longs to be loved—that pines for love, love, love, beyond all!—that flings itself at your feet, and cries, Love me, Arthur! Your heart beats no quicker at the kneeling appeal of my love!—your proud eye is dimmed by no tear of sympathy!—you accept my soul's treasure as though 'twere dross! not the pearls from the unfathomable deeps of affection! not the diamonds from the caverns of the heart. You treat me like a slave, and bid me bow to my master! Is this the guerdon of a free maiden—is this the price of a life's passion? Ah me! when was it otherwise? when did love meet with aught but disappointment? Could I hope (fond fool!) to be the exception to the lot of my race; and lay my fevered brow on a heart that comprehended my own? Foolish girl that I was! One by one, all the flowers of my young life have faded away; and this, the last, the sweetest, the dearest, the fondly, the madly loved, the wildly cherished—where is it? But no more of this. Heed not my bleeding heart.—Bless you, bless you always, Arthur!"

"The words of this letter were perfectly clear, and written in Blanche's neatest hand upon her scented paper; and yet the meaning of the composition not a little puzzled Pen. Did Blanche mean to accept or to refuse his polite offer? Her phrases either meant that
