To truly grasp the architecture of this chamber of mystery, one must first confront the absolute silence that follows the cessation of horror. For moments after that awful laugh had ceased reverberating through the rocky room, Tars Tarkas and I stood in a tense, expectant void. No further sound broke the stillness; within the range of our vision, nothing moved. The air itself seemed to hold its breath, a suffocating weight pressing against the eardrums of two men trapped in a nightmare of their own making.

At length, Tars Tarkas laughed softly, a sound distinct from the hysterical cackles of lesser minds. It was the genuine expression of pleasure derived by his strange kin when confronted with the horrible or the terrifying. Often and again have I seen them roll upon the ground in mad fits of uncontrollable mirth, witnessing the death agonies of women and little children beneath the torture of that hellish green Martian spectacle—the Great Games. Their joy is born of cruelty, a perverse aesthetic where the destruction of the weak becomes art.

I looked up at the Thark, a smile curving my own lips. Here, in truth, was a greater need for a smiling face than a trembling chin. To offer despair to a being who finds ecstasy in the slaughter of innocents would be to insult the very nature of their existence.

"What do you make of it all?" I asked, my voice cutting through the heavy quiet. "Where in the deuce are we?"

He looked at me in surprise, his large, green eyes widening.

"Where are we?" he repeated, the question hanging heavy in the air. "Do you tell me, John Carter, that you know not where you be?"

"That I am upon Barsoom is all that I can guess," I replied, the words tasting bitter on my tongue. "But but for you and the great white apes, I should not even guess that. For the sights I have seen this day are as unlike the things of my beloved Barsoom as I knew it ten long years ago as they are unlike the world of my birth."

"No, Tars Tarkas, I know not where we be."

"Where have you been since you opened the mighty portals of the atmosphere plant years ago?" Tars Tarkas demanded, his voice rising with a mixture of anger and disbelief. "After the keeper had died and the engines stopped and all Barsoom was dying—that which had not already died of asphyxiation? Your body even was never found, though the men of a whole world sought after it for years. Though the Jeddak of Helium and his granddaughter, your princess, offered such fabulous rewards that even princes of royal blood joined in the search."

"There was but one conclusion to reach when all efforts to locate you had failed," the Thark continued, his tone shifting to a somber recitation of history. "And that, that you had taken the long, last pilgrimage down the mysterious River Iss, to await in the Valley Dor upon the shores of the Lost Sea of Korus the beautiful Dejah Thoris, your princess."

"Why you had gone none could guess," he pressed, "for your princess still lived—"

"Thank God," I interrupted him, the relief washing over me like a tidal wave. "I did not dare to ask you, for I feared I might have been too late to save her. She was very low when I left her in the royal gardens of Tardos Mors that long-gone night; so very low that I scarcely hoped even then to reach the atmosphere plant ere her dear spirit had fled from me forever. And she lives yet?"

"She lives, John Carter."

"You have not told me where we are," I reminded him, forcing the doubt aside.

"We are where I expected to find you, John Carter—and another," Tars Tarkas declared. "Many years ago you heard the story of the woman who taught me the thing that green Martians are reared to hate, the woman who taught me to love. You know the cruel tortures and the awful death her love won for her at the hands of the beast, Tal Hajus. She, I thought, awaited me by the Lost Sea of Korus."

"You know that it was left for a man from another world, for yourself, John Carter, to teach this cruel Thark what friendship is; and you, I thought, also roamed the care-free Valley Dor."

"Thus were the two I most longed for at the end of the long pilgrimage I must take some day," the Thark explained, his voice thick with emotion. "So as the time had elapsed which Dejah Thoris had hoped might bring you once more to her side—for she has always tried to believe that you had but temporarily returned to your own planet—I at last gave way to my great yearning. A month since I started upon the journey, the end of which you have this day witnessed. Do you understand now where you be, John Carter?"

"And that was the River Iss, emptying into the Lost Sea of Korus in the Valley Dor?" I asked, piecing together the geography of my confusion.

"This is the valley of love and peace and rest to which every Barsoomian since time immemorial has longed to pilgrimage at the end of a life of hate and strife and bloodshed," he replied, his tone suddenly cold and ironical. "This, John Carter, is Heaven."

His bitterness reflected the terrible disappointment he had suffered. Such a fearful disillusionment, such a blasting of life-long hopes and aspirations, such an uprooting of age-old tradition might have excused a vastly greater demonstration on the part of the Thark. Yet, he stood silent, accepting the crushing weight of reality.

I laid my hand upon his shoulder, feeling the rough texture of his skin beneath my palm.

"I am sorry," I said, nor did there seem aught else to say.

"Think, John Carter, of the countless billions of Barsoomians who have taken the voluntary pilgrimage down this cruel river since the beginning of time, only to fall into the ferocious clutches of the terrible creatures that to-day assailed us."

"There is an ancient legend," Tars Tarkas continued, his voice dropping to a whisper, "that once a red man returned from the banks of the Lost Sea of Korus, returned from the Valley Dor, back through the mysterious River Iss. The legend has it that he narrated a fearful blasphemy of horrid brutes that inhabited a valley of wondrous loveliness, brutes that pounced upon each Barsoomian as he terminated his pilgrimage and devoured him upon the banks of the Lost Sea where he had looked to find love and peace and happiness; but the ancients killed the blasphemer, as tradition has ordained that any shall be killed who return from the bosom of the River of Mystery."

"But now we know that it was no blasphemy," Tars Tarkas insisted, his eyes flashing with a fierce intensity. "That the legend is a true one, and that the man told only of what he saw. But what does it profit us, John Carter, since even should we escape, we also would be treated as blasphemers? We are between the wild *thoat* of certainty and the mad *zitidar* of fact—we can escape neither."

"As Earth men say, we are between the devil and the deep sea, Tars Tarkas," I replied, nor could I help but smile at our dilemma. The absurdity of our situation provided a fragile shield against the encroaching dread.

"There is naught that we can do but take things as they come," the Thark agreed, "and at least have the satisfaction of knowing that whoever slays us eventually will have far greater numbers of their own dead to count than they will get in return. White ape or plant man, green Barsoomian or red man, whosoever it shall be that takes the last toll from us will know that it is costly in lives to wipe out John Carter, Prince of the House of Tardos Mors, and Tars Tarkas, Jeddak of Thark, at the same time."

I could not help but laugh at his grim humor, and he joined in with me in one of those rare laughs of real enjoyment which was one of the attributes of this fierce Tharkian chief, marking him from the others of his kind. It was a sound of defiance, a refusal to be broken by the unknown.

"But about yourself, John Carter," he cried at last, his curiosity overriding his caution. "If you have not been here all these years, where indeed have you been, and how is it that I find you here to-day?"

"I have been back to Earth," I replied, the confession coming easily now. "For ten long Earth years I have been praying and hoping for the day that would carry me once more to this grim old planet of yours, for which, with all its cruel and terrible customs, I feel a bond of sympathy and love even greater than for the world that gave me birth. For ten years have I been enduring a living death of uncertainty and doubt as to whether Dejah Thoris lived, and now that for the first time in all these years my prayers have been answered and my doubt relieved, I find myself, through a cruel whim of fate, hurled into the one tiny spot of all Barsoom from which there is apparently no escape. And if there were, at a price which would put out forever the last flickering hope which I may cling to of seeing my princess again in this life—and you have seen to-day with what pitiful futility man yearns toward a material hereafter."

"Only a bare half-hour before
