For a fleeting heartbeat, I stood paralyzed before the avalanche of violence, but the initial surge of their bodies drove me reeling backward. My foot sought purchase on the solid floor but met only the void. I had stumbled blindly into the chasm that had claimed Issus moments prior. For a suspended second, I teetered on the precipice, the edge trembling under my weight. Then, gravity reclaimed its due; clutching the boy tightly against my chest, I pitched backward into the abyss.

We struck a polished chute, a smooth slide of obsidian glass. Above us, the aperture sealed with the silent, magical precision of a closing eye, trapping the chaos outside. We plummeted, unscathed, into a dimly lit apartment far beneath the roar of the arena.

As I rose to my feet, the first visage that greeted me was the malignant countenance of Issus, glaring through the heavy iron bars of a grated door set into the wall.

"Rash mortal!" she shrilled, her voice echoing like shattered glass. "You shall pay the awful penalty for your blasphemy in this secret cell. Here you shall lie alone, consumed by darkness, with the carcass of your accomplice festering in its rottenness by your side. Until crazed by loneliness and hunger, you shall feed upon the crawling maggots that were once a man."

That was her decree. In an instant, she vanished, and the dim light that had briefly illuminated the cell dissolved into Cimmerian blackness.

"Pleasant old lady," a voice murmured at my side. "Who speaks?"

"I ask," I replied, my voice rough.

"'Tis I, your companion," the voice continued, warm and steady despite the gloom. "Who has had the honor today of fighting shoulder to shoulder with the greatest warrior that ever wore metal upon Barsoom."

"I thank God that you are not dead," I said, relief washing over me. "I feared for that nasty cut upon your head."

"It but stunned me," he replied lightly. "A mere scratch."

"Perhaps it were as well had it been final," I countered grimly. "We seem to be in a rather precarious fix here, with a splendid probability of perishing from starvation and thirst."

"Where are we?"

"Beneath the arena," I answered. "We tumbled down the shaft that swallowed Issus just as she was bringing us to our knees."

He laughed, a low sound of profound pleasure and relief. Reaching out through the inky blackness, he seized my shoulder and pulled my ear close to his mouth.

"Nothing could be better," he whispered. "There are secrets within the secrets of Issus of which Issus herself does not dream."

"What do you mean?"

"I labored alongside the other slaves a year ago during the remodeling of these subterranean galleries," he explained. "At that time, we discovered below these very floors an ancient system of corridors and chambers sealed for ages. The overseers, the blacks in charge of the work, explored them, taking several of us along to perform tasks as needed. I know the entire labyrinth perfectly."

"There are miles of corridors honeycombing the ground beneath the gardens and the temple itself," he continued, his voice dropping further. "And there is one specific passage that leads downward, connecting with the lower regions that open onto the water shaft giving passage to Omean. If we can reach the submarine undetected, we may yet make the sea, wherein there are many islands to which the blacks never venture. There, we may survive for a time, and who knows what transpirations may aid us in ultimate escape?"

He spoke in a hushed whisper, evidently fearing prying ears even in this isolated depth. I answered him in kind.

"Lead back to Shador, my friend," I whispered. "Xodar, the boy, is there. We were to attempt our escape together; I cannot desert him."

"No," the boy insisted. "One cannot desert a friend. It were better to be recaptured ourselves than to leave him behind."

Then he began to grope his way across the floor of the dark chamber, searching for the mechanism of the trapdoor leading to the corridors beneath. At length, he summoned me with a low, cautious hiss: "S-s-t."

I crept toward the sound of his voice to find him kneeling on the brink of an opening in the floor.

"There is a drop here of about ten feet," he whispered. "Hang by your hands, and you will alight safely on a level floor of soft sand."

Very quietly, I lowered myself from the inky cell above into the inky pit below. So utterly dark was it that we could not see our hands at an inch from our noses. Never, I think, have I known such a complete absence of light as existed in the pits of Issus. For an instant, I hung suspended in mid-air. There is a strange, primal sensation connected with such an experience, difficult to articulate. When the feet tread empty air and the distance below is shrouded in impenetrable shadow, there arises a feeling akin to panic at the thought of releasing one's hold and plunging into unknown depths. Although the boy had assured me it was but ten feet to the floor, I experienced the same visceral thrill as though I were dangling above a bottomless chasm.

Then I released my hold and dropped—four feet to a soft cushion of sand. The boy followed.

"Raise me to your shoulders," he instructed, "and I will replace the trap."

Once this was done, he took my hand, leading me very slowly, with much deliberation and frequent halts to assure himself that he had not strayed into forbidden passageways. Presently, we commenced the descent of a very steep incline.

"It will not be long," he said, "before we shall have light. At the lower levels, we meet the same stratum of phosphorescent rock that illuminates Omean."

Never shall I forget that journey through the pits of Issus. While it was devoid of dramatic incidents, it was filled for me with a strange charm of excitement and adventure, which I believe hinged principally on the unguessable antiquity of these long-forgotten corridors. The things which the Stygian darkness hid from my objective eye could not have been half so wonderful as the pictures which my imagination wrought, conjuring to life again the ancient peoples of this dying world and setting them once more to the labors, the intrigues, the mysteries, and the cruelties they practiced to make their last stand against the swarming hordes of the dead sea-bottoms that had driven them step by step to the uttermost pinnacle of the world, where they were now entrenched behind an impenetrable barrier of superstition.

In addition to the green men, there had been three principal races upon Barsoom: the blacks, the whites, and a race of yellow men. As the waters of the planet dried and the seas receded, all other resources dwindled until life upon the planet became a constant battle for survival. The various races had waged war upon one another for ages, and the three higher types had easily bested the green savages of the water places of the world. But now, that the receding seas necessitated the constant abandonment of their fortified cities and forced them into a more or less nomadic life, separating them into smaller communities, they soon fell prey to the fierce hordes of green men. The result was a partial amalgamation of the blacks, whites, and yellows—the progenitor of the present splendid race of red men.

I had always supposed that all traces of the original races had disappeared from the face of Mars. Yet, within the past four days, I had found both whites and blacks in great multitudes. Could it be possible that in some far-off corner of the planet there still existed a remnant of the ancient race of yellow men?

My reveries were broken by a low exclamation from the boy.

"At last, the lighted way!" he cried. Looking up, I beheld at a long distance before us a dim radiance. As we advanced, the light increased until presently we emerged into well-lit passageways. From then on, our progress was rapid until we came suddenly to the end of a corridor that led directly upon the ledge surrounding the pool of the submarine.

The craft lay at her moorings with the hatch uncovered. Raising a finger to his lips and then tapping his sword in a significant manner, the youth crept noiselessly toward the vessel. I was close at his heels. Silently, we dropped to the deserted deck and, on hands and knees, crawled toward the hatchway. A stealthy glance below revealed no guard in sight. With the quickness and soundlessness of cats, we dropped together into the main cabin of the submarine.

Even here, there was no sign of life. Quickly, we covered and secured the hatch. Then the boy stepped into the pilot house, touched a button, and the boat sank amid swirling waters toward the bottom of the shaft.

Even then, there was no scurrying of feet as we had expected. While the boy remained to direct the boat, I slid from cabin to cabin in a futile search for some member of the crew. The craft was entirely deserted. Such good fortune seemed almost unbelievable.

When I returned to the pilot house to report the good news to my companion, he handed me a piece of paper.

"This may explain the absence of the crew," he said.

It was a radio-aerial message addressed to the commander of the submarine:

*"The slaves have risen. Come with what men you have and
