I walked to the railway station accompanied, as was customary, by Gabriel Betteredge. Clutched in my pocket was the incriminating letter, and safely packed in a small bag was the nightgown bearing the smudge of paint—both items destined for immediate scrutiny by Mr. Bruff before I retired that night.

Leaving the house, we moved in a heavy silence. For the first time in my acquaintance with him, I found old Betteredge in my company without uttering a single word. Having something urgent to say, I broke the quiet as soon as we passed the lodge gates.

"Before I depart for London," I began, "I have two questions to ask you. They concern myself, and I fear they may prove surprising."

"If they serve to banish that poor creature's letter from my mind, Mr. Franklin, they may accomplish anything else they desire. Pray, begin to surprise me, sir, at once."

"My first question, Betteredge, is this: Was I drunk on the night of Rachel's Birthday?"

"You drunk!" the old man exclaimed. "It is the great failing of your character, Mr. Franklin, that you only drink with your dinner, and never touch a drop of liquor afterward!"

"But the birthday was a special occasion. On that night of all others, I might have abandoned my regular habits."

Betteredge considered for a moment.

"You did go out of your ways, sir," he said. "And I'll explain why. You looked wretchedly ill—and we persuaded you to have a drop of brandy and water to lift your spirits."

"I am not accustomed to brandy and water. It is entirely possible—"

"Wait a moment, Mr. Franklin. I knew you were not accustomed, either. I poured you out half a wineglass-full of our fifty-year-old Cognac; and (though I blush to admit it!) I drowned that noble liquor in nearly a tumbler-full of cold water. A child could not possibly get drunk on it—let alone a grown man!"

Knowing I could rely on his memory regarding matters of this nature, I felt it was plainly impossible that I could have been intoxicated. I proceeded to the second question.

"Before I was sent abroad, Betteredge, you saw much of me when I was a boy? Now tell me plainly: do you remember anything strange concerning me after I had gone to bed at night? Did you ever discover me walking in my sleep?"

Betteredge stopped, looked at me for a long moment, nodded his head, and continued walking.

"I see your drift now, Mr. Franklin!" he said. "You're attempting to account for how you acquired the paint on your nightgown without conscious knowledge. It won't work, sir. You are miles away from the truth. Walk in your sleep? You never did such a thing in your life!"

Again, I felt compelled to accept his judgment. Neither at home nor abroad had my life ever been solitary. If I had been a somnambulist, hundreds upon hundreds of people would have discovered it, warned me for my own safety, and taken precautions to restrain me.

Nevertheless, admitting this, I clung—with an obstinacy that seemed natural and excusable under the circumstances—to one or other of the only two explanations visible to me that could account for the unendurable position in which I now stood. Noticing that I remained unsatisfied, Betteredge shrewdly alluded to certain later events in the history of the Moonstone; and he scattered both my theories to the wind at once and forever.

"Let's try it another way, sir," he said. "Keep your own opinion, and see how far it takes you toward finding the truth. If we are to believe the nightgown—which I do not, for one moment—you not only smeared off the paint from the door without knowing it, but you also took the Diamond without knowing it. Is that correct, so far?"

"Quite correct. Continue."

"Very good, sir. We shall say you were drunk, or walking in your sleep, when you took the jewel. That accounts for the night and morning following the birthday. But how does it account for what has happened since? The Diamond has been taken to London. The Diamond has been pledged to Mr. Luker. Did you perform these two acts without knowing it, too? Were you drunk when I saw you off in the pony-chaise on that Saturday evening? And did you walk in your sleep to Mr. Luker's when the train brought you to your destination? Pardon me for saying it, Mr. Franklin, but this business has so upset you that you are not yet fit to judge for yourself. The sooner you lay your head alongside Mr. Bruff's, the sooner you will see your way out of the deadlock that has trapped you."

We reached the station with barely a minute or two to spare.

I hurriedly gave Betteredge my address in London, so that he might write to me if necessary; promising, on my part, to inform him of any news I might acquire. This done, and just as I was bidding him farewell, I happened to glance toward the book-and-newspaper stall. There stood Mr. Candy's remarkable-looking assistant again, speaking to the keeper of the stall! Our eyes met simultaneously. Ezra Jennings removed his hat to me. I returned the salute and entered a carriage just as the train started. It was, I suppose, a relief to my mind to dwell on any subject appearing to be of no personal consequence to me. At any rate, I began the momentous journey back which was to take me to Mr. Bruff, wondering—absurdly enough, I admit—that I should have seen the man with the piebald hair twice in one day!

The hour of my arrival in London precluded any hope of finding Mr. Bruff at his office. I drove from the railway to his private residence at Hampstead, where I disturbed the old lawyer dozing alone in his dining-room, his favorite pug-dog resting on his lap and a bottle of wine beside him.

I shall best describe the effect my story produced on the mind of Mr. Bruff by relating his subsequent actions. Upon hearing it to the end, he ordered lights and strong tea to be brought into his study, and dispatched a message to the ladies of his family, forbidding them to disturb us on any pretext whatsoever. With these preliminaries disposed of, he first examined the nightgown, and then devoted himself to reading Rosanna Spearman's letter.

Upon completing the reading, Mr. Bruff addressed me for the first time since we had been secluded in his room.

"Franklin Blake," said the old gentleman, "this is a very serious matter, in more respects than one. In my opinion, it concerns Rachel quite as nearly as it concerns you. Her extraordinary conduct is no longer a mystery. She believes you have stolen the Diamond."

I had shrank from reasoning my own way fairly to that revolting conclusion. Yet it had forced itself upon me, nevertheless. My resolution to obtain a personal interview with Rachel rested truly and indeed on the ground just stated by Mr. Bruff.

"The first step in this investigation," the lawyer proceeded, "is to appeal to Rachel. She has been silent all this time from motives which I, who know her character, can readily understand. It is impossible, after what has occurred, to submit to that silence any longer. She must be persuaded to tell us, or forced to tell us, on what grounds she bases her belief that you took the Moonstone. The chances are that the whole of this case, serious as it appears, will tumble to pieces if we can only break through Rachel's inveterate reserve and prevail upon her to speak out."

"That is a very comforting opinion for *me*," I said. "I own I should like to know—"

"You would like to know how I can justify it," interjected Mr. Bruff. "I can tell you in two minutes. Understand, in the first place, that I view this matter from a lawyer's point of view. It is a question of evidence. Very well. The evidence breaks down, at the outset, on one important point."

"On what point?"

"You shall hear. I admit that the mark of the name proves the nightgown to be yours. I admit that the mark of the paint proves the nightgown made the smear on Rachel's door. But what evidence is there to prove that you are the person who wore it on the night when the Diamond was lost?"

The objection struck me all the more forcibly because it reflected an objection I had felt myself.

"As to this," pursued the lawyer, taking up Rosanna Spearman's confession, "I can understand that the letter is a distressing one to *you*. I can understand that you may hesitate to analyze it from a purely impartial point of view. But *I* am not in your position. I can bring my professional experience to bear on this document, just as I should on any other. Without alluding to the woman's career as a thief, I will merely remark that her letter proves her to have been an adept at deception, on her own showing; and I argue from that that I am justified in suspecting her of not having told the whole truth. I won't start any theory, at present, as to what she may or may not have done. I will only say that, if Rachel has suspected you *on the evidence of the nightgown only*, the chances are ninety-nine to a hundred that Rosanna Spearman was the person who showed it to her. In that case, there is the woman's letter, confessing that she was jealous of Rachel, confessing that she changed the roses, confess
