Upon reaching our hut, I signaled for Infadoos to join us inside.

"Now, Infadoos," I said, "we wish to speak with you."

"Let my lords speak," he replied.

"It appears to us, Infadoos, that King Twala is a cruel man."

"It is true, my lords. Alas! the land groans under his tyranny. Tonight you shall witness it. It is the Great Witch-Hunt, and many will be hunted out as wizards and slain. No man's life is safe. If the king covets a man's cattle, or a wife, or fears a man might incite rebellion, then Gagool, whom you have seen, or one of the witch-finding women she has trained, will scent that man as a sorcerer, and he will be killed. Many must die before the moon fades tonight. It is always so. Perhaps I too shall be killed. Thus far, I have been spared because I am skilled in war and beloved by the soldiers, but I know not how long my life remains. The land suffers under Twala's cruelty; it is weary of him and his bloody ways."

"Then why do the people not cast him down?"

"Nay, my lords. He is the king. If he were killed, Scragga would reign in his place, and Scragga's heart is blacker than Twala's. Under Scragga, the yoke upon our necks would be heavier than Twala's. Had Imotu never been slain, or Ignosi his son lived, it might have been different; but both are dead."

"How do you know that Ignosi is dead?" a voice asked from behind us. We turned, astonished, to see Umbopa.

"What means this, boy?" Infadoos demanded. "Who gave you leave to speak?"

"Listen, Infadoos," Umbopa answered calmly. "I will tell you a story. Years ago, King Imotu was killed in this land, and his wife fled with the boy Ignosi. Is that not so?"

"It is so."

"It was said that the woman and her son perished on the mountains. Is that not so?"

"It is even so."

"Well, it came to pass that the mother and the boy Ignosi did not die. They crossed the mountains and were led by a tribe of wandering desert men across the sands beyond, until they reached water, grass, and trees once more."

"How do you know this?"

"Listen. They traveled on for many months, until they reached a land inhabited by a people called the Amazulu, who are also of the Kukuana stock and live by war. There they stayed for many years, until at length the mother died. Then the son Ignosi became a wanderer again, journeying into a land of wonders where white people live. For many more years he learned the wisdom of the white men."

"It is a pretty story," Infadoos said, his skepticism evident.

"For years he lived there working as a servant and a soldier, yet holding in his heart all that his mother had told him of his own place. He cast about in his mind, planning how he might journey back to see his people and his father's house before he died. For long years he lived and waited, and at last the time came, as it ever does to those who can wait, and he met some white men seeking this unknown land. He joined them. The white men started and traveled on, searching for one who was lost. They crossed the burning desert, they crossed the snow-clad mountains, and finally reached the land of the Kukuanas, where they found *you*, O Infadoos."

"Surely you are mad to talk thus," the astonished old soldier exclaimed.

"You think so? See, I will show you, O my uncle."

"I am Ignosi, rightful king of the Kukuanas!"

With a single movement, Umbopa slipped off his "moocha" or girdle and stood naked before us.

"Look," he said, pointing to a picture of a great snake tattooed in blue around his middle, its tail disappearing into its open mouth just above where the thighs are set into the body.

Infadoos stared, his eyes bulging nearly from his head. Then he fell upon his knees.

"Koom! Koom!" he ejaculated. "It is my brother's son; it is the king."

"Did I not tell you so, my uncle? Rise. I am not yet the king, but with your help, and with the help of these brave white men who are my friends, I shall be. Yet the old witch Gagool was right: the land shall run with blood first, and hers shall run with it, if she has any and can die, for she killed my father with her words and drove my mother forth. Now, Infadoos, choose. Will you put your hands between mine and be my man? Will you share the dangers that lie before me and help me to overthrow this tyrant and murderer, or will you not? Choose."

The old man placed his hand to his head in thought. Then he rose, advanced to where Umbopa—or rather Ignosi—stood, knelt before him, and took his hand.

"Ignosi, rightful king of the Kukuanas, I put my hand between yours, and am your man till death. When you were a babe I dandled you upon my knees; now shall my old arm strike for you and for freedom."

"It is well, Infadoos. If I conquer, you shall be the greatest man in the kingdom after its king. If I fail, you can only die, and death is not far from you. Rise, my uncle."

"And you, white men, will you help me? What have I to offer you! The white stones! If I conquer and can find them, you shall have as many as you can carry hence. Will that suffice you?"

I translated this remark.

"Tell him," answered Sir Henry, "that he mistakes an Englishman. Wealth is good, and if it comes in our way we will take it; but a gentleman does not sell himself for wealth. Still, speaking for myself, I say this. I have always liked Umbopa, and so far as lies in me, I will stand by him in this business. It will be very pleasant to me to try to square matters with that cruel devil Twala. What do you say, Good, and you, Quatermain?"

"Well," said Good, adopting the language of hyperbole in which all these people seem to indulge, "you can tell him that a row is surely good and warms the cockles of the heart, and that so far as I am concerned, I'm his boy. My only stipulation is that he allows me to wear trousers."

I translated the substance of these answers.

"It is well, my friends," said Ignosi, formerly Umbopa. "And what sayest thou, Macumazahn? Art thou also with me, old hunter, cleverer than a wounded buffalo?"

I thought awhile and scratched my head.

"Umbopa, or Ignosi," I said, "I do not like revolutions. I am a man of peace and a bit of a coward"—here Umbopa smiled—"but, on the other hand, I stick up for my friends, Ignosi. You have stuck to us and played the part of a man, and I will stick by you. But mind you, I am a trader and have to make my living, so I accept your offer about those diamonds in case we should ever be in a position to avail ourselves of it. Another thing: we came, as you know, to look for Incubu's (Sir Henry's) lost brother. You must help us to find him."

"That I will do," answered Ignosi. "Stay, Infadoos, by the sign of the snake about my middle, tell me the truth. Has any white man to thy knowledge set his foot within the land?"

"None, O Ignosi."

"If any white man had been seen or heard of, wouldst thou have known?"

"I should certainly have known."

"Thou hearest, Incubu," said Ignosi to Sir Henry, "he has not been here."

"Well, well," said Sir Henry, with a sigh, "there it is; I suppose that he never got so far. Poor fellow, poor fellow! So it has all been for nothing. God's will be done."

"Now for business," I interjected, anxious to escape from a painful subject. "It is very well to be a king by right divine, Ignosi, but how dost thou propose to become a king indeed?"

"Nay, I know not. Infadoos, hast thou a plan?"

"Ignosi, Son of the Lightning," answered his uncle, "tonight is the great dance and witch-hunt. Many shall be smelt out and perish, and in the hearts of many others there will be grief and anguish and fury against the king Twala. When the dance is over, then I will speak to some of the great chiefs, who in turn, if I can win them over, will speak to their regiments. I shall speak to the chiefs softly at first, bringing them to see that thou art indeed the king, and I think that by tomorrow's light thou shalt have twenty thousand spears at thy command. And now I must go and think, and hear, and make ready. After the dance is done, if I am yet alive, and we are all alive, I will meet thee here, and we can talk. At the best there must be war."

At this moment our conference was interrupted by the cry that messengers had come from the king. Advancing to the door of the hut, we ordered them admitted, and presently three men entered, each bearing a shining shirt of chain armor and a magnificent battle-axe.

"The gifts of my lord the king to the white men from the Stars!" cried a herald who came with them.

"We thank the king," I answered. "Withdraw."

The men went, and we examined the armor with great interest. It was the most wonderful chain work either of us had ever seen. A whole coat fell together so closely that it formed a mass of links scarcely too big to be covered with both hands.

"Do you make these things in this country, Infadoos?" I asked. "They are very beautiful."

"Nay, my lord, they came down to us from our forefathers. We know not who made them, and there are but few left. None but those of royal blood may be clad in them. They are magic coats through which no spear can pass, and those who wear them are well-nigh safe in battle. The king is well pleased or much afraid, or he would not have sent these garments of steel. Clothe yourselves in them tonight, my lords."

The remainder of that day we spent quietly, resting and talking over the situation, which was sufficiently exciting. At last the sun went down, the thousand watch fires glowed out, and through the darkness we heard the tramp of many feet and the clashing of hundreds of spears as the regiments passed to their appointed places to be ready for the great dance. Then the full moon shone out in splendor. As we stood watching her rays, Infadoos arrived, clad in his war dress, accompanied by a guard of twenty men to escort us to the dance. As he recommended, we had already donned the shirts of chain armor which the king had sent us, putting them on under our ordinary clothing. To our surprise, they were neither very heavy nor uncomfortable. These steel shirts, which evidently had been made for men of very large stature, hung somewhat loosely upon Good and myself, but Sir Henry's fitted his magnificent frame like a glove. Then strapping our revolvers round our waists and taking in our hands the battle-axes which the king had sent with the armor, we started.

On arriving at the great kraal, where we had that morning been received by the king, we found it closely packed with some twenty thousand men arranged round it in regiments. These regiments were in turn divided into companies, and between each company ran a little path to allow space for the witch-finders to pass up and down. Nothing more imposing than the sight presented by this vast and orderly concourse of armed men can be conceived. There they stood perfectly silent, and the moon poured her light upon the forest of their raised spears, upon their majestic forms, waving plumes, and the harmonious shading of their various-colored shields. Wherever we looked were line upon line of dim faces surmounted by range upon range of shimmering spears.

"Surely," I said to Infadoos, "the whole army is here?"

"Nay, Macumazahn," he answered. "But a third of it. One third is present at this dance each year, another third is mustered outside in case there should be trouble when the killing begins, ten thousand more garrison the outposts round Loo, and the rest watch at the kraals in the country. Thou seest it is a great people."

"They are very silent," said Good. Indeed, the intense stillness among such a vast concourse of living men was almost overpowering.

"What says Bougwan?" asked Infadoos.

I translated.

"Those over whom the shadow of Death is hovering are silent," he answered grimly.

"Will many be killed?"

"Very many."

"It seems," I said to the others, "that we are going to assist at a gladiatorial show arranged regardless of expense."

Sir Henry shivered, and Good said he wished that we could get out of it.

"Tell me," I asked Infadoos, "are we in danger?"

"I know not, my lords. I trust not; but do not seem afraid. If ye live through the night all may go well with you. The soldiers murmur against the king."

All this while we had been advancing steadily towards the center of the open space, in the midst of which were placed some stools. As we proceeded, we perceived another small party coming from the direction of the royal hut.

"It is the king Twala, Scragga his son, and Gagool the old; and see, with them are those who slay," said Infadoos, pointing to a little group of about a dozen gigantic and savage-looking men
