Ten days after that harrowing morning, we returned to our quarters at Loo. Miraculously, we emerged from our ordeal scarcely worse for the wear, save for the fact that my stubble had emerged from the treasure cave three shades grayer than it entered, and that Good had never fully recovered from Foulata's death, a loss that seemed to weigh heavily upon his spirit. Yet, viewing the matter through the lens of a seasoned traveler, I must admit that her passing was a fortunate relief; without it, the entanglement between Good and such a creature of stately beauty and refined mind would have become an insurmountable complication. As she herself had poignantly asked, "Can the sun mate with the darkness, or the white with the black?"

We made no further attempt to penetrate Solomon's treasure chamber. After forty-eight hours of recovery, we descended into the great pit seeking the exit we had used, but the rain had washed away our tracks, and the cavern walls were riddled with ant-bear burrows, making our escape route impossible to identify. We also revisited the stalactite cave and the Chamber of the Dead, standing once more beneath the spear of the White Death to gaze at the massive rock that had sealed our fate. We searched for the secret mechanism of the sliding door, but found nothing; the join was invisible, and the method of operation was lost forever. It was a marvel of inscrutable simplicity, a testament to an age that could create such massive, silent machinery. Yet, we gave up in disgust. Even if the rock had risen before our eyes, revealing the path to the diamonds, I doubt we would have found the courage to step over Gagool's mangled remains to claim them. Still, the thought of leaving behind the greatest accumulation of wealth in human history brought a sting of regret.

There was, however, no help for it. Only dynamite could breach five feet of solid rock. Perhaps in some distant future, a more fortunate explorer might discover the "Open Sesame," flooding the world with gems. But I harbored a grim suspicion that the millions of pounds' worth of jewels lying in the three stone coffers would never adorn the neck of an earthly beauty; they and Foulata's bones would keep cold company until the end of time.

Disappointed, we turned back. Ironically, our disappointment was unwarranted. I had taken the precaution of filling the pockets of my shooting coat and trousers with gems before we left our prison, along with Foulata's basket, which held even more, though the water bottle had claimed some space. Several large stones had tumbled out during our descent, but an enormous quantity remained. We possessed enough to make us exceedingly wealthy men, and enough stones each to create the finest sets of gems in Europe. We had not done so badly.

Upon arriving at Loo, we were greeted with immense cordiality by Ignosi, who was in good health and busy consolidating his power and reorganizing his regiments after the great struggle with Twala. He listened with intense fascination to our tale, but when we recounted Gagool's frightful end, his expression turned thoughtful. He summoned an ancient Induna, a councillor who had known the witch-doctor since childhood. The old man confirmed that Gagaoola had been as ugly and wicked in his youth as she was in her final days. "She is no more; she is dead," Ignosi declared. "An ancient curse is taken from the land." He dismissed the councillor with a gesture of grim satisfaction, noting that she would have likely killed us in the dark place and subsequently sought to slay him to install Twala in his place.

Once I had finished narrating our escape, I addressed Ignosi regarding our departure from Kukuanaland. "Ignosi," I said, "the time has come to bid thee farewell and return to our own lands. Thou camest with us a servant, and now we leave thee a mighty king. If thou art grateful, remember to rule justly, respect the law, and put none to death without cause. So shalt thou prosper. Tomorrow, at break of day, thou wilt give us an escort to lead us across the mountains. Is it not so, O king?"

Ignosi covered his face with his hands for a moment before speaking. "My heart is sore," he said finally. "Your words split my heart in twain. What have I done to you, Incubu, Macumazahn, and Bougwan, that ye should leave me desolate? Ye who stood by me in rebellion and in battle, will ye leave me in the day of peace and victory? Wives? Choose from among the maidens! A place to live? Behold, the land is yours as far as ye can see. The white man's houses? Ye shall teach my people how to build them. Cattle? Every married man shall bring you an ox or a cow. Wild game? Does not the elephant walk through my forests? Would ye make war? My Impis wait your word. If there is anything more I can give, that will I give you."

"Nay, Ignosi," I answered gently, "we seek our own place."

"Now do I learn," Ignosi said bitterly, his eyes flashing, "that ye love the bright stones more than me, your friend. Ye have the stones; now ye would go to Natal and across the moving black water to sell them and be rich, as it is the desire of a white man's heart. Cursed for your sake be the white stones, and cursed he who seeks them. Death shall it be to him who sets foot in the place of Death to find them. I have spoken. White men, ye can go."

I laid my hand upon his arm. "Ignosi," I said, "tell us, when thou didst wander in Zululand and among the white people of Natal, did not thine heart turn to the land thy mother told thee of, thy native place, where thou didst see the light and play when thou wast little?"

"It was even so, Macumazahn."

"In like manner, Ignosi, do our hearts turn to our land and to our own place."

A silence fell between us. When Ignosi broke it, his voice had changed. "I do perceive that now as ever thy words are wise and full of reason, Macumazahn; that which flies in the air loves not to run along the ground; the white man loves not to live on the level of the black or to house among his kraals. Well, ye must go, and leave my heart sore, because ye will be as dead to me, since from where ye are no tidings can come to me."

"But listen, and let all your brothers know my words. No other white man shall cross the mountains, even if any man live to come so far. I will see no traders with their guns and gin. My people shall fight with the spear, and drink water, like their forefathers before them. I will have no praying-men to put a fear of death into men's hearts, to stir them up against the law of the king, and make a path for the white folk who follow to run on. If a white man comes to my gates I will send him back; if a hundred come I will push them back; if armies come, I will make war on them with all my strength, and they shall not prevail against me. None shall ever seek for the shining stones: no, not an army, for if they come I will send a regiment and fill up the pit, and break down the white columns in the caves and choke them with rocks, so that none can reach even to that door of which ye speak, and whereof the way to move it is lost."

"But for you three, Incubu, Macumazahn, and Bougwan, the path is always open; for, behold, ye are dearer to me than aught that breathes."

"And ye would go. Infadoos, my uncle, and my Induna, shall take you by the hand and guide you with a regiment. There is, as I have learned, another way across the mountains that he shall show you. Farewell, my brothers, brave white men. See me no more, for I have no heart to bear it. Behold! I make a decree, and it shall be published from the mountains to the mountains; your names, Incubu, Macumazahn, and Bougwan, shall be '_hlonipa_' even as the names of dead kings, and he who speaks them shall die. So shall your memory be preserved in the land for ever."

"Go now, ere my eyes rain tears like a woman's. At times as ye look back down the path of life, or when ye are old and gather yourselves to crouch before the fire, because for you the sun has no more heat, ye will think of how we stood shoulder to shoulder, in that great battle which thy wise words planned, Macumazahn; of how thou wast the point of the horn that galled Twala's flank, Bougwan; whilst thou stood in the ring of the Greys, Incubu, and men went down before thine axe like corn before a sickle; ay, and of how thou didst break that wild bull Twala's strength, and bring his pride to dust. Fare ye well for ever, Incubu, Macumazahn, and Bougwan, my lords and my friends."

Ignosi rose and looked earnestly at us for a few seconds. Then he threw the corner of his kaross over his head, covering his face from us. We went in silence.

Next day at dawn we left Loo, escorted by our old friend Infadoos, who was heart-broken at our departure, and by the regiment of Buffaloes. Early as was the hour, all the main street of the town was lined with multitudes of people who gave us the royal salute as we passed at the head of the regiment, while the women blessed us for having rid the land of Twala, throwing flowers before us as we went. It was truly affecting, a rare display of affection from natives.

One ludicrous incident occurred, however, which I rather welcomed, as it gave us something to laugh at. Just before we reached the confines of the town, a pretty young girl, holding lovely lilies, ran forward and presented them to Good. Some how, all seemed to like Good; perhaps his eyeglass and solitary whisker gave him a fictitious value. She then said she had a boon to ask.

"Speak on," he answered.

"Let my lord show his servant his beautiful white legs, that his servant may look upon them, and remember them all her days, and tell of them to her children; his servant has travelled four days' journey to see them, for the fame of them has gone throughout the land."

"I'll be hanged if I do!" exclaimed Good excitedly.

"Come, come, my dear fellow," said Sir Henry, "you can't refuse to oblige a lady."

"I won't," replied Good obstinately, "it is positively indecent."

However, in the end, he consented to draw up his trousers to the knee, amidst notes of rapturous admiration from all the women present, especially the gratified young lady. In this guise, he had to walk until we were clear of the town. Good's legs, I fear, will never be so greatly admired again. Of his melting teeth and even of his "transparent eye," the Kukuanas woreied more or less, but of his legs never.

As we traveled, Infadoos told us of another pass over the mountains to the north of the one followed by Solomon's Great Road. Rather more than two years previously, a party of Kukuana hunters had descended this path into the desert in search of ostriches, whose plumes are much prized for war head-dresses. In the course of their hunt, they had been led far from the mountains and troubled by thirst. Seeing trees on the horizon, they walked towards them and discovered a large and fertile oasis, plentifully watered. It was by way of this oasis that Infadoos suggested we should return, and the idea seemed excellent, as it would allow us to escape the rigors of the mountain pass. Some of the hunters were in attendance to guide us to the oasis, from which they stated they could perceive other fertile spots far away in the desert.

Travelling easily, on the night of the fourth day's journey, we found ourselves once more on the crest of the mountains that separate Kukuanaland from the desert, which rolled away in sandy billows at our feet, about twenty-five miles to the north of Sheba's Breasts.

At dawn on the following day, we were led to the edge of a very precipitous chasm, by which we were to descend the precipice and gain the plain two thousand feet below. Here we bade farewell to that true friend and sturdy old warrior, Infadoos, who solemnly wished us all good and nearly wept with grief. "Never, my lords," he said, "shall mine old eyes see the like of you again. Ah! the way that Incubu cut his men down in the battle! Ah! for the sight of that stroke with which he swept off my brother Twala's head! It was beautiful—beautiful! I may never hope to see such another, except perchance in happy dreams."

We were very sorry to part from him; indeed, Good was so moved that he gave him as a souvenir—an eyeglass. Afterwards, we discovered it was a spare one. Infadoos was delighted, foreseeing that the possession of such an article would increase his prestige enormously, and after several vain attempts, he actually succeeded in screwing it into his own eye. Anything more incongruous than the old warrior looked with an eyeglass I never saw. Eyeglasses do not go well with leopard-skin cloaks and black ostrich plumes.

Then, after seeing that our guides were well laden with water and provisions, and having received a thundering farewell salute from the Buffaloes, we wrung Infadoos by the hand and began our downward climb. A very arduous business it proved to be, but somehow that evening we found ourselves at the bottom without accident.

"Do you know," said Sir Henry that night, as we sat by our fire and gazed up at the beetling cliffs above us, "I think that there are worse places than Kukuanaland in the
