The cathedral tower stood in the air, a massive gray square impossibility suspended between the eye and the real prospect. There was no spike of rusty iron connecting the ground to the stone, yet something intervened. Perhaps it was the Sultan's order, impaling a horde of Turkish robbers one by one. Cymbals clashed; the Sultan paraded to his palace in a long procession. Ten thousand scimitars flashed in the sunlight, followed by thrice ten thousand dancing girls strewing flowers, and then white elephants caparisoned in countless colors, infinite in number and attended by infinite servants. Yet the tower remained, rising in the background where it could not be, and no writhing figure hung from the grim spike.

Stay. Was the spike so low a thing as the rusty nail on the top of a post of an old bedstead that had tumbled all awry? Some vague period of drowsy laughter must be devoted to the consideration of this possibility.

Shaking from head to foot, the man whose scattered consciousness had thus fantastically pieced itself together finally rose. He supported his trembling frame upon his arms and looked around. He was in the meanest and closest of small rooms. Through the ragged window-curtain, the light of early day stole in from a miserable court. He lay, dressed, across a large unseemly bed, upon a bedstead that had indeed given way under the weight upon it. Lying, also dressed and also across the bed, not longwise, were a Chinaman, a Lascar, and a haggard woman. The two first were in a sleep or stupor; the last was blowing at a kind of pipe to kindle it. As she blew, shading it with her lean hand and concentrating its red spark of light, it served in the dim morning as a lamp to show him what he saw of her.

"Another?" said this woman, in a querulous, rattling whisper. "Have another?"

He looked about him, with his hand to his forehead.

"Ye've smoked as many as five since ye come in at midnight," the woman went on, as she chronically complained. "Poor me, poor me, my head is so bad. Them two come in after ye. Ah, poor me, the business is slack, is slack! Few Chinamen about the Docks, and fewer Lascars, and no ships coming in, these say! Here's another ready for ye, deary. Ye'll remember like a good soul, won't ye, that the market price is dreffle high just now? More nor three shillings and sixpence for a thimbleful! And ye'll remember that nobody but me (and Jack Chinaman t'other side the court; but he can't do it as well as me) has the true secret of mixing it? Ye'll pay up accordingly, deary, won't ye?"

She blew at the pipe as she spoke, and, occasionally bubbling at it, inhaled much of its contents. "O me, O me, my lungs is weak, my lungs is bad! It's nearly ready for ye, deary. Ah, poor me, poor me, my poor hand shakes like to drop off! I see ye coming-to, and I ses to my poor self, 'I'll have another ready for him, and he'll bear in mind the market price of opium, and pay according.' O my poor head! I makes my pipes of old penny ink-bottles, ye see, deary—this is one—and I fits-in a mouthpiece, this way, and I takes my mixter out of this thimble with this little horn spoon; and so I fills, deary. Ah, my poor nerves! I got Heavens-hard drunk for sixteen year afore I took to this; but this don't hurt me, not to speak of. And it takes away the hunger as well as wittles, deary."

She handed him the nearly-emptied pipe and sank back, turning over on her face. He rose unsteadily from the bed, laid the pipe upon the hearth-stone, drew back the ragged curtain, and looked with repugnance at his three companions. He noticed that the woman had opium-smoked herself into a strange likeness of the Chinaman. Her form of cheek, eye, and temple, and her color, were repeated in him. The said Chinaman convulsively wrestled with one of his many Gods or Devils, perhaps, and snarled horribly. The Lascar laughed and dribbled at the mouth. The hostess was still.

"What visions can she have?" the waking man mused, as he turned her face towards him and stood looking down at it. "Visions of many butchers' shops, and public-houses, and much credit? Of an increase of hideous customers, and this horrible bedstead set upright again, and this horrible court swept clean? What can she rise to, under any quantity of opium, higher than that!—Eh?"

He bent down his ear to listen to her mutterings. "Unintelligible!"

As he watched the spasmodic shoots and darts that broke out of her face and limbs, like fitful lightning out of a dark sky, some contagion in them seized upon him: insomuch that he had to withdraw himself to a lean arm-chair by the hearth—placed there, perhaps, for such emergencies—and to sit in it, holding tight, until he had got the better of this unclean spirit of imitation.

Then he came back, pounced on the Chinaman, and seizing him with both hands by the throat, turned him violently on the bed. The Chinaman clutched the aggressive hands, resisted, gasped, and protested. "What do you say?"

A watchful pause. "Unintelligible!"

Slowly loosening his grasp as he listened to the incoherent jargon with an attentive frown, he turned to the Lascar and fairly dragged him forth upon the floor. As he fell, the Lascar started into a half-risen attitude, glared with his eyes, lashed about him fiercely with his arms, and drew a phantom knife. It then became apparent that the woman had taken possession of this knife, for safety's sake; for, she too starting up, and restraining and expostulating with him, the knife was visible in her dress, not in his, when they drowsily dropped back, side by side.

There had been chattering and clattering enough between them, but to no purpose. When any distinct word had been flung into the air, it had had no sense or sequence. Wherefore "unintelligible!" was again the comment of the watcher, made with some reassured nodding of his head, and a gloomy smile.

He then laid certain silver money on the table, found his hat, groped his way down the broken stairs, gave a good morning to some rat-ridden doorkeeper, in bed in a black hutch beneath the stairs, and passed out.

That same afternoon, the massive gray square tower of an old Cathedral rose before the sight of a jaded traveller. The bells were going for daily vesper service, and he must needs attend it, one would say, from his haste to reach the open Cathedral door. The choir were getting on their sullied white robes in a hurry when he arrived among them, got on his own robe, and fell into the procession filing in to service. Then, the Sacristan locked the iron-barred gates that divided the sanctuary from the chancel, and all of the procession having scuttled into their places, hid their faces; and then the intoned words, "WHEN THE WICKED MAN—" rose among groins of arches and beams of roof, awakening muttered thunder.

The cathedral bell tolled the hour, a sound that seemed to vibrate through the cracked flagstones rather than the air. Outside, the Virginia creeper had surrendered its deep-red leaves to the pavement, and the rain left a wintry shudder moving through the puddles like a nervous tremor. Two figures emerged from the gloom of the nave, walking together into the echoing Close. They were not the whole flock; they had detached themselves from the sedate, clerical company of the rooks, retracing their steps to linger in the twilight as if carrying some occult weight.

One of them locked the great door with a goodly key. The other, holding a folio music-book, flitted away.

"Mr. Jasper was that, Tope?"

"Yes, Mr. Dean."

"He has stayed late."

"Yes, Mr. Dean. I have stayed for him, your Reverence. He has been taken a little poorly."

"Say 'taken,' Tope," the younger rook interposed, his voice low and corrective, as if offering bad grammar to the laity were acceptable but not to the Dean. "To the Dean."

Mr. Tope, Chief Verger and Showman, accustomed to the adulation of excursion parties, declined with a silent loftiness to acknowledge the suggestion.

"And when and how has Mr. Jasper been taken—for, as Mr. Crisparkle has remarked, it is better to say taken—taken—" repeated the Dean, his voice rising in a spiral of concern. "When and how has Mr. Jasper been Taken—"

"Taken, sir," Tope murmured deferentially.

"Poorly, Tope?"

"Why, sir, Mr. Jasper was that breathed—"

"I wouldn't say 'That breathed,' Tope," Mr. Crisparkle interrupted, applying the same rigid standard of propriety. "Not English—to the Dean."

"Breathed to that extent," the Dean remarked, accepting the indirect homage with a condescension that pleased him. "Would be preferable."

"Mr. Jasper's breathing was so remarkably short"—thus discreetly did Mr. Tope navigate around the sunken rock of the conversation—"when he came in, that it distressed him mightily to get his notes out: which was perhaps the cause of his having a kind of fit on him after a little. His memory grew DAZED." Mr. Tope shot the word out, his eyes fixed on the Reverend Mr. Crisparkle, daring him to improve upon it. "And a dimness and giddiness crept over him as strange as ever I saw: though he didn't seem to mind it particularly, himself. However, a little time and a little water brought him out of his DAZE." Mr. Tope repeated the word and its emphasis, with the air of a man who had succeeded once and intended to succeed again.

"And Mr. Jasper has gone home quite himself, has he?" asked the Dean.

"Your Reverence, he has gone home quite himself. And I'm glad to see he's having his fire kindled up, for it's chilly after the wet, and the Cathedral had both a damp feel and a damp touch this afternoon, and he was very shivery."

They all three looked toward an old stone gatehouse crossing the Close, with an arched thoroughfare passing beneath it. Through its latticed window, a fire burned, casting shadows over the pendent masses of ivy and creeper covering the building's front. As the deep Cathedral-bell struck the hour, a ripple of wind went through these vines at their distance, like a ripple of the solemn sound that hums through tomb and tower, broken niche and defaced statue, in the pile close at hand.

"Is Mr. Jasper's nephew with him?" the Dean asked.

"No, sir," replied the Verger, "but expected. There's his own solitary shadow betwixt his two windows—the one looking this way, and the one looking down into the High Street—drawing his own curtains now."

"Well, well," says the Dean, with a sprightly air of breaking up the little conference, "I hope Mr. Jasper's heart may not be too much set upon his nephew. Our affections, however laudable, in this transitory world, should never master us; we should guide them, guide them. I find I am not disagreeably reminded of my dinner, by hearing my dinner-bell. Perhaps, Mr. Crisparkle, you will, before going home, look in on Jasper?"

"Certainly, Mr. Dean. And tell him that you had the kindness to desire to know how he was?"

"Ay; do so, do so. Certainly. Wished to know how he was. By all means. Wished to know how he was."

With a pleasant air of patronage, the Dean as nearly cocked his quaint hat as a Dean in good spirits may, and directed his comely gaiters toward the ruddy dining-room of the snug old red-brick house where he was currently residing with Mrs. Dean and Miss Dean.

Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon, fair and rosy, and perpetually pitching himself head-foremost into all the deep running water in the surrounding country; Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon, early riser, musical, classical, cheerful, kind, good-natured, social, contented, and boy-like; Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon and good man, lately "Coach" upon the chief Pagan high roads, but since promoted by a patron (grateful for a well-taught son) to his present Christian beat; betook himself to the gatehouse, on his way home to his early tea.

"Sorry to hear from Tope that you have not been well, Jasper."

"Oh, it was nothing, nothing!"

"You look a little worn."

"Do I? Oh, I don't think so. What is better, I don't feel so. Tope has made too much of it, I suspect. It's his trade to make the most of everything appertaining to the Cathedral, you know."

"I may tell the Dean—I call expressly from the Dean—that you are all right again?"

The reply, with a slight smile, was: "Certainly; with my respects and thanks to the Dean."

"I'm glad to hear that you expect young Drood."

"I expect the dear fellow every moment."

"Ah! He will do you more good than a doctor, Jasper."

"More good than a dozen doctors. For I love him dearly, and I don't love doctors, or doctors' stuff."

Mr. Jasper is a dark man of some six-and-twenty, with thick, lustrous, well-arranged black hair and whiskers. He looks older than he is, as dark men often do. His voice is deep and good, his face and figure are good, his manner is a little sombre. His room is a little sombre, and may have had its influence in forming his manner. It is mostly in shadow. Even when the sun shines brilliantly, it seldom touches the grand piano in the recess, or the folio music-books on the stand, or the book-shelves on the wall, or the unfinished picture of a blooming schoolgirl hanging over the chimneypiece; her flowing brown hair tied with a blue riband, and her beauty remarkable for a quite childish, almost babyish, touch of saucy discontent, comically conscious of itself. (There is not the least artistic merit in this picture, which is a mere daub; but it is clear that the painter has made it humorously—one might almost say, revengefully—like the original.)

"We shall miss you, Jasper, at the 'Alternate Musical Wednesdays' to-night; but no doubt you are best at home. Good-night. God bless you! 'Tell me, shep-herds, te-e-ell me; tell me-e-e, have you seen (have you seen, have you seen, have you seen) my-y-y Flo-o-ora-a pass this way!' " Melodiously good Minor Canon the Reverend Septimus Crisparkle thus delivered himself, in musical rhythm, as he withdrew his amiable face from the doorway and conveyed it downstairs.

Sounds of recognition and greeting passed between the Reverend Septimus and somebody else, at the stair-foot. Mr. Jasper listened, started from his chair, and caught a young fellow in his arms, exclaiming:

"My dear Edwin!"

"My dear Jack! So glad to see you!"

"Get off your greatcoat, bright boy, and sit down here in your own corner. Your feet are not wet? Pull your boots off. Do pull your boots off."

"My dear Jack, I am as dry as a bone. Don't moddley-coddley, there's a good fellow. I like anything better than being moddley-coddleyed."

With the check upon him of being unsympathetically restrained in a genial outburst of enthusiasm, Mr. Jasper stood still, and looked on intently at the young fellow, divesting himself of his outward coat, hat, gloves, and so forth. Once for all, a look of intentness and intensity—a look of hungry, exacting, watchful, and yet devoted affection—is always, now and ever afterwards, on the Jasper face whenever the Jasper face is addressed in this direction. And whenever it is so addressed, it is never, on this occasion or on any other, dividedly addressed; it is always concentrated.

"Now I am right, and now I'll take my corner, Jack. Any dinner, Jack?"

Mr.

The city of Cloisterham exists in a suspended animation, a dusty chronicle where the names of Druids, Romans, Saxons, and Normans have long since evaporated into the ether. It is a place of monotony, a silent entity deriving its earthy flavor from the deep, resonant hum of its cathedral crypt. Here, the soil is rich with the remains of the powerful; children play games of dirt-pie amidst the vestiges of monastic graves, grinding the bones of archbishops and bishops into flour for their bread, much like the ogre in fairy tales who demands tribute from the uninvited guest.

There is a peculiar moral decay in this antiquity, older than any recorded history suggests. The inhabitants live under the delusion that all change belongs to the past, convinced that the future holds no surprises. The streets are so still that shop blinds dare not flap in the southern breeze, and the sun-browned tramps hurry past, eager to escape the suffocating weight of the town's respectable stagnation. To leave is easy, for the city is essentially a single narrow artery leading in and out, flanked by disappointing yards with pumps and no thoroughfares, save for the Cathedral Close and a paved Quaker settlement that resembles a bonnet in a shaded corner.

At the heart of this static world stands the Nuns' House. Its current designation, "Seminary for Young Ladies," is painted on a resplendent brass plate attached to a gate that encloses an old courtyard. The contrast between the weathered, battered facade of the building and the glaring shine of the modern sign creates an image akin to a disheveled old beau wearing a large, contemporary eyeglass over a blind eye.

Behind the scenes, the institution operates on a dual frequency. Just as intoxication and somnambulism allow for two non-interfering states of consciousness, Miss Twinkleton possesses two distinct personas. By day, she is the stern seminary mistress, unaware of the local scandals or the specific gossip of Tunbridge Wells. By night, however, she transforms. She smooths her curls, brightens her eyes, and becomes a sprightly confidante, recounting tender scandals and referencing the "Wells" with a familiarity that belies her daytime ignorance. Her constant companion in both states is Mrs. Tisher, a deferential widow with a weak back and a chronic sigh, who manages the wardrobes and maintains the illusion that she has witnessed better days—a belief so strong among the staff that it is considered fact that the late Mrs. Tisher was once a hairdresser.

The focal point of this household is Miss Rosa Bud, universally known as Rosebud. She is a creature of wonder: wonderfully pretty, wonderfully childish, and wonderfully whimsical. An awkward, romantic tension surrounds her, for a husband has already been chosen for her by will, binding her guardian to deliver her to him upon his coming of age. Miss Twinkleton attempts to combat the romantic implications of this destiny by feigning pity for the "doomed little victim," shaking her head behind Rosebud's dimpled shoulders. Yet, this performance fails to impress the young ladies, who collectively dismiss her as a pretentious old thing.

The atmosphere shifts whenever the allotted husband arrives. It is understood that he has a right to visit, and any attempt by Miss Twinkleton to dispute this would result in immediate transport. Consequently, when his bell rings, every young lady peers from a window, practices out of tune, and the French class descends into chaos, the mark circulating as rapidly as a bottle at a party of the previous century.

On the afternoon following the dinner at the gatehouse, the bell rings with its customary effect.

"Mr. Edwin Drood to see Miss Rosa," announces the parlour-maid.

Miss Twinkleton adopts an exemplary air of melancholy and instructs the sacrifice to descend. Miss Bud follows, trailed by the scrutiny of all eyes.

Mr. Edwin Drood waits in Miss Twinkleton's parlour, a dainty room containing nothing strictly academic except a terrestrial and a celestial globe. These instruments suggest that even in private, Miss Twinkleton remains perpetually on the verge of becoming a Wandering Jewess, scouring the earth for knowledge.

The door opens, revealing a charming little apparition, its face obscured by a silk apron draped over its head. This is the latest maid, stumbling guiltily down the stairs, making her debut in the presence of the groom-to-be.

"Oh! it _is_ so ridiculous!" the apparition exclaims, shrinking back. "Don't, Eddy!"

"Don't what, Rosa?"

"Don't come any nearer, please. It _is_ so absurd."

"What is absurd, Rosa?"

"The whole thing. It _is_ so absurd to be an engaged orphan, and so absurd to have the girls and servants scuttling about like mice in the wainscot, and so absurd to be called upon!"

The figure keeps a thumb in the corner of its mouth while complaining.

"You give me an affectionate reception, Pussy, I must say."

"Well, I will in a minute, Eddy, but I can't just yet. How are you?" (said very briefly.)

"I am unable to reply that I am much the better for seeing you, Pussy, inasmuch as I see nothing of you."

This remark draws a dark, bright, pouting eye from a corner of the apron, only for it to vanish again as the girl cries, "Oh good gracious! you have had half your hair cut off!"

"I should have done better to have had my head cut off, I think," Edwin replies, ruffling the hair in question with a fierce glance at the mirror and an impatient stamp. "Shall I go?"

"No; you needn't go just yet, Eddy. The girls would all be asking questions why you went."

"Once for all, Rosa, will you uncover that ridiculous little head of yours and give me a welcome?"

The apron is pulled aside. "You're very welcome, Eddy. There! I'm sure that's nice. Shake hands. No, I can't kiss you, because I've got an acidulated drop in my mouth."

"Are you at all glad to see me, Pussy?"

"Oh, yes, I'm dreadfully glad.—Go and sit down.—Miss Twinkleton."

It is the custom for Miss Twinkleton to appear every three minutes during such visits, either in her own person or as Mrs. Tisher, laying offerings on the shrine of Propriety by searching for nonexistent items. On this occasion, she glides in and out gracefully. "How do you do, Mr. Drood? Very glad indeed to have the pleasure. Pray excuse me. Tweezers. Thank you!"

"I got the gloves last evening, Eddy, and I like them very much. They are beauties."

"Well, that's something," the affianced replies, half-grumbling. "The smallest encouragement thankfully received. And how did you pass your birthday, Pussy?"

"Delightfully! Everybody gave me a present. And we had a feast. And we had a ball at night."

"A feast and a ball, eh? These occasions seem to go off tolerably well without me, Pussy."

"De-lightfully!" cries Rosa, spontaneously and without reserve.

"Hah! And what was the feast?"

"Tarts, oranges, jellies, and shrimps."

"Any partners at the ball?"

"We danced with one another, of course, sir. But some of the girls made game to be their brothers. It _was_ so droll!"

"Did anybody make game to be—"

"To be you? Oh dear yes!" cries Rosa, laughing with great enjoyment. "That was the first thing done."

"I hope she did it pretty well," says Edwin rather doubtfully.

"Oh, it was excellent!—I wouldn't dance with you, you know."

Edwin scarcely grasps the significance of this; he asks why.

"Because I was so tired of you," returns Rosa. But she quickly adds, pleadingly, sensing displeasure in his face: "Dear Eddy, you were just as tired of me, you know."

"Did I say so, Rosa?"

"Say so! Do you ever say so? No, you only showed it. Oh, she did it so well!" cries Rosa, suddenly ecstatic about her counterfeit betrothal.

"It strikes me that she must be a devilish impudent girl," says Edwin Drood. "And so, Pussy, you have passed your last birthday in this old house."

"Ah, yes!" Rosa clasps her hands, looks down with a sigh, and shakes her head.

"You seem to be sorry, Rosa."

"I am sorry for the poor old place. Somehow, I feel as if it would miss me, when I am gone so far away, so young."

"Perhaps we had better stop short, Rosa?"

She looks up with a swift, bright expression; the next moment she shakes her head, sighs, and looks down again.

"That is to say, is it, Pussy, that we are both resigned?"

She nods again. After a short silence, she quaintly bursts out: "You know we must be married, and married from here, Eddy, or the poor girls will be so dreadfully disappointed!"

For a moment, there is more compassion in her fiancé's face for her and himself than there is love. He checks the emotion and asks, "Shall I take you out for a walk, Rosa dear?"

Rosa dear is initially unclear on this point until her com

The air in the auctioneer's office was thick with the scent of port wine and the dust of things sold. Mr. Thomas Sapsea sat before a fire that burned with the polite indifference of an early luxury, his posture a rigid assertion of his own importance. On the table beside him, a bottle of port waited alongside a clock that measured time and a weather-glass that defied the elements. Both instruments served a single, internal logic: to uphold the auctioneer against the chaos of the world outside.

Sapsea held a scrap of manuscript. He read it aloud, his voice rolling over the syllables with the gravity of a sermon, pausing only where the rhythm demanded a breath. The name "Ethelinda" hung in the silence, a ghost of a wife whose memory he curated with religious fervor.

"The world," Sapsea declared, pacing the room with thumbs hooked in his waistcoat, "is a place for the knowing. And I know it."

His guest, Mr. Jasper, watched him. Jasper was a man of the city, cooped within its narrow bounds, yet he listened to Sapsea's claims of global familiarity with a mixture of amusement and pity. Sapsea spoke of clocks from Paris and tea from Pekin, claiming to identify them by the mere touch of a finger, as if geography were a texture one could feel through fabric. It was a performance of omniscience, a shield against the vulnerability of being merely a man in a small town.

"You are a man of taste," Sapsea told Jasper, pouring wine with a flourish that suggested he was bestowing a blessing rather than serving a drink. "And I propose a toast to the coming of the French. May we meet them at Dover!"

Jasper smiled, a thin expression that did not reach his eyes. "We were to speak of the late Mrs. Sapsea."

The atmosphere shifted, becoming heavier, more sepulchral. Sapsea filled the glasses, his movements stiffening. He spoke of Miss Brobity, the woman who had once admired his style until she died of the inability to match his intellect. He recounted her final words—"O Thou!"—and the hollow victory of his solitude. He poured wine into the void, asking himself if a husband closer to her level might have saved her liver, or perhaps his own sanity.

"Now," Sapsea resumed, holding up the manuscript again, "let us judge the inscription. Read it."

Jasper took the paper. The ink was fresh, the words carved in the language of the grave:

*ETHIELINDA, Reverential Wife of MR. THOMAS SAPSEA, AUCTIONEER, VALUER, ESTATE AGENT, &c., OF THIS CITY. Whose Knowledge of the World, Though somewhat extensive, Never brought him acquainted with A SPIRIT More capable of LOOKING UP TO HIM. STRANGER, PAUSE And ask thyself the Question, CANST THOU DO LIKEWISE? If Not, WITH A BLUSH RETIRE.*

"It is admirable," Jasper said, returning the paper. "Striking, characteristic, and complete."

Sapsea inclined his head, accepting the praise as a due reward. Just then, the maid announced the arrival of Durdles.

Durdles entered, a figure composed of stone and shadow. He wore a suit of coarse flannel, a yellow neckerchief, and boots the color of the graves he knew better than anyone else. He was the chartered libertine of Cloisterham, a man who slept in cathedral crypts and spoke of the dead as if they were old acquaintances waiting to greet him. He carried a two-foot rule in his pocket and a hammer in his hand, tools for measuring the dead and breaking the living.

Sapsea handed him the manuscript. Durdles took it unfeelingly, pulling the rule from his pocket. He did not read the words; he measured the spacing between them, alloying the poetry with the grit of stone-dust.

"This is for the monument?" Durdles asked.

"The Inscription. Yes."

"It'll come in to an eighth of an inch," Durdles replied, his voice flat and resonant. "Your servant, Mr. Jasper. Hope I see you well."

"How are you, Durdles?"

"I've got a touch of the Tombatism on me, Mr. Jasper, but that I must expect."

"Tombatism?" Sapsea snapped, nettled by the casual reception of his labor. "You mean rheumatism."

"No, I don't," Durdles corrected, turning his gaze toward the window where the cold air seemed to seep in. "I mean the Tombatism. It's another sort from rheumatism. Mr. Jasper knows what Durdles means. You get among them tombs afore it's well light on a winter morning, and keep on walking in the same all the days of your life, and you'll know what Durdles means."

"It is a bitter cold place," Jasper assented, shivering despite the fire.

Outside, the wind picked up, rattling the windows of the auctioneer's office. Inside, the clock ticked on, counting down the seconds of a life lived in the shadow of monuments that would soon rise to claim the dead.

The moonlight fell flat across the Close, illuminating a scene of static violence. John Jasper stepped from the shadow of the arches into the pale glare, halting abruptly. Before him leaned Stony Durdles, a figure encrusted in mortar and lime, his dinner bundle resting heavily against the iron railing of the burial ground. Opposite him, a small boy in rags hurled stones with the rhythmic indifference of a machine. Some struck Durdles; others missed. The boy cared for neither outcome, save for the specific joy of impact. Upon hitting his mark, the boy blew a sharp, triumphant whistle through a jagged gap in his gums, where several teeth were missing. On a miss, he yelped, "Mulled agin!" and recalibrated his aim with renewed ferocity.

"What are you doing to the man?" Jasper demanded, his voice cutting through the silence.

"Making a cock-shy of him," the boy replied.

"Give me those stones in your hand."

"Yes, I'll give 'em you down your throat, if you come a-ketching hold of me," the boy retorted, shaking loose and backing away. "I'll smash your eye, if you don't look out!"

"Baby-Devil that you are, what has the man done to you?"

"He won't go home."

"What is that to you?"

"He gives me a 'apenny to pelt him home if I ketches him out too late," the boy explained, chanting like a primitive incantation, stumbling through the tatters of his boots. "Widdy widdy wen! I—ket—ches—Im—out—ar—ter—ten, Widdy widdy wy! Then—E—don't—go—then—I—shy— Widdy Widdy Wake-cock warning!" The chant ended with a sweeping gesture and another stone aimed at Durdles.

Jasper extended a beckoning finger, inviting the boy to follow, though he knew dragging or coaxing was futile. He crossed to the railing where Durdles stood, profoundly meditative amidst his creations. "Do you know this thing, this child?" Jasper asked, searching for a definition.

"Deputy," Durdles nodded.

"Is that its—his—name?"

"Deputy," Durdles assented. "I'm man-servant up at the Travellers' Twopenny in Gas Works Garding. All us man-servants at Travellers' Lodgings is named Deputy. When we're chock full and the Travellers is all a-bed I come out for my 'elth." Withdrawing into the road, Deputy resumed his aim.

"Hold your hand," Jasper cried sharply, "and don't throw while I stand so near him, or I'll kill you! Come, Durdles; let me walk home with you to-night. Shall I carry your bundle?"

"Not on any account," Durdles replied, adjusting the weight. "Durdles was making his reflections here when you come up, sir, surrounded by his works, like a poplar Author." He introduced a sarcophagus within the railing, white and cold in the moonlight. "Mrs. Sapsea;" he pointed to the monument of the devoted wife. "Late Incumbent;" he indicated the Reverend Gentleman's broken column. "Departed Assessed Taxes;" he gestured to a vase and towel standing on what might represent a cake of soap. "Former pastrycook and Muffin-maker, much respected;" he marked a gravestone. "All safe and sound here, sir, and all Durdles's work. Of the common folk, that is merely bundled up in turf and brambles, the less said the better. A poor lot, soon forgot."

"This creature, Deputy, is behind us," Jasper noted, glancing back. "Is he to follow us?"

The relationship between Durdles and Deputy was capricious. When Durdles turned with the slow gravity of beery suddenness, Deputy executed a wide circuit into the road, assuming a defensive posture. "You never cried Widdy Warning before you begun to-night," Durdles observed, suddenly recalling—or perhaps inventing—an offense.

"Yer lie, I did," Deputy countered, offering his only form of polite contradiction.

"Own brother, sir," Durdles remarked, turning again and forgetting the slight as quickly as he had conceived it. "Own brother to Peter the Wild Boy! But I gave him an object in life."

"At which he takes aim?" Jasper suggested.

"That's it, sir," Durdles returned, satisfied. "at which he takes aim. I took him in hand and gave him an object. What was he before? A destroyer. What work did he do? Nothing but destruction. What did he earn by it? Short terms in Cloisterham jail. Not a person, not a piece of property, not a winder, not a horse, nor a dog, nor a cat, nor a bird, nor a fowl, nor a pig, but what he stoned, for want of an enlightened object. I put that enlightened object before him, and now he can turn his honest halfpenny by the three penn'orth a week."

"I wonder he has no competitors."

"He has plenty, Mr. Jasper, but he stones 'em all away."

"Now, I don't know what this scheme of mine comes to," Durdles pursued, considering it with sodden gravity. "I don't know what you may precisely call it. It ain't a sort of a—scheme of a—National Education?"

"I should say not," Jasper replied.

"I should say not," Durdles assented; "then we won't try to give it a name."

"He still keeps behind us," Jasper repeated, looking over his shoulder. "is he to follow us?"

"We can't help going round by the Travellers' Twopenny, if we go the short way, which is the back way," Durdles answered. "and we'll drop him there."

They proceeded; Deputy, as a rear-rank element, took open order, invading the silence of the hour and place by stoning every wall, post, pillar, and other inanimate object along the deserted path.

"Is there anything new down in the crypt, Durdles?" Jasper asked.

"Anything old, I think you mean," Durdles growled. "It ain't a spot for novelty."

"Any new discovery on your part, I meant."

"There's a old 'un under the seventh pillar on the left as you go down the broken steps of the little underground chapel as formerly was; I make him out (so fur as I've made him out yet) to be one of them old 'uns with a crook. To judge from the size of the passages in the walls, and of the steps and doors, by which they come and went, them crooks must have been a good deal in the way of the old 'uns! Two on 'em meeting promiscuous must have hitched one another by the mitre pretty often, I should say."

Without attempting to correct the literalness of this opinion, Jasper surveyed his companion—covered from head to foot with old mortar, lime, and stone grit—as though he, Jasper, were becoming imbued with a romantic interest in this weird life. "Yours is a curious existence."

Without furnishing the least clue to whether he received this as a compliment or its reverse, Durdles gruffly answered: "Yours is another."

"Well! inasmuch as my lot is cast in the same old earthy, chilly, never-changing place, Yes. But there is much more mystery and interest in your connection with the Cathedral than in mine. Indeed, I am beginning to have some idea of asking you to take me on as a sort of student, or free 'prentice, under you, and to let me go about with you sometimes, and see some of these odd nooks in which you pass your days."

The Stony One replied generally, "All right. Everybody knows where to find Durdles, when he's wanted." Which, if not strictly true, was approximately so, if taken to express that Durdles may always be found in a state of vagabondage somewhere.

"What I dwell upon most," Jasper continued, pursuing his subject of romantic interest, "is the remarkable accuracy with which you would seem to find out where people are buried.—What is the matter? That bundle is in your way; let me hold it."

Durdles had stopped and backed a little (Deputy, attentive to all his movements, immediately skirmishing into the road), looking about for some ledge or corner to place his bundle on, when thus relieved of it. "Just you give me my hammer out of that," Durdles said, "and I'll show you."

*Clink, clink.* His hammer was handed to him.

"Now, lookee here. You pitch your note, don't you, Mr. Jasper?"

"Yes."

"So I sound for mine. I take my hammer, and I tap." (Here he struck the pavement, and the attentive Deputy skirmished at a rather wider range, as supposing that his head may be in requisition.) "I tap, tap, tap. Solid! I go on tapping. Solid still! Tap again. Holloa! Hollow! Tap again, persevering. Solid in hollow! Tap, tap, tap, to try it better. Solid in hollow; and inside solid, hollow again! There you are! Old 'un crumbled away in stone

The morning air near Cloisterham Weir was thin and brittle, easily shattered by the impact of Septimus Crisparkle's forehead. He broke the surface tension of the ice, a trivial act that served as a necessary shock to his system. Now indoors, he sought further stimulation, engaging in a rigorous exercise of self-defense against his own reflection. The glass offered a pristine image: a man feinting with calculated grace, striking with linear force, his face radiating an innocence that seemed almost artificial, his gloves glowing with a soft-hearted benevolence that belied the violence of the motion.

Mrs. Crisparkle, his mother and widow, descended the stairs just as the Reverend paused. She waited for the tea urn, her presence marking the transition from solitary exertion to domestic routine. Septimus halted his assault on the mirror, gently cupping her face between his padded fists. He kissed her cheek with a tenderness that contrasted sharply with the previous ferocity, then resumed his counter-attacks, left hook followed by right cross, executing the movements with tremendous vigor.

"You'll break something eventually, Sept," Mrs. Crisparkle observed, watching him. "Or perhaps a blood vessel."

"Nothing of the sort, Mother," he replied, breathless. "Here is the wind. Observe!"

He delivered a final, severe blow, narrowly missing her cap, which fluttered like a banner of lavender and cherry silk before settling undisturbed. With magnanimous restraint, he released his opponent, stowing his gloves away and adopting a pose of contemplative stillness until the servant arrived with the urn. Once the breakfast preparations were complete, the two stood alone once more. It was a scene of quiet devotion: the old lady reciting the Lord's Prayer aloud, her voice steady, while her son, a Minor Canon nearing forty, bowed his head to listen. He had stood thus, listening to the same words from the same lips, when he was barely four years old.

There is a peculiar beauty in an elderly woman whose eyes remain bright, whose figure retains its compact integrity, whose expression balances cheerfulness with calm, and whose attire resembles the porcelain shepherdess figurines adorning a mantelpiece—dainty, individually chosen, perfectly molded to her form. Septimus often mused on this perfection as he sat opposite his widowed mother. Her thoughts, distilled, revolved around a single phrase: "My Sept!"

Minor Canon Corner, situated in the cathedral's shadow, possessed a unique atmosphere. The cawing of rooks, the echo of passing feet, the tolling of bells, and the rolling of organs did not disturb the silence here; rather, they deepened it, rendering the place quieter than absolute void. Centuries of swaggering soldiers, suffering serfs, and powerful monks had once dominated this spot, but they were all gone. Their absence left behind a blessed tranquility, a serene romanticism born of a sorrowful tale fully concluded—a state of mind conducive to pity and forbearance.

Surrounding them were red-brick walls softened by time, ivy rooted in strength, latticed windows, panelled rooms with oak beams, and stone-walled gardens where fruit still ripened on ancient trees. This was the setting for their breakfast.

"And what does the letter say?" Septimus asked, displaying a vigorous appetite.

His mother placed the folded paper on the cloth and handed it to him. She prided herself on her clear vision, requiring no spectacles. Septimus, equally proud of her clarity and eager to maximize her enjoyment of it, had devised a pretense: he claimed he could not read without glasses. Thus, he produced a pair of lenses of grave and prodigious dimensions. They obstructed his view of his food and his nose alike, turning his eyes into a confused combination of microscope and telescope.

"It is from Mr. Honeythunder, naturally," his mother declared, crossing her arms.

"Naturally," Septimus agreed. He began to read, stumbling over the salutation. "'Haven of Philanthropy... I write in the—'"

"In the chair," his mother supplied.

"Why, what should he write in?" Septimus asked, removing his spectacles to see her face clearly, exclaiming in confusion.

"Bless you, Sept," she corrected gently. "You miss the context. Return it to me."

Relieved to remove the heavy lenses, which always irritated his eyes, Septimus complied, murmuring that his reading vision deteriorated daily. His mother continued, her voice precise. "'I write from the chair, to which I shall probably be confined for some hours.' Septimus glanced at the row of chairs along the wall, his expression a mixture of protest and appeal. 'We have,' she emphasized, 'a meeting of our Convened Chief Composite Committee of Central and District Philanthropists... and it is their unanimous pleasure that I take the chair.'"

Septimus breathed easier. "If he means that, let him."

"'Not to lose a day's post, I take the opportunity of a long report being read, denouncing a public miscreant—'"

"It is extraordinary," Septimus interrupted, lowering his cutlery to rub his ear in irritation, "that these Philanthropists are perpetually denouncing someone. And equally extraordinary that they are so flush with miscreants!"

"'Denouncing a public miscreant,'" his mother resumed, "'to get our little affair of business off my mind. I have spoken with my two wards, Neville and Helena Landless, regarding their defective education. They agree to the proposed plan; as I should have ensured, regardless of their willingness.'"

"And another extraordinary fact," Septimus noted in the same tone, "is that these philanthropists seize their fellow creatures by the scruff of the neck and bump them onto the path of peace. Excuse me, Mother."

"'Therefore, dear Madam, you will please prepare your son, the Rev. Mr. Septimus, to expect Neville as an inmate to be read with, on Monday next. On the same day Helena will accompany him to Cloisterham, to take up her quarters at the Nuns' House... The terms are as stated in writing... With compliments to the Rev. Mr. Septimus, I am, Dear Madam, Your affectionate brother (In Philanthropy), LUKE HONEYTHUNDER.'"

"Well, Mother," Septimus said after another pause to massage his ear, "we must attempt it. There is no doubt we have room, time, and inclination. I confess I feel relieved he is not Mr. Honeythunder himself. Though that seems wretchedly prejudiced, does it not? I have never seen him. Is he a large man, Mother?"

"I believe he is," she hesitated, "though his voice sounds larger."

"Larger than himself?"

"Larger than anyone."

"Hah!" Septimus laughed, finishing his breakfast as if the flavor of the Souchong tea and the ham and toast had suddenly faded.

Mrs. Crisparkle's sister, a piece of Dresden china matched perfectly to her, was the childless wife of a London clergyman. Mr. Honeythunder, publicly known as Professor of Philanthropy, had met Mrs. Crisparkle during her recent annual visit, following a charitable event where orphaned children were fed plum buns. These were the only known antecedents of the incoming students.

"I am sure you agree, Mother," Septimus reasoned, "that the priority is to put these young people at ease. Disinterest is impossible; we cannot be comfortable unless they are. Jasper's nephew is currently here; like attracts to like, and youth to youth. He is a cordial young man. We shall invite him to dinner to meet the siblings. That makes three. We cannot ask him without asking Jasper. That makes four. Adding Miss Twinkleton and the future fairy bride brings us to six. Including ourselves, that is eight. Would eight guests at a friendly dinner trouble you, Mother?"

"Nine would, Sept," she replied, appearing nervous.

"My dear Mother, I specified eight."

"The exact capacity of the table and the room."

Thus settled, Septimus visited Miss Twinkleton to arrange Helena Landless's stay at the Nuns' House, securing the remaining invitations. Miss Twinkleton glanced at her globes, regretting their exclusion from society, but ultimately accepted their confinement. Instructions were sent to the Philanthropist for the timely arrival of Neville and Helena, and soon the scent of soup filled the air of Minor Canon Corner.

Cloisterham lacked railways; Mr. Sapsea insisted there never would be. Yet, miraculously, express trains now whirred past without stopping, casting dust against its insignificance. A remote fragment of the main line threatened the money market and the constitution, forcing traffic to sneak in via a back stableway marked "Beware of the Dog."

To this ignominious entrance approached Septimus, waiting for a short, squat omnibus burdened with luggage like an elephant carrying too much castle. A large passenger sat on the box seat, elbows squared, hands on knees, compressing the driver into a tiny space, glaring with a stern face.

"Is this Cloisterham?" the passenger demanded in a booming voice.

"Yes," the driver replied, rubbing his sore muscles. "And I am glad to see it."

"Tell your master to widen the box-seat," the passenger commanded. "He is morally, and legally under penalty, bound to provide for the comfort of his fellow-man."

The driver patted his ribs anxiously. "Have I sat upon you?"

"You have," the driver admitted reluctantly.

"Take this card, my friend."

"I shall not depr

The walk back from the school gates was measured, a slow procession through the cooling twilight where the shadows seemed to stretch longer than the moonlight allowed. Neville spoke first, his voice carrying the weight of someone trying to define a boundary.

"I know very little of that gentleman, sir," he said, turning his head slightly toward the Minor Canon.

"You know very little of your guardian?" the voice asked, repeating the phrase with a flat, interrogative rhythm.

"Almost nothing!"

"How came he—"

"To be my guardian?" Neville supplied the missing link, his tone shifting abruptly. "I suppose you know that we come from Ceylon? My sister and I."

"Indeed, no."

"I wonder at that. We lived with a stepfather there. Our mother died there, when we were little children. We have had a wretched existence. She made him our guardian, and he was a miserly wretch who grudged us food to eat, and clothes to wear. At his death, he passed us over to this man; for no better reason that I know of, than his being a friend or connexion of his, whose name was always in print and catching his attention."

"That was lately, I suppose?"

"Quite lately, sir. This stepfather of ours was a cruel brute as well as a grinding one. It is well he died when he did, or I might have killed him."

Mr. Crisparkle stopped short in the moonlight, the silence expanding around him like a vacuum. He looked at his hopeful pupil, and the expression on his face shifted from expectation to consternation.

"I surprise you, sir?" he asked, his voice dropping quickly into a submissive register.

"You shock me; unspeakably shock me."

The pupil hung his head for a moment, letting the gravity of the accusation settle into his posture, before continuing. "You never saw him beat your sister. I have seen him beat mine, more than once or twice, and I never forgot it."

"Nothing," said Mr. Crisparkle, "not even a beloved and beautiful sister's tears under dastardly ill-usage;" he became less severe, in spite of himself, as his indignation rose; "could justify those horrible expressions that you used."

"I am sorry I used them, and especially to you, sir. I beg to recall them. But permit me to set you right on one point. You spoke of my sister's tears. My sister would have let him tear her to pieces, before she would have let him believe that he could make her shed a tear."

Mr. Crisparkle reviewed those mental notes of his, and was neither at all surprised to hear it, nor at all disposed to question it.

"Perhaps you will think it strange, sir"—this was said in a hesitating voice—"that I should so soon ask you to allow me to confide in you, and to have the kindness to hear a word or two from me in my defence?"

"Defence?" Mr. Crisparkle repeated. "You are not on your defence, Mr. Neville."

"I think I am, sir. At least I know I should be, if you were better acquainted with my character."

"Well, Mr. Neville," was the rejoinder. "What if you leave me to find it out?"

"Since it is your pleasure, sir," answered the young man, with a quick change in his manner to sullen disappointment: "since it is your pleasure to check me in my impulse, I must submit."

There was that in the tone of this short speech which made the conscientious man to whom it was addressed uneasy. It hinted to him that he might, without meaning it, turn aside a trustfulness beneficial to a mis-shapen young mind and perhaps to his own power of directing and improving it. They were within sight of the lights in his windows, and he stopped.

"Let us turn back and take a turn or two up and down, Mr. Neville, or you may not have time to finish what you wish to say to me. You are hasty in thinking that I mean to check you. Quite the contrary. I invite your confidence."

"You have invited it, sir, without knowing it, ever since I came here. I say 'ever since,' as if I had been here a week. The truth is, we came here (my sister and I) to quarrel with you, and affront you, and break away again."

"Really?" said Mr. Crisparkle, at a dead loss for anything else to say.

"You see, we could not know what you were beforehand, sir; could we?"

"Clearly not," said Mr. Crisparkle.

"And having liked no one else with whom we have ever been brought into contact, we had made up our minds not to like you."

"Really?" said Mr. Crisparkle again.

"But we do like you, sir, and we see an unmistakable difference between your house and your reception of us, and anything else we have ever known. This—and my happening to be alone with you—and everything around us seeming so quiet and peaceful after Mr. Honeythunder's departure—and Cloisterham being so old and grave and beautiful, with the moon shining on it—these things inclined me to open my heart."

"I quite understand, Mr. Neville. And it is salutary to listen to such influences."

"In describing my own imperfections, sir, I must ask you not to suppose that I am describing my sister's. She has come out of the disadvantages of our miserable life, as much better than I am, as that Cathedral tower is higher than those chimneys."

Mr. Crisparkle in his own breast was not so sure of this.

"I have had, sir, from my earliest remembrance, to suppress a deadly and bitter hatred. This has made me secret and revengeful. I have been always tyrannically held down by the strong hand. This has driven me, in my weakness, to the resource of being false and mean. I have been stinted of education, liberty, money, dress, the very necessaries of life, the commonest pleasures of childhood, the commonest possessions of youth. This has caused me to be utterly wanting in I don't know what emotions, or remembrances, or good instincts—I have not even a name for the thing, you see!—that you have had to work upon in other young men to whom you have been accustomed."

"This is evidently true. But this is not encouraging," thought Mr. Crisparkle as they turned again.

"And to finish with, sir: I have been brought up among abject and servile dependents, of an inferior race, and I may easily have contracted some affinity with them. Sometimes, I don't know but that it may be a drop of what is tigerish in their blood."

"As in the case of that remark just now," thought Mr. Crisparkle.

"In a last word of reference to my sister, sir (we are twin children), you ought to know, to her honour, that nothing in our misery ever subdued her, though it often cowed me. When we ran away from it (we ran away four times in six years, to be soon brought back and cruelly punished), the flight was always of her planning and leading. Each time she dressed as a boy, and showed the daring of a man. I take it we were seven years old when we first decamped; but I remember, when I lost the pocket-knife with which she was to have cut her hair short, how desperately she tried to tear it out, or bite it off. I have nothing further to say, sir, except that I hope you will bear with me and make allowance for me."

"Of that, Mr. Neville, you may be sure," returned the Minor Canon. "I don't preach more than I can help, and I will not repay your confidence with a sermon. But I entreat you to bear in mind, very seriously and steadily, that if I am to do you any good, it can only be with your own assistance; and that you can only render that, efficiently, by seeking aid from Heaven."

"I will try to do my part, sir."

"And, Mr. Neville, I will try to do mine. Here is my hand on it. May God bless our endeavours!"

They were now standing at his house-door, and a cheerful sound of voices and laughter was heard within.

"We will take one more turn before going in," said Mr. Crisparkle, "for I want to ask you a question. When you said you were in a changed mind concerning me, you spoke, not only for yourself, but for your sister too?"

"Undoubtedly I did, sir."

"Excuse me, Mr. Neville, but I think you have had no opportunity of communicating with your sister, since I met you. Mr. Honeythunder was very eloquent; but perhaps I may venture to say, without ill-nature, that he rather monopolised the occasion. May you not have answered for your sister without sufficient warrant?"

Neville shook his head with a proud smile.

"You don't know, sir, yet, what a complete understanding can exist between my sister and me, though no spoken word—perhaps hardly as much as a look—may have passed between us. She not only feels as I have described, but she very well knows that I am taking this opportunity of speaking to you, both for her and for myself."

Mr. Crisparkle looked in his face, with some incredulity; but his face expressed such absolute and firm conviction of the truth of what

The courtyard of the Nuns' House lay bathed in a moonlight that offered no warmth, only a stark illumination of the brazen door-plate. It stared back at the two young men with the cold indifference of a judgment seat. Behind them, the figures of the damsels had vanished into the shadows of the cloisters. The silence stretched, taut and thin, until the two men exchanged a glance that spoke volumes of shared defeat and walked away together down the perspective of the street.

"Do you stay here long, Mr. Drood?" Neville asked, his voice cutting through the damp air.

"Not this time," Edwin replied, the tone casual, almost dismissive. "I leave for London tomorrow. But I shall drift back and forth until next Midsummer. After that, I depart Cloisterham, and England itself, for many a long day."

"Are you going abroad?"

"Going to wake up Egypt a little," Edwin said, the condescension dripping from his words like water off a duck's back.

"Are you reading?"

"Reading?" Edwin repeated, a flicker of contempt crossing his features. "No. Doing. Working. Engineering. My father, a former partner, left a portion of the Firm's capital to me. Until I come of age, I am a liability to the Firm; then I inherit my modest share. Jack—you met him at dinner—is my guardian and trustee until then."

"I heard from Mr. Crisparkle regarding your other good fortune."

"What do you mean by 'other good fortune'?"

Neville had advanced cautiously, his movements a mixture of predatory intent and fearful shyness, embodying that peculiar tension of being both hunter and hunted. Edwin's retort was abrupt, lacking all polish. They halted, locking eyes in a heated, silent contest.

"I hope," Neville ventured, "there is no offense, Mr. Drood, in my innocently referring to your betrothal?"

"By George!" Edwin cried, accelerating his pace. "Everyone in this chattering old Cloisterham refers to it. I wonder no public-house hasn't been erected with my portrait for the sign of *The Betrothed's Head*. Or *Pussy's* portrait. One or the other."

"I am not accountable for Mr. Crisparkle mentioning the matter to me so openly," Neville began.

"No; that is true; you are not," Edwin conceded.

"But," Neville resumed, "I am accountable for mentioning it to you. And I did so, on the supposition that you could not fail to be highly proud of it."

Two currents of human nature drove this exchange. Neville Landless, already captivated by Little Rosebud, felt a surge of indignation that Edwin Drood—a man beneath her station—should treat his prize so lightly. Conversely, Edwin Drood, sufficiently smitten by Helena, resented that Helena's brother, a man far beneath her, should dispose of him so coolly, effectively removing him from the equation.

"The last remark deserves an answer," Edwin stated. "I don't know, Mr. Neville—adapting that mode of address from Mr. Crisparkle—that what people are proudest of, they usually talk most about. Nor do I know that what they cherish most, they desire others to discuss. But I lead a busy life. I speak under correction by you, the readers, who ought to know everything, and I daresay do."

By now, both men had descended into savagery. Neville stood exposed in the open; Edwin hid beneath the transparent cover of a popular tune, pausing occasionally to feign admiration of the picturesque moonlight ahead.

"It does not seem very civil in you," Neville remarked finally, "to reflect upon a stranger who comes here, not having had your advantages, trying to make up for lost time. But, to be sure, I was not raised in a 'busy life,' and my ideas of civility were formed among Heathens."

"Perhaps, the best civility, regardless of our upbringing," Edwin retorted, "is to mind our own business. If you will set me that example, I promise to follow it."

"Do you know that you take a great deal too much upon yourself?" Neville shot back angrily. "And in the part of the world I come from, you would be called to account for it?"

"By whom, for instance?" Edwin asked, halting to survey the other with a look of disdain.

Suddenly, a firm right hand landed on Edwin's shoulder. Jasper stepped between them. It seemed he, too, had circled the Nuns' House, emerging from the shadowy side of the road.

"Ned, Ned, Ned!" Jasper exclaimed. "We must have no more of this. I dislike this. I have overheard high words between you. Remember, my dear boy, you are almost host tonight. You belong to the place, representing it to a stranger. Mr. Neville is a stranger; you owe him the obligations of hospitality. And, Mr. Neville," placing his left hand on the younger man's shoulder, walking between them, hand-to-hand, "you will pardon me, but I appeal to you to govern your temper. What is amiss? Why ask! Let there be nothing amiss, and the question is superfluous. Are we all three on a good understanding?"

After a silent struggle to determine who would speak last, Edwin broke the silence. "As far as I am concerned, Jack, there is no anger in me."

"Nor in me," Neville said, though less freely, or perhaps less carelessly. "But if Mr. Drood knew all that lies behind me, far away from here, he might understand why sharp-edged words cut so deep."

"Perhaps," Jasper soothed, "we should not qualify our good understanding. We should avoid anything resembling reproof or condition; it might not seem generous. Frankly and freely, you see, there is no anger in Ned. Frankly and freely, there is no anger in you, Mr. Neville?"

"None at all, Mr. Jasper." Yet, not quite so frankly, or so freely, or perhaps so carelessly.

"All over then! My bachelor gatehouse is a few yards hence, the heater is on the fire, and wine and glasses await on the table. It is not a stone's throw from Minor Canon Corner. Ned, you depart tomorrow. We will bring Mr. Neville in for a stirrup-cup."

"With all my heart, Jack."

"And with all mine, Mr. Jasper." Neville found himself unable to refuse, though he wished to linger. He sensed he had lost control of his temper; Edwin's coolness, far from being contagious, burned him red-hot.

Jasper, walking centrally, hands on shoulders, beautifully refrained a drinking song, and they ascended to his rooms. Upon entering, the first object visible, illuminated by the lamp Jasper lit beside the fire, was the portrait above the mantelpiece. It was an object unlikely to improve the atmosphere between the two young men, awkwardly resurrecting the source of their discord. Both glanced at it consciously but said nothing. Jasper, however, seemingly unaware of the depth of their rift, drew immediate attention to it.

"You recognize that picture, Mr. Neville?" Jasper shaded the lamp to cast its glow upon it.

"I recognize it, but it is far from flattering the original."

"Oh, you are hard upon it! It was done by Ned, who gave it to me as a present."

"I am sorry for that, Mr. Drood." Neville apologized sincerely. "If I had known I was in the artist's presence—"

"Oh, a joke, sir, a mere joke," Edwin interjected with a provoking yawn. "A little humorizing of Pussy's points! I'm going to paint her gravely, one of these days, if she's good."

The air of leisurely patronage and indifference with which this was delivered, as the speaker threw himself back in a chair, clasping his hands behind his head as a rest, was exasperating to the excitable Neville. Jasper watched them, smiling faintly, then turned his back to mix a jug of mulled wine at the fire. The process required considerable mixing and compounding.

"I suppose, Mr. Neville," Edwin said, quick to resent the indignant protest against himself visible in Neville's face, "that if you painted the picture of your lady love—"

"I can't paint," Neville interrupted hastily.

"That's your misfortune, not your fault. You would if you could. But if you could, I suppose you would make her (regardless of her reality) Juno, Minerva, Diana, and Venus, all in one. Eh?"

"I have no lady love, and I can't say."

"If I were to try my hand," Edwin said, a boyish boastfulness rising in him, "on a portrait of Miss Landless—in earnest, mind you; in earnest—you should see what I could do!"

"My sister's consent to sit for it being first obtained, I suppose? Since that will never happen, I fear I shall never see what you can do. I must bear the loss."

Jasper turned from the fire, filled a large goblet for Neville, filled one for Edwin, handed them out, then filled his own.

"Come, Mr. Neville, we drink to my nephew, Ned. As it is his foot in the stirrup—metaphorically—our stirrup-cup is dedicated to him. Ned, my dearest fellow, my love!"

Jasper set the example, nearly emptying his glass, and Neville followed. Edwin said,

The silence inside the Nuns' House was not empty; it was a suspended weight, thick with the memory of a drowning girl. Rosa remembered her mother as a small, pale thing, barely older than herself, laid out in a summer dress that seemed to hold the humidity of the sea. Wet hair, scattered petals, the specific, terrible color of a life cut short at a party of pleasure. Her father had followed her to the grave a year later, broken by the arithmetic of loss. From that equation, a new variable emerged: Edwin Drood. He had been the solvent for her father's grief, a widower matching a widow, until he too vanished into the quiet road where all pilgrims eventually fade.

Time had altered the texture of Rosa's isolation. Once, the pity surrounding her was a grey fog; now, it shimmered in hues of gold, rose, and azure, a soft, artificial light that kept her perpetually young. The nuns, driven by a collective need to console, treated her as a perpetual child, a dynamic that bred a peculiar rivalry among them. Who would bring the ribbon? Who would write the letter? These petty contests masked a deeper, harder strife beneath their veils. Rosa, spoiled by this endless well of affection, had grown giddy and wilful, unaware that the depth of her reservoirs had never truly been tested.

Then, the news arrived. It did not knock; it seeped. Perhaps carried by the wind through the open casements, or kneaded into the morning bread, or deposited on the dust-beaten mats by the town's atmosphere, the rumor permeated every gable before Miss Twinkleton had even risen. Through Mrs. Tisher, while the matron was still sacrificing to the Graces in her dressing gown, the report crystallized: Miss Landless's brother had attacked Mr. Edwin Drood.

The narrative expanded with the chaotic logic of gossip. First, a bottle. Then, a knife, which suggested a fork. Finally, the cook confirmed the trifecta: bottle, knife, and fork, plus a decanter flying aimlessly at everyone's head. The psychological imperative was clear: one must know the motive. Why throw the implements? Because Miss Landless's brother admired Miss Bud, and Mr. Drood had denied him the right to do so. The altercation was simple, a collision of pride, yet the aftermath was a minefield.

Rosa retreated, plugging her ears, seeking refuge in a corner. Miss Landless, however, demanded clarity. She bypassed the filter of discretion, striking directly for Mr. Crisparkle's office. When she returned, her cheeks flushed, she offered Rosa only the tip of the iceberg—the provocation, the final insult—carefully omitting the earlier, more complex exchanges regarding her lover's easy temper. She delivered her brother's petition for forgiveness with sisterly earnestness, closing the door on the subject.

It fell to Miss Twinkleton to manage the public consciousness. Entering the "apartment allotted to study," she summoned the girls with a forensic air. With Mrs. Tisher standing behind her like a queen at Tilbury, Miss Twinkleton invoked Shakespeare, the Bard of Avon, specifically his depiction of Rumour in *The Merchant of Venice*. She declared that the recent fracas between two young gentlemen, occurring within a hundred miles of their peaceful walls, had been grotesquely exaggerated by the voice of Rumour. Citing responsible inquiries, she dismissed the affair as an "airy nothing," urging the students to return to their labors.

Yet the subject survived. By dinner, Miss Ferdinand had donned a paper moustache and attempted to lob a water-bottle at Miss Giggles, who defended herself with a spoon. Rosa watched this performance with an uneasy knot in her stomach. She felt implicated, a passive participant in a drama she did not fully understand, trapped in a false position regarding her engagement. The distance from her fiancé amplified her anxiety, and today, with Helena avoiding the topic as a delicate wound, Rosa was cast alone with her thoughts.

The bell rang, announcing the arrival of her guardian. Mr. Grewgious entered, a man composed of aridity and sand. His hair was a mangy yellow tippet, so unlike natural growth that it must have been a wig, unless Nature had simply abandoned the project mid-chisel. His face was carved from hard curves, his forehead notched as if the sculptor had lost patience. He walked with a shambling hesitation, his near-sightedness failing to notice the expanse of white cotton stocking contrasting with his black suit. Despite this awkward machinery, he possessed a strange capacity to make an agreeable impression.

He found Rosa discomfited in Miss Twinkleton's presence, dim forebodings weighing on him. He greeted her warmly, offering a chair, while Miss Twinkleton, with charming grace, maneuvered her desk to the corner window, effectively removing herself from the immediate circle. "You will be under no restraint," she assured them, retreating to the periphery.

Left alone by the fire, Mr. Grewgious repeated his greeting, waiting for Rosa to settle. "My visits," he said, "are like those of the angels—not that I compare myself to an angel."

"No, sir," Rosa replied.

"Not by any means," he agreed, smoothing his head as if pressing water from a dive. "I merely refer to my visits, which are few and far between. The angels are, we know very well, up-stairs." He glanced meaningfully at Miss Twinkleton, who resumed her writing with a stiff stare.

"I refer," he continued, placing his hand on Rosa's, "to the other young ladies."

Miss Twinkleton dipped her pen, waiting for inspiration from the Celestial Nine. Grewgious smoothed his head again, pulled out a pocket-book, and a stub of pencil. "I made a guiding memorandum... 'Well and happy.' Truly. You are well and happy, my dear?"

"Yes, indeed, sir," Rosa answered.

"For which," Grewgious noted, bending his head toward the window, "acknowledgments are due to the maternal kindness of the lady before me." This was a lame departure, a circuitous route that never reached its destination, as Miss Twinkleton bit the end of her pen, looking upward for an idea.

Grewgious lined out "well and happy" and moved to the next line: "'Pounds, shillings, and pence.' A dry subject, but important. Life is pounds, shillings, and pence. Death is—" He paused, a sudden recollection of her parents stopping him, and softened his tone. "Death is *not* pounds, shillings, and pence." His voice was as hard and dry as his own constitution, yet somehow conveyed kindness. If Nature had finished him, his face might have shown it, but the notches in his forehead refused to fuse.

"You find your allowance sufficient?" he asked.

Rosa wanted for nothing. "And you are not in debt?"

She laughed at the notion, finding it a comical vagary of the imagination. Grewgious stretched his near sight to confirm her view. "Ah!" he commented, lining out the currency notes. "I spoke of having got among the angels! So I did!"

Rosa sensed the direction of his next query before he voiced it, blushing and folding a crease in her dress. "Marriage," Grewgious murmured, carrying his smoothing hand down over his eyes, nose, and chin. He leaned closer, speaking confidentially. "I now touch upon the point that is the direct cause of my troubling you. Otherwise, being a particularly Angular man, I should not have intruded. I am the last man to intrude into a sphere for which I am so entirely unfitted. I feel, on these premises, as if I was a bear—with the cramp—in a youthful Cotillon."

His ungainliness validated the simile, setting Rosa off in hearty laughter.

The air in the study was thick with the scent of wool and stagnation. Mrs. Crisparkle sat, her needles moving in a rhythm that suggested a prayer she had long since stopped believing in. Her son, Septimus, watched her hands. He saw the way the yarn tightened around the needle tips, a small, controlled violence.

"You are hard on Mr. Neville," Septimus said. His voice was flat, lacking the warmth of conviction.

"No," Mrs. Crisparkle replied. She did not look up. "I am not."

"Discuss it, Ma."

"I am open to discussion," she said. The phrase hung in the air, a polite shield. Internally, she added: *And I should like to see the discussion that changes my mind.*

Septimus smiled, a conciliatory gesture that cost him nothing. "Then let us discuss."

Mrs. Crisparkle knit harder. "I hope not, my dear. I am quite open to discussion."

"But if you take that line—"

"Blame Mr. Neville," she interrupted, her tone shifting from maternal to judicial. "Not me."

"Why him?"

"He came home intoxicated," she stated, reciting facts as if they were laws of physics. "He brought discredit to this house. He showed disrespect to this family."

"That is undeniable," Septimus conceded. "He is sorry."

"And yet," Mrs. Crisparkle continued, her eyes fixed on the growing fabric, "Mr. Jasper came to me next day. In the nave. With his gown still on. He expressed hope that I had not been alarmed. If he had not done that, I might never have heard of the disgrace."

Septimus paused. He had considered hushing the matter, a joint conspiracy of silence between teacher and student. But the girl's presence, the weight of her silence, had altered the equation. "If I had kept it from you," he murmured, "it would have been for your peace. For the good of the young men."

Mrs. Crisparkle crossed the room and kissed him. A quick, dry press of lips. "Of course, my dear. I am sure of that."

"It became town-talk," Septimus noted, rubbing his ear. "Passed out of my power."

"I thought ill of Mr. Neville then," she said, resuming her knitting. "I think ill of him now. I hope he comes to good, but I do not believe he will." The vibration in her cap increased, a tremor of finality.

"I am sorry to hear you say so," Septimus ventured.

"I am sorry to say so," she interjected, her hands continuing their mechanical dance. "But I cannot help it."

Septimus shifted the topic. "Undeniably, Mr. Neville is industrious. Attentive. Improving apace. And he has... an attachment to me."

"There is no merit in the last article," Mrs. Crisparkle snapped, her eyes darting to the china figurine on the table. "And if he boasts of it, I think the worse of him."

"He never boasted," Septimus argued gently.

"Perhaps not," she allowed. "Still, it does not signify."

She gestured to the china figure. "Ask yourself what he would be without his sister. You know her influence. Whatever he reads with you, he reads with her. Give her her fair share of your praise. How much is left for him?"

Septimus fell silent. He drifted into a reverie, a mental excursion to the rimy mornings at Cloisterham Weir. He remembered climbing the beetling fragment of monastery ruin, facing the wind at sunset. Below, the river flowed dark, reflecting the town fires. There, walking side by side, were the two figures: Helena, proud and fierce, and Neville, submitting to the fairy-bride. He had seen them pass, two studious shadows against the bleaker landscape. He realized then that in teaching one, he was teaching two. He had adapted his explanations to both minds, bridging the gap between the direct contact and the mediated approach. He thought of the gossip from the Nuns' House, of Helena learning from her sister what she knew. He wondered if these recent alliances had already become an integral part of his life, woven into the fabric of his own existence.

Whenever Septimus fell thus a-musing, his mother interpreted it as a need for support. She hurried to the dining-room closet.

It was a wonder of Cloisterham, a masterpiece of Minor Canon Corner. Above it, a portrait of Handel in a flowing wig beamed down, seemingly up to the contents, intending to combine all its harmonies in one delicious fugue. This was no common closet with a vulgar door. It possessed a lock in mid-air, where two perpendicular slides met. Pulling down the upper slide revealed deep shelves of pickle-jars, jam-pots, tin canisters, and vessels of blue and white porcelain.

The inhabitants were labeled in printed capitals. The pickles, dressed in rich brown double-breasted coats, announced themselves as Walnut, Gherkin, Onion, Cabbage, Cauliflower. The jams, wearing curlpapers, whispered in feminine caligraphy: Raspberry, Gooseberry, Apricot, Plum, Damson, Apple, Peach. Lower still, oranges awaited a mighty japanned sugar-box to temper their acerbity. Biscuits and plum-cake waited at the court of these powers. Lowest of all, a compact leaden vault held the sweet wine and cordials, issuing whispers of Seville Orange, Lemon, Almond, and Caraway-seed.

Every dipper among the shelves emerged mellow-faced, having undergone a saccharine transfiguration, as if the Cathedral bells and organs had hummed through the air for ages, sublimateing everything in store.

Septimus yielded himself willingly to this glorious cupboard, just as he did to the nauseous medicinal herb-closet on the upper landing. To what amazing infusions of gentian, peppermint, sage, and dandelion did his courageous stomach submit! He would swathe his rosy face in layers of dried leaves if his mother suspected a toothache, or stick botanical blotches upon his cheek if she convicted him of a pimple. Unlike the lamb led to slaughter, he bore nobody but himself. He would quietly swallow what was given, taking a corrective dip of hands and face into bowls of dried rose-leaves and lavender, emerging confident in the sweetening powers of Cloisterham Weir and a wholesome mind, while Lady Macbeth remained hopeless of the seas.

That evening, Septimus accepted his glass of Constantia with excellent grace. Supported to his mother's satisfaction, he applied himself to the remaining duties of the day. Orderly and punctual, they brought round Vesper Service and twilight. The Cathedral was very cold. After service, he set off for a brisk trot, ending in a charge at his favorite fragment of ruin, to be carried by storm without a pause for breath.

He carried it in a masterly manner, standing breathless before the view. He looked down upon the river. Cloisterham was near enough to the sea to throw up seaweed. An unusual quantity had come in with the last tide, mingling with the confusion of the water. Restless gulls dipped and flapped. Beyond the brown-sailed barges turning black, an angry light signaled a stormy night.

In his mind, he contrasted the wild, noisy sea with the quiet harbor of Minor Canon Corner. Then, Helena and Neville Landless passed below him. He had thought of them both all day. He climbed down to speak to them together. The footing was rough in the uncertain light, suitable only for a good climber. Septimus was as good a climber as most men, and stood beside them before many good climbers would have been halfway down.

"A wild evening, Miss Landless!" he called out. "Do you not find your usual walk with your brother too exposed and cold for the time of year? Or at least, when the sun is down and the weather drives in from the sea?"

Helena thought not. It was their favorite walk. Very retired.

"It is very retired," Septimus agreed, seizing the opportunity. "It is a place of all others where one can speak without interruption, as I wish to do. Mr. Neville, I believe you tell your sister everything that passes between us?"

"Everything, sir."

"Consequently," Septimus continued, looking to her and not to him, "your sister is aware that I have repeatedly urged you to make some kind of apology for that unfortunate occurrence which befell on the night of your arrival here."

"Yes," Helena replied.

"I call it unfortunate," Septimus resumed, "forasmuch as it certainly has engendered a prejudice against Neville. There is a notion about that he is a dangerously passionate fellow, of an uncontrollable and furious temper. He is really avoided as such."

"I have no doubt he is, poor fellow," Helena said, with a look of proud compassion at her brother, expressing a deep sense of his being ungenerously treated. "I should be quite sure of it, from your saying so; but what you tell me is confirmed by suppressed hints and references that I meet with every day."

"Now," Septimus said, in a tone of mild though firm persuasion, "is not this to be regretted, and ought it not to be amended? These are early days of Neville's in Cloisterham, and I have no fear of his outliving such a prejudice, and proving himself to have been misunderstood. But how much wiser to take action at once, than to trust

The air inside Staple Inn tasted of wet wool and suspended dust. It was a place designed to dampen the noise of the world, a legal nook where the pavement seemed to soften beneath one's boots, and the sparrows in the smoky trees played a game of pretend-country that required no understanding of borders or maps. In the corner of the inner quadrangle, behind a portal marked *P J T 1747*, the fog pressed against the glass, blurring the candlelight into a murky, indistinct glow.

Inside, Mr. Grewgious sat by the fire. He was a man carved from the same dry wood as the furniture around him, a conveyancer who had married the law only to divorce it shortly after. Ambition had been a spark he had extinguished years ago, replaced by the steady, smokeless heat of receiverships and the careful management of other people's debts. His life was a series of precise movements: filing papers, counting coins, ensuring that every fact remained complete and every figure accurate. To leave even a single digit obscure was a death sentence for his conscience.

Across the room, sitting in the shadows, was Bazzard. He was a creature of low luminescence, a man whose complexion suggested a constant hunger and whose hair grew in tangled knots like vines choking a wall. He possessed a strange gravitational pull toward Grewgious, sticking to his side like a familiar summoned by a spell that refused to break. Grewgious tolerated him with a patience that bordered on the miraculous, treating the gloom of the clerk as if it were a necessary component of the office's atmosphere.

"Mr. Drood," Bazzard announced, his voice flat against the silence.

Grewgious looked up, arranging his papers with the deliberate slowness of a man measuring time. "He has called?"

"He has called," Bazzard confirmed.

Grewgious gestured vaguely toward the door. "Show him in."

The door opened, admitting Edwin Drood. He entered carrying the weight of the fog outside, his eyes stinging as if ground with cayenne pepper. Grewgious watched him, noting the discomfort, the slight hunch of the shoulders.

"You are choking," Grewgious observed, his tone devoid of pity but full of practical concern. "Undo your wraps. Come, sit."

Edwin hesitated, then accepted the invitation to the easy-chair in the corner. The fire roared, licking at the moisture he brought in, trying to consume the chill.

"I look as if I have come to stay," Edwin smiled, though the expression did not reach his eyes.

"We can have dinner," Grewgious said, his voice dropping to a conspiratorial whisper that somehow carried perfectly in the small room. "Just across Holborn. Take your pepper here rather than outside. Sit."

Edwin glanced around, considering the prospect of a meal shared with a bachelor in chambers. "You are very kind."

"Not at all," Grewgious replied, his eyes twinkling with a sudden, bright idea. "You are kind to join issue with a man alone. And I shall ask Bazzard. He might object otherwise."

"Bazzard!" Grewgious called out.

"If I am ordered to dine, I will," Bazzard stated, his voice lacking any inflection of desire.

"You are not ordered," Grewgious corrected sharply. "You are invited."

"In that case," Bazzard conceded, "I do not care."

"Then it is settled," Grewgious said, issuing instructions with the rhythm of someone reciting a catechism. "Go to Furnival's Inn. Ask for the strongest soup, the best made-dish, a haunch of mutton, and whatever poultry is available. Whatever remains on the bill of fare."

Bazzard bowed stiffly and retreated to execute the command. Once the clerk was gone, Grewgious lowered his voice further. "I was delicate about employing him in the commissariat. He might dislike it."

"He seems to have his own way," Edwin noted.

"No," Grewgious said, shaking his head slowly. "If he had his own way, he would not be here."

Edwin considered this, wondering where Bazzard would be if he chose freedom, but Grewgious interrupted his thoughts. The lawyer stood up, adjusting his skirts, his back to the fire, creating a barrier between himself and the window.

"I assume you visited to inform me that you are proceeding downstairs, where I can assure you you are expected. And perhaps to discuss commissions regarding my ward? Or simply to sharpen my wits?"

"I called as an act of attention," Edwin replied.

"Attention," Grewgious repeated, leaning closer to the fire as if to burn the word into his own skin. "Not impatience?"

"Impatience?"

Grewgious straightened, realizing his attempt at archness had evaporated before it could take root, leaving only the stark reality of the situation. "I have been down there recently," he said, smoothing his coat. "That is why I said you are expected."

"Indeed," Edwin said, relaxing slightly. "Yes, I knew Pussy was watching for me."

"Do you keep a cat there?" Grewgious asked, genuinely puzzled.

Edwin flushed. "I call her Rosa Pussy."

"Pussy," Grewgious tested the word, his face unreadable. "Affable."

"A pet name," Edwin clarified, sensing a resistance he could not decipher.

"Umps," Grewgious nodded, offering a response that was simultaneously an agreement and a dismissal, leaving Edwin disoriented.

"Did she—" Edwin began, correcting himself mid-sentence. "Did Rosa tell you anything about the Landlesses?"

"The Landlesses?" Grewgious frowned. "An estate? A villa?"

"A brother and sister. The sister is at the Nuns' House and has become a close friend of..."

"Pussy's," Grewgious interjected, his face suddenly rigid.

"She is a strikingly handsome girl, sir. Surely you have heard of her?"

"Neither," Grewgious said firmly. "But here comes Bazzard."

The clerk returned, flanked by two waiters. One moved with the inertia of a statue, the other with the frantic energy of a bird caught in a storm. Together, they brought in enough fog to reignite the fire. The flying waiter moved with dizzying speed, polishing glasses, fetching soup, retrieving dishes, and returning with breathless urgency, while the immovable waiter stood still, critiquing every movement with a silent, stern gaze. Between flights, the flying waiter was reproached for bringing the weather indoors; the immovable waiter was blamed for forgetting items. Finally, the immovable waiter folded the tablecloth under his arm, delivering a look that screamed *the reward is mine*, and shoved the exhausted flyer out into the hallway.

The scene was a grotesque parody of bureaucratic efficiency, a living caricature of the Circumlocution Office itself. The fog served as the sauce for the meal, thickening the air with every sneeze and shiver.

Grewgious descended to the cellar and returned with bottles of wine that had slept in lands untouched by London's grey mist. They popped their corks with a cheerful defiance, dancing on the table as if eager to escape their long imprisonment. Yet, Grewgious remained unmoved. The alcohol did not loosen his features; instead, it seemed to highlight the dry lines etched into his face. He did not drink deeply, pouring the liquid over his own high-dried nature as if it were snuff.

When the meal concluded, Grewgious signaled Edwin to return to the corner. The lawyer turned his chair toward the fire, smoothing his hands over his face, studying Edwin with an intensity that felt like a physical pressure.

"Bazzard!"

"Yes, sir," the clerk responded, having consumed his share of food and silence with mechanical precision.

"Greetings, Bazzard. Mr. Edwin, success to Mr. Bazzard."

"Success to Mr. Bazzard," Edwin echoed, his enthusiasm sounding entirely manufactured, masking a question he dared not speak aloud.

The evening air in the Cathedral Close carried the damp weight of a city that refused to dry. Mr. Sapsea walked with his hands clasped behind his back, a posture designed to project the gravity of a man who believed he invented the concept of civic order. He viewed the churchyard not as a place of rest, but as a portfolio of his own benevolence. He imagined Mrs. Sapsea, his wife, as a tenant he had generously housed, a monument to his largesse standing silently in the gloom. Every stray face peering through the iron railings seemed to him a tribute, a blush of gratitude for the inscription he had commissioned. If a stranger hurried past, Sapsea interpreted the haste as a moral retreat, a blush of shame for having disturbed the sanctity of his domain.

His status had swollen recently; he was now Mayor of Cloisterham. Without figures like him, Sapsea reasoned, the entire architecture of society would collapse into a heap of meaningless rubble. He possessed the confidence of a man who believes he has discovered the laws of physics. Mayors, he knew, were knights of the tongue, launching verbal artillery into the dense fortifications of grammar. Sapsea intended to fire his own broadside. Rise, Sir Thomas Sapsea! Such was the salt of the earth, preserved in the brine of his own ego.

Earlier that day, his relationship with Mr. Jasper had deepened, forged in the fires of port, epigraphs, backgammon, and beef. Jasper had performed at the gatehouse, singing with a voice that tickled the air itself, creating a sonic landscape vast enough to swallow the silence. Sapsea admired this quality in the younger man: a readiness to absorb the wisdom of elders, a solidity at the core. That evening, Jasper had sung not the frivolous tunes favored by foreign powers, but a hymn of imperial dominance, urging the reduction of all other lands to dust, celebrating the unique virtue of their small, heart-of-oak nation. It was a performance of grandeur, yet delivered with the casual ease of a man discussing the weather.

Now, walking slowly along the wet pavement, Sapsea rounded a corner expecting to encounter a blushing stranger. Instead, he found the Dean, engaged in conversation with the Verger and Mr. Jasper. Sapsea bowed, and in that moment, he felt a surge of ecclesiastical authority that rivaled any Archbishop.

"You are evidently planning a book about us, Mr. Jasper," the Dean said, his voice carrying the weight of antiquity. "We are ancient, and we ought to make a good book. Our wealth lies in our years rather than our possessions, but perhaps you will include that in your narrative, highlighting our grievances."

Mr. Tope, ever the audience, chuckled appreciatively.

"I have no intention of becoming an author or an archaeologist, sir," Jasper replied, his tone light. "It is merely a whim. And even for this whim, Mr. Sapsea bears more responsibility than I do."

"How so, Mr. Mayor?" the Dean asked, nodding with friendly recognition.

"I am unaware," Sapsea said, scanning the surroundings for context, "what Your Reverence refers to." He then turned his attention minutely to the fabric of his own coat.

"Durdles," Mr. Tope suggested.

"Ay!" the Dean echoed. "Durdles, Durdles!"

"The truth is," Jasper explained, "my curiosity regarding the man was sparked by Mr. Sapsea. His ability to extract the reclusive and the peculiar from the shadows first drew my attention to him. You would not be surprised if you had witnessed Mr. Sapsea handling him in his own parlour."

"Oh!" cried Sapsea, catching the ball metaphorically tossed to him with effortless pomp. "Yes, yes. Your Reverence refers to that? Indeed. I introduced Durdles to Mr. Jasper. I regard Durdles as a Character."

"A character, Mr. Sapsea, whom you can turn inside out with a few skilled strokes," Jasper observed.

"Nay, not quite," the lumbering auctioneer corrected. "Perhaps I possess a slight influence over him, a glimpse into his nature. Your Reverence must remember that I have seen the world." Sapsea stepped back slightly to inspect his buttons, ensuring his armor was flawless.

"Well!" the Dean said, glancing around for his copyist. "I trust, Mr. Mayor, you will utilize your study of Durdles to persuade him not to break our Choir-Master's neck. We cannot afford it; his head and voice are too precious."

Mr. Tope erupted into respectful convulsions of laughter, settling into a murmuring agreement that breaking a neck for such a compliment would be an honor.

"I will take responsibility for Mr. Jasper's neck," Sapsea declared loftily. "I will instruct Durdles to be careful. He will heed my words. How is it currently endangered?" he asked, surveying the scene with magnificent patronage.

"Only because I proposed a moonlight expedition with Durdles among the tombs, vaults, and ruins," Jasper replied. "You suggested, when we first met, that as a lover of the picturesque, it might be worthwhile?"

"I remember!" the auctioneer exclaimed, genuinely believing his own recollection.

"Acting on your advice," Jasper continued, "I have taken several day excursions with this extraordinary old fellow. Tonight, we intend to conduct a moonlit exploration of the corners and holes."

"And here he is," the Dean announced.

Durdles emerged, slouching toward them with a dinner bundle in hand. Seeing the Dean, he removed his hat, tucked it under his arm, and prepared to slouch away. Sapsea intercepted him.

"Take care of my friend," Sapsea instructed.

"What friend of yours is dead?" Durdles asked, his voice thick with suspicion. "No orders have been issued for any deceased friend."

"I mean my living friend there."

"Oh! Him?" Durdles said. "He can look after himself, can Mister Jarsper."

"But you must take care of him too," Sapsea insisted.

Durdles surveyed the mayor from head to toe, his expression sullen despite the implied command.

"With respect to Your Reverence the Dean, if you mind your own business, Mr. Sapsea, Durdles will mind his own."

"You are out of temper," Sapsea said, winking at the assembly to demonstrate his mastery of the situation. "My friend concerns me, and Mr. Jasper is my friend. And you are my friend."

"Don't get into the habit of boasting," Durdles retorted, offering a grave warning. "It will grow on you."

[Illustration: Durdles cautions Mr. Sapsea against boasting]

"You are out of temper," Sapsea repeated, flushing slightly before sinking back into the crowd.

"I admit it," Durdles conceded. "I dislike liberties."

Sapsea winked a third time, signaling to the company that he had successfully managed the subordinate, and strode away from the dispute.

Durdles then bid the Dean good evening. Adding, as he replaced his hat, "You'll find me at home, Mister Jarsper, as agreed, when you require me; I'm heading home to clean myself," he slouched out of sight. This declaration of cleaning oneself was one of the man's inexplicable compromises with reality; he, his hat, his boots, and his clothes showed no sign of cleanliness, remaining uniformly coated in dust and grit.

As the lamplighter dotted the quiet Close with moving specks of light, climbing his precarious ladder beneath the sacred shadow of its inconvenience—a fixture generations had grown accustomed to, though Cloisterham would recoil at the thought of removing—it—the Dean retired to dinner, Mr. Tope to tea, and Mr. Jasper to his piano. Bathed only in the firelight, he chanted choir music in a low, beautiful voice for hours, continuing until darkness deepened and the moon began to rise.

Then, he closed the piano lid softly. Changing his coat for a pea-jacket, he secured a bottle in a large pocket, donned a low-crowned, flap-brimmed hat, and slipped quietly outside. Why did he move so softly tonight? No external reason presented itself. Was there a darker, sympathetic motive crouching within him?

He repaired to Durdles's unfinished dwelling, a hole in the city wall. Seeing a light within, he navigated carefully among the gravestones, monuments, and stony debris of the yard, already illuminated by the rising moon. Two journeyman masons had left their great saws embedded in blocks of stone nearby. Two skeletal figures from the Dance of Death might have grinned in the shadows of their sentry boxes, poised to slice away at the stones of the next two victims destined to die in Cloisterham. Presumably, the living masons thought little of this now, being alive and perhaps merry. It was difficult to guess which of the two was the more curious.

"Ho! Durdles!"

The light shifted, and he appeared at the door. He seemed to have been "cleaning himself" with a bottle, jug, and tumbler, for no other cleansing implements were visible in the bare brick room with its exposed rafters and unplastered ceiling.

"Are you ready?"

"I am ready, Mister Jarsper. Let the old ones come out if they dare when we go among their tombs. My spirit is ready for

The silence in Miss Twinkleton's establishment was not merely an absence of noise; it was a calculated suspension of time, a serene hush engineered by the approaching Christmas recess. What had once been termed "the half" by the erudite Miss Twinkleton herself—a phrase suggesting a partial, unfinished state—had evolved into "the term," a designation implying a strict, collegiate finality that would expire tomorrow. For several days, the discipline of the Nuns' House had relaxed into a peculiar, almost ritualistic informality. Suppers were served in bedrooms, where a dressed tongue was carved with scissors and circulated alongside curling tongs. Marmalade was distributed on plates fashioned from curlpaper, and cowslip wine was consumed from the small, squat measuring glass usually reserved for little Rickitts, the junior of weakly constitution, who took her steel drops daily.

Housemaids had been bribed with fragments of ribbon and pairs of shoes worn down at the heel to ignore crumbs found in beds. The airiest costumes were worn during these festive occasions, culminating in a performance by the daring Miss Ferdinand, who played a sprightly solo on a comb and curlpaper until she was suffocated by her own pillow under the hands of two flowing-haired executioners. These were not the only signs of dispersal. Boxes appeared in bedrooms—objects normally kept hidden—and a surprising amount of packing occurred, disproportionate to the actual contents. Odds and ends of cold cream, pomatum, and hairpins were freely distributed among the attendants. Under the guise of inviolable secrecy, confidences were exchanged regarding the golden youth of England expected to arrive "at home" on the first opportunity. Miss Giggles, deficient in sentiment, professed to acknowledge such homage by making faces at the golden youth, but she was outvoted by an immense majority.

On the eve of a recess, it was a point of honor that no one should sleep, and that ghosts should be encouraged by all possible means. This compact invariably collapsed; all the young ladies slept very soon and arose very early. The concluding ceremony took place at noon on the day of departure. Miss Twinkleton, supported by Mrs. Tisher, held a drawing-room in her own apartment—the globes already covered with brown Holland—where glasses of white wine and plates of cut pound cake were discovered on the table.

"Ladies," Miss Twinkleton began, "another revolving year has brought us round to that festive period at which the first feelings of our nature bounded in our... bosoms." She paused annually on the brink of that expression, substituting "hearts" instead. "Our hearts. Hem! Again a revolving year, ladies, has brought us to a pause in our studies—let us hope our greatly advanced studies—and, like the mariner in his bark, the warrior in his tent, the captive in his dungeon, and the traveler in his various conveyances, we yearn for home."

Did we say, on such an occasion, in the opening words of Mr. Addison's impressive tragedy: "The dawn is overcast, the morning lowers, And heavily in clouds brings on the day, The great, th' important day—"? Not so. From horizon to zenith all was *couleur de rose*, for all was redolent of relations and friends. Might *we* find *them* prospering as *we* expected; might *they* find *us* prospering as *they* expected! Ladies, we would now, with our love to one another, wish one another good-bye, and happiness, until we met again. And when the time should come for our resumption of those pursuits which (here a general depression set in all round), pursuits which, pursuits which;—then let us ever remember what was said by the Spartan General, in words too trite for repetition, at the battle it were superfluous to specify.

The handmaidens, in their best caps, handed the trays, and the young ladies sipped and crumbled. The bespoken coaches began to choke the street. Leave-taking was not long about. Miss Twinkleton, in saluting each young lady's cheek, confided to her an exceedingly neat letter, addressed to her next friend at law, "with Miss Twinkleton's best compliments" in the corner. This missive she handed with an air as if it had not the least connection with the bill, but were something in the nature of a delicate and joyful surprise.

So many times had Rosa seen such dispersals, and so very little did she know of any other Home, that she was contented to remain where she was, and was even better contented than ever before, having her latest friend with her. Yet, her latest friendship possessed a blank place in it of which she could not fail to be sensible. Helena Landless, having been a party to her brother's revelation about Rosa, and having entered into that compact of silence with Mr. Crisparkle, shrank from any allusion to Edwin Drood's name. Why she so avoided it was mysterious to Rosa, but she perfectly perceived the fact. But for the fact, she might have relieved her own little perplexed heart of some of its doubts and hesitations by taking Helena into her confidence. As it was, she had no such vent; she could only ponder on her own difficulties and wonder more and more why this avoidance of Edwin's name should persist, now that she knew—for so much Helena had told her—that a good understanding was to be re-established between the two young men when Edwin came down.

It would have made a pretty picture, so many pretty girls kissing Rosa in the cold porch of the Nuns' House, and that sunny little creature peeping out of it (unconscious of sly faces carved on spout and gable peeping at her), waving farewells to the departing coaches as if she represented the spirit of rosy youth abiding in the place to keep it bright and warm in its desertion. The hoarse High Street became musical with the cry, in various silvery voices, "Good-bye, Rosebud darling!" The effigy of Mr. Sapsea's father over the opposite doorway seemed to say to mankind: "Gentlemen, favour me with your attention to this charming little last lot left behind, and bid with a spirit worthy of the occasion!" Then the staid street, so unwontedly sparkling, youthful, and fresh for a few rippling moments, ran dry, and Cloisterham was itself again.

If Rosebud in her bower now waited Edwin Drood's coming with an uneasy heart, Edwin for his part was uneasy too. With far less force of purpose in his composition than the childish beauty, crowned by acclamation fairy queen of Miss Twinkleton's establishment, he had a conscience, and Mr. Grewgious had pricked it. That gentleman's steady convictions of what was right and what was wrong in such a case as his were neither to be frowned aside nor laughed aside. They would not be moved. But for the dinner in Staple Inn, and but for the ring he carried in the breast pocket of his coat, he would have drifted into their wedding-day without another pause for real thought, loosely trusting that all would go well, left alone. But that serious putting him on his truth to the living and the dead had brought him to a check. He must either give the ring to Rosa, or he must take it back. Once put into this narrowed way of action, it was curious that he began to consider Rosa's claims upon him more unselfishly than he had ever considered them before, and began to be less sure of himself than he had ever been in all his easy-going days.

"I will be guided by what she says, and by how we get on," was his decision, walking from the gatehouse to the Nuns' House. "Whatever comes of it, I will bear his words in mind, and try to be true to the living and the dead."

Rosa was dressed for walking. She expected him. It was a bright, frosty day, and Miss Twinkleton had already graciously sanctioned fresh air. Thus they got out together before it became necessary for either Miss Twinkleton, or the deputy high-priest Mrs. Tisher, to lay even so much as one of those usual offerings on the shrine of Propriety.

"My dear Eddy," said Rosa, when they had turned out of the High Street and had got among the quiet walks in the neighborhood of the Cathedral and the river. "I want to say something very serious to you. I have been thinking about it for a long, long time."

"I want to be serious with you too, Rosa dear. I mean to be serious and earnest."

"Thank you, Eddy. And you will not think me unkind because I begin, will you? You will not think I speak for myself only, because I speak first? That would not be generous, would it? And I know you are generous!"

He said, "I hope I am not ungenerous to you, Rosa." He called her Pussy no more. Never again.

"And there is no fear," pursued Rosa, "of our quarrelling, is there? Because, Eddy," clasping her hand on his arm, "we have so much reason to be very lenient to each other!"

"We will be, Rosa."

"That's a dear good boy! Eddy, let us be courageous. Let us change to brother and sister from this day forth."

"Never be husband and wife?"

"Never!"

Neither spoke again for a little while. But after that pause he said, with some effort:

"Of course I know that this has been in both our minds, Rosa, and of course I am in honour bound

The air in Cloisterham held the scent of dried fruit and damp stone, a heavy perfume of Christmas Eve. The city seemed to have shrunk under the weight of its own traditions, a small, enclosed world where the cathedral clock and the cawing of rooks served as the only rhythm for those returning from the outer darkness. For them, the rustling of leaves and the smell of the Close were ghosts from a childhood that had already ended, circling back to haunt the final moments of a life nearly completed.

Inside the shops, the profusion was excessive. Currants, raisins, candied peel, and moist sugar lay in lavish piles. A mistletoe hung in the greengrocer's door, an obscene green flag in a grey world. There was a Twelfth Night cake, a pathetic thing crowned with a Harlequin, offered for a shilling per soul. The atmosphere buzzed with a cheap gallantry, a frantic attempt to celebrate before the inevitable collapse. The High School was empty; the scholars had fled to Miss Twinkleton's, where the handmaidens fluttered behind glass, becoming skittish and artificial in their confinement.

Tonight, three figures were destined to converge at the gatehouse. The question remained: how did each survive the day leading up to that collision?

Neville Landless sat in his quiet room, the fire low, the shadows long. He was not reading for pleasure but performing a ritual of purification. Until two hours past noon, he wrote and read with a concentration that bordered on religious fervor. Then came the clearing. He swept his table, arranged his books, and burned every stray paper, every untidy accumulation. No note survived unless it bore directly on his studies. He stripped his drawers bare, leaving nothing but the essential.

From his wardrobe, he selected ordinary wear, including sturdy shoes and thick socks for the road. He packed these into a new knapsack bought earlier that day in the High Street. Alongside it went a heavy walking-stick, iron-shod at the bottom, designed for a grip that would not slip. He tested the weight, swung it, balanced it, and placed it on the window seat alongside the bag.

He dressed and stepped out, only to pause on the staircase. He had met Mr. Crisparkle, who emerged from his own room. Neville reached for his stick, intending to take it with him. Mr. Crisparkle watched, smiling, and removed the object from his hand.

"You choose a stick?" the older man asked.

"Really, I don't understand the subject," Neville replied. "I chose it for its weight."

"Too heavy, Neville. Much too heavy."

"To rest upon in a long walk, sir?"

"Rest upon?" Mr. Crisparkle repeated, shifting into a pedestrian stance. "You do not rest upon it; you merely balance with it."

"I shall learn with practice, sir. I have not lived in a walking country."

"True," said Mr. Crisparkle. "Train yourself, and we will cover many miles together. I could leave you nowhere now. Will you return before dinner?"

"I think not, as we dine early."

Mr. Crisparkle nodded, his expression radiating a confident ease that felt calculated.

Neville descended to the Nuns' House. He requested that Miss Landless be told of his arrival, then waited at the gate, refusing to cross the threshold. He was on parole; he could not obstruct Rosa's path.

Helena joined him instantly, mindful of the agreement they had made. They met with affection but avoided lingering. Walking toward the upper inland country, Neville spoke.

"I am not treading upon forbidden ground, Helena," he said, turning as they walked. "You will understand in a moment that I cannot help referring to... my infatuation."

"Had you not better avoid it, Neville? You know I can hear nothing."

"You can hear, my dear, what Mr. Crisparkle has heard, and heard with approval."

"Yes; I can hear so much."

"Well, it is this. I am unsettled and unhappy, and I am conscious of unsettling others. How do I know that, but for my presence, you and the rest of that former party might be dining cheerfully in Minor Canon Corner tomorrow? Indeed, they probably would be. I see clearly that I am not high in the old lady's opinion. I am an irksome clog upon her orderly hospitality, especially at this season, when I must be kept apart from that person. There is a reason for my separation, an unfavorable reputation preceding me with another, and so on. I have put this gently to Mr. Crisparkle, knowing his self-denying ways, but I have put it. What I stressed more is that I am engaged in a miserable struggle with myself. A little change, a little absence, may allow me to emerge stronger. So, with the weather bright and hard, I am going on a walking expedition. I intend to remove myself from everyone's way, my own included, tomorrow morning."

"When to come back?"

"In a fortnight."

"And going quite alone?"

"I am much better without company, even if there were anyone but you to bear me company, my dear Helena."

"Mr. Crisparkle entirely agrees, you say?"

"Entirely. At first, perhaps, he thought it a moody scheme, harmful to a brooding mind. But we took a moonlight walk last Monday to discuss it. I showed him that I wanted to conquer myself. Once this evening is over, it is better that I be away than here. I could hardly avoid meeting certain people walking together here, and that would do no good. It is not the way to forget. In a fortnight, that chance will probably be over. When it arises again, I can go away then. Furthermore, I feel hopeful of bracing exercise and wholesome fatigue. You know Mr. Crisparkle respects such things for his own sound mind and body. His spirit is not likely to maintain one law for himself and another for me. He yielded when convinced of my sincerity. With his full consent, I start tomorrow morning. Early enough to be out of the streets, out of hearing of the bells when the good people go to church."

Helena considered this. If Mr. Crisparkle approved, she would approve; but she did so originally, from her own mind, viewing it as a healthy project, a sincere attempt at self-correction. She pitied him, poor fellow, for going solitary on the great Christmas festival, but she felt it was more important to encourage him. And she did.

"He will write to her?"

"He will write every alternate day and tell her all his adventures."

"Does he send clothes in advance?"

"My dear Helena, no. Travel like a pilgrim, with wallet and staff. My wallet—or knapsack—is packed and ready. And here is my staff!"

He handed it to her. She noted its heaviness, matching Mr. Crisparkle's observation, and asked what wood it was. "Iron-wood," he answered.

Until this point, he had been cheerful. Perhaps carrying his case with her, presenting it in its brightest aspect, had roused his spirits. Perhaps succeeding in this display was followed by a sudden revulsion. As the day closed and the city lights began to flicker into existence, he grew depressed.

"I wish I were not going to this dinner, Helena."

"Dear Neville, is it worth caring much about? Think how soon it will be over."

"How soon it will be over!" he repeated, gloomily. "Yes. But I don't like it."

"There may be a moment's awkwardness," she suggested cheerfully, "but it can only last a moment. You are quite sure of yourself."

"I wish I felt as sure of everything else as I feel of myself," he answered.

"How strangely you speak, dear! What do you mean?"

"Helena, I don't know. I only know that I don't like it. What a strange dead weight there is in the air!"

She pointed to the copperous clouds beyond the river, noting the rising wind. He scarcely spoke again until they reached the gate of the Nuns' House. When they parted, she did not enter immediately but remained watching him along the street. Twice he passed the gatehouse, reluctant to enter. Finally, as the cathedral clock chimed a quarter past twelve, he hurried inside with a rapid turn.

So he ascended the postern stairs.

Edwin Drood passed a solitary day. Something of deeper moment than he had anticipated had slipped out of his life; in the silence of his chamber, he had wept for it the previous night. Though the image of Miss Landless hovered in the background of his mind, the pretty, affectionate creature, firmer and wiser than he had supposed, occupied its stronghold. With some misgiving regarding his own unworthiness, he thought of her and of what they might have been to one another if he had been more earnest sooner, if he had valued her higher, if he had studied the right way to appreciate and enhance his lot instead of accepting it as an inheritance of course. Yet, despite the sharp heartache, the vanity and caprice of youth sustained that handsome figure in the twilight of his thoughts.

Rosa's look when they parted at the gate had been curious. Did it mean she saw below the surface of his thoughts, down into their twilight depths? Scarcely. It was a look of astonished and keen inquiry. He decided he could not understand it, though it

The bells of Cloisterham tolled for morning service, marking the passage of time with a rhythm that seemed to ignore the distance Neville Landless had covered. He was eight miles away, his stomach a hollow drumbeat demanding sustenance. He had begun his journey on a crust of bread, a meager fuel for a body moving with urgent purpose. He halted at the roadside tavern, the sign of The Tilted Wagon, seeking the alchemy of tea, toast, and bacon.

Inside, the atmosphere was thick with the humidity of neglect. The wagon itself, perched atop a hill, offered a view of a landscape marred by damp hoofprints and trodden straw. A scolding landlady managed a baby in the bar, one sock red, the other missing—a visual testament to the establishment's chaotic economy. On shelves, cheese lay abandoned beside a mouldy cloth and a green-handled knife resting in a cast-iron canoe. Bread, pale and weeping crumbs, suffered a shipwreck in another vessel nearby. Linen hung in a limbo of half-washed, half-dried states, leading a public life of exposure. Everything here was designed to rhyme with 'mug,' yet it failed to provide the promised entertainment for man or beast. Neville, however, was not critical. He accepted the banality, drank from the available vessels, and prepared to continue his march.

Leaving the tavern, he paused at a quarter-mile mark, weighing the direct road against a cart track cutting through a breezy heath. The latter path wound between high hedgerows, promising a shortcut across a slope, though the ascent was steep and rutted. He chose the toil.

As he labored upward, the silence of the heath was breached. Pedestrians emerged behind him, moving with a pace that betrayed intent. Four passed him quickly; four slowed, trailing like shadows; and six turned back, retreating at a frantic rate. Neville watched the four approaching, then the four ahead. They locked gazes. He resumed walking, but the formation held firm. When they spilled onto the open slope, maintaining their ranks regardless of his lateral movements, the illusion of solitude shattered. He stopped, testing the perimeter. They stopped with him.

"Why do you attend upon me?" Neville asked the assembly. "Are you a pack of thieves?"

"Don't answer him," one voice commanded, though the speaker remained unseen. "Better be quiet."

"Better be quiet?" Neville repeated, anger rising like bile. "Who said so?"

Silence answered.

"It is good advice, whoever this skulking voice belongs to," Neville snapped. "I will not submit to being penned between four men yonder and four men here. I intend to pass those four in front."

No movement. No retreat.

"If eight men, or four, or two, set upon one," Neville declared, his voice cracking with rage, "the victim has no choice but to strike. By the Lord, I will do it if I am interrupted further!"

Shouldering his heavy stick, he surged forward to bypass the lead group. The largest figure shifted instantly, intercepting him with dexterity. The stick fell smartly, meeting resistance.

"Let him be!" the man whispered, suppressing the violence in his tone. "Fair play! His frame is slight compared to mine, and he carries a weight strapped to his back. Leave him. I will handle him."

They rolled together on the grass, a close combat that smeared blood across their faces. Eventually, the larger man disengaged, kneeling from Neville's chest. "There! Now take him arm-in-arm, any two of you!"

Compliance was immediate.

"As to our reputation as thieves, Mr. Landless," the speaker said, wiping blood from his lip, "you know better than that at midday. We would not have touched you had you not forced us. We are escorting you to the high road, where help awaits if you seek it. Someone, wipe his face; look how it trickles down him!"

Once cleansed, Neville recognized the speaker: Joe, the driver of the Cloisterham omnibus, a man he had glimpsed only once upon his arrival.

"My recommendation for the present is silence, Mr. Landless," Joe instructed. "You will find a friend awaiting you at the high road—he went ahead via the alternate route when we divided. Say nothing until you reach him. Bring the stick along, someone else, and let us move!"

Bewildered, Neville offered no words. Flanked by his conductors, whose arms gripped his own, he walked on in a dreamlike trance until they rejoined the high road and a gathering crowd. Among them were the men who had retreated earlier, and at the center stood Mr. Jasper and Mr. Crisparkle. The escorts delivered Neville to the Minor Canon, releasing him as a gesture of deference.

"What is this? What is happening? I feel as though I have lost my senses!" Neville cried, surrounded.

"Where is my nephew?" Jasper demanded, his voice wild.

"Where is your nephew?" Neville echoed, confusion clouding his features. "Why do you ask me?"

"I ask you," Jasper retorted sharply, "because you were the last person in his company, and he is nowhere to be found."

"Not to be found!" Neville gasped, aghast.

"Stay, stay," Crisparkle interjected gently. "Permit me, Jasper. Mr. Neville, you are confounded. Collect your thoughts. It is vital you do so. Attend to me."

"I will try, sir, but I seem mad."

"You left Mr. Jasper last night with Edwin Drood?"

"Yes."

"At what hour?"

"Was it twelve o'clock?" Neville asked, hand pressed to his throbbing temple, turning to Jasper.

"Quite right," Crisparkle confirmed. "The hour Mr. Jasper has already stated. You went down to the river together?"

"Undoubtedly. To observe the wind's action there."

"What followed? How long did you remain?"

"About ten minutes, perhaps less. We then walked to your house, and he took his leave at the door."

"Did he mention returning to the river?"

"No. He said he was going straight back."

The bystanders exchanged glances, their eyes settling on Crisparkle. Jasper, who had been watching Neville with intense scrutiny, lowered his voice. "What are those stains upon his dress?"

All eyes turned to the blood soaking Neville's clothes.

"And here are the same stains upon this stick!" Jasper exclaimed, seizing the weapon from the man holding it. "I know this stick to be his; he carried it last night. What does this mean?"

"In the name of God, explain!" Crisparkle urged.

"That man and I," Neville pointed to his former adversary, "struggled for the stick moments ago. You can see the matching marks on him. What was I to suppose, when molested by eight people, when they offered no explanation?"

They admitted their discretion in silence and confirmed the struggle. Yet, the very witnesses regarded the drying smears on Neville's coat with dark, unreadable expressions.

"We must return, Neville," Crisparkle said. "You will be glad to come back to clear yourself?"

"Of course, sir."

"Mr. Landless will walk at my side," the Minor Canon announced, surveying the group. "Come, Neville!"

They set off, the others straggling behind at varying distances. Jasper walked on Neville's opposite side, never breaking contact. He remained silent while Crisparkle repeated his inquiries and Neville reiterated his answers, despite the Minor Canon's attempts to provoke explanatory conjecture. Jasper's fixed demeanor refused engagement. Near the city, when Crisparkle suggested visiting the Mayor immediately, Neville nodded sternly but spoke not a word until they entered Mr. Sapsea's parlour.

Upon learning the circumstances necessitated a voluntary statement before the Mayor, Jasper broke his silence. He placed his entire reliance on Mr. Sapsea's penetration. Unless the Mayor could suggest a reason for his nephew's sudden flight, Jasper deferred judgment. Unless drowning in the dark appeared likely, he deferred. He washed his hands of all suspicion unless the Mayor deemed it inseparable from Neville, his last companion and current antagonist. His own mind, distracted by dismal apprehension, was unsafe; Mr. Sapsea's was not.

Mr. Sapsea opined the case possessed a dark, distinctly Un-English complexion. After wandering into a dense haze of nonsense unsuitable for a mayor, he arrived at the brilliant conclusion that killing a fellow creature meant destroying something that did not belong to you. He hovered on the brink of issuing a warrant for Neville's committal under grave suspicion but was restrained by Crisparkle's indignant protest, who guaranteed Neville's presence in his own home and availability for production. Jasper interpreted this as a directive to scour the river, examine its banks rigorously, dispatch particulars to outlying regions and London, and circulate placards imploring Edwin Drood—if he had withdrawn from his uncle's society—to reveal himself to alleviate his grieving kinsman's sorrow. These measures were enacted immediately.

It was difficult to discern who bore greater horror: Neville Landless or John Jasper. Yet, Jasper's position compelled activity, while Neville's enforced passivity; the difference was negligible. Both were bowed down, broken by the weight of the mystery.

At the break of dawn, men worked the river. Others, mostly volunteers, inspected the banks. Throughout the day, the search persisted: barges with poles and drags, nets,

The air in the dining room was thick with the scent of roasted poultry and the metallic tang of fear. John Jasper lay in an easy-chair, his body a map of recent collapse, while Mr. and Mrs. Tope hovered like anxious birds around him. Between them sat Mr. Grewgious, a figure carved from wood and silence, his hands resting rigidly upon his knees. He watched Jasper recover with the detached scrutiny of a clockmaker inspecting a broken gear.

"You've come to nicely now, sir," Mrs. Tope murmured, her voice trembling with a theatrical pity. "Thoroughly worn out. No wonder!"

"A man cannot have his rest broken," Mr. Grewgious recited, his tone flat and instructional, "nor his mind cruelly tormented, nor his body overtaxed by fatigue, without being thoroughly worn out."

Jasper, weak and pale, offered a faint apology for alarming them. Grewgious dismissed it with a repetitive nod, offering thanks that sounded less like gratitude and more like a refusal to acknowledge the gravity of the situation. Mrs. Tope, however, saw only a hungry guest. She announced the arrival of wine, jelly, and a wing of roast fowl that had been reheated twenty times, perhaps once. As she bustled to serve, Grewgious emitted a sharp snort—a sound devoid of meaning, capable of signifying agreement, denial, or total absence.

Jasper ate and drank with a voracious indifference, consuming the food not to savor it, but to anchor himself against the vertigo of his thoughts. Grewgious remained upright, a statue of polite imperturbability, refusing to engage in any discourse that might reveal the cracks in his composure.

When Jasper finally pushed his plate aside, he spoke. "Do you know," he asked, his voice regaining a thread of strength, "that I find some crumbs of comfort in the communication which has so amazed me?"

"Do you?" Grewgious replied, the unspoken clause hanging heavy in the air: *I do not.*

Jasper elaborated. After the shock of learning that his beloved Edwin had withheld a devastating secret, a secret that destroyed the castles he had built for the boy, a sliver of light had pierced the darkness. "Supposing him to have disappeared of his own act," Jasper argued, tracing the logic with desperate fervor, "is not his disappearance more accountable? Less cruel? The fact that he had just parted from your ward provides a reason. It relieves the cruelty from her."

Grewgious assented.

"And even as to me," Jasper continued, his face brightening with a dangerous hope, "he knew you were coming. He knew you were entrusted with this truth. Therefore, he foresaw the inferences I would draw. Even the cruelty to me—John Jasper, Music Master—vanishes!"

Again, Grewgious nodded.

"I begin to believe it possible," Jasper declared, clasping his hands, "that he may have disappeared of his own accord, and that he may yet be alive and well."

At that moment, Mr. Crisparkle entered. Jasper repeated his theory to the Minor Canon. Crisparkle, though troubled, found the argument plausible. He recalled his own conversation with Mr. Sapsea, where Jasper had insisted there was no quarrel between Edwin and Neville Landless at their last meeting. Yet, Crisparkle carried a private burden. He knew of Neville's fiery temper, incited by a romantic delusion regarding Jasper's niece. He remembered two specific incidents: a second outbreak of anger against Edwin, and the jealous flame burning in Neville's breast. These facts weighed heavily against Neville's innocence, yet Crisparkle feared that voicing them now would be tantamount to constructing a falsehood to replace the truth.

Watching Jasper's hopeful transformation, Crisparkle hesitated no longer. He addressed Grewgious, testifying to Jasper's integrity and affirming his own belief in Edwin's clearance from suspicion. He admitted that despite knowing Neville's volatile nature and his infatuation with the girl, he maintained his faith in the young man. This declaration struck Jasper like a blow; he paled, yet clung tenaciously to the hope that Edwin had simply absconded of his own wild will.

Crisparkle left the room, his mind unsettled, and took a night walk. He wandered aimlessly until the sound of falling water reached him—the Cloisterham Weir. Starlight illuminated the scene. The water crashed over the weir with its usual rhythm, a cold, indifferent noise. Crisparkle reasoned with himself, searching for the source of his unease. He listened, he looked, he strained his hawk-like eyes. Nothing was visible. Nothing was audible.

Yet, the place felt haunted.

He returned at sunrise. The frost bit at his skin, but the morning clarity allowed him to survey the weir in its minutest details. Suddenly, his gaze locked onto a single spot. Something glistened there, stationary amidst the moving water. It was not a reflection.

Without hesitation, Crisparkle stripped off his clothes and plunged into the icy depths. He swam to the spot, climbing the timbers to retrieve a gold watch caught in the interstices of the wood. Engraved on its back were the letters: *E. D.*

He dove again, searching for the body, but found only a shirt-pin stuck in the mud.

Returning to Cloisterham, Crisparkle took Neville Landless with him and proceeded straight to the Mayor. Jasper was summoned. The watch and pin were identified. The narrative shifted instantly. Neville was detained, and the wildest frenzies of evil report rose against him. He was painted as a vindictive monster, a man of violent nature who had nearly brought Mrs. Crisparkle to her grave. The Mayor recounted Neville's past atrocities—his whipping of nomadic "Natives" across the globe, his threats to destroy lives, his importation by a Philanthropist who believed him to be a danger to the smallest number. In the court of public opinion, the missing boy was presumed murdered, and the lover was presumed guilty.

The air in the London office of the Haven of Philanthropy was thick with the scent of stale ink and unspoken grievances. Half a year had elapsed since the last significant movement, and Mr. Crisparkle sat in a waiting room that felt less like a sanctuary and more like a holding cell for the weary. He waited for an audience with Mr. Honeythunder.

In his youth, amidst the athletic exercises of his college days, Mr. Crisparkle had known the professors of the Noble Art of fisticuffs. He had witnessed their gloved gatherings, where the clash of leather gloves echoed the rhythm of a drum. Now, observing the men who passed through the Haven, he found a disturbing symmetry. The phrenological contours of the Philanthropists' backs of heads mirrored those of the pugilists perfectly. Both groups possessed an exaggerated development of the organs responsible for the impulse to strike. These professors moved with an aggressive readiness, poised to engage any novice who happened to loiter nearby, much like the fighters of the Fancy. Preparations were underway for a moral exhibition on the rural circuit, with various backers promoting specific speakers as if they were heavyweight champions destined for a knockout. The intended resolutions were crafted with the tactical precision of boxing rounds. Among the officials, dressed in somber black, Mr. Crisparkle recognized the silhouette of a former benefactor, once famous as Frosty-faced Fogo, who had formerly managed the magic circle of ropes and stakes.

Yet, the resemblance ended there. The Philanthropists were poorly trained, bloated with what experts termed "Suet Pudding," lacking the temperamental steel of the boxers. Worse, their vocabulary was far rougher, and their code of conduct permitted actions that would shock the ring: boring opponents to distraction, striking a fallen man, kicking, stamping, and gouging without mercy. In these brutal particulars, the professors of philanthropy were far more noble than the professors of the fist.

Lost in this comparison, watching the crowd shuffle past—each individual seemingly engaged in the futile act of snatching value from another while offering nothing in return—Crisparkle's name was called. A shabby, underpaid stipendiary ushered him to Mr. Honeythunder's room. The usher was so destitute that he could scarcely have performed worse had he served a declared enemy of humanity.

"Sit down," commanded Mr. Honeythunder. His voice was tremendous, resonating with the authority of a schoolmaster addressing a recalcitrant boy.

Crisparkle seated himself. Honeythunder signed the final entries of a stack of circulars, summoning families without means to contribute instantly or face damnation. Another shabby employee collected the forms into a basket and departed.

"Now, Mr. Crisparkle," Honeythunder said, turning his chair halfway around. He squared his arms, resting his hands on his knees, his brows knitted in a expression that suggested he intended to finish the business quickly. "We entertain different views regarding the sanctity of human life."

"Do we?" Crisparkle replied.

"We do, sir."

"Might I inquire what your views are on that subject?"

"That human life is a thing to be held sacred, sir."

"And what are your views?"

"They are best known to yourself," Honeythunder roared, squaring his arms further.

"Candidly, I admit that. But you stated we differed. Therefore, you must have attributed some views to me. Which ones?"

"Here is a man—a young man," Honeythunder continued, as if the mention of youth compounded the tragedy—"swept off the face of the earth by a deed of violence. What do you call that?"

"Murder," Crisparkle answered.

"What do you call the perpetrator?"

"A murderer."

"I am glad to hear you admit so much," Honeythunder retorted, lowering his voice with malicious satisfaction. "I did not expect it."

"Please explain why those expressions are unjustifiable."

"I do not sit here to be browbeaten," Honeythunder shouted.

"As the only other person present, no one knows that better than I do," Crisparkle said quietly. "But I must interrupt your explanation."

"Murder!" Honeythunder resumed, entering a boisterous reverie, folding his arms and nodding with abhorrent reflection after every syllable. "Bloodshed! Abel! Cain! I hold no terms with Cain. I repudiate the red hand with a shudder."

Instead of rising to cheer, Crisparkle merely crossed his legs and said mildly, "Do not let me interrupt your explanation when you begin it."

"The Commandments say, no murder. NO murder, sir!" Honeythunder paused platformally, as if correcting Crisparkle for implying a license to kill.

"And they also say, you shall bear no false witness," Crisparkle observed.

"E-enough!" Honeythunder bellowed, with a solemnity that would have silenced a theater. "My late wards are now of age, and I am released from a trust I cannot contemplate without horror. There are the accounts you accepted on their behalf, and the balance you must receive. Let me tell you, sir, I wish that as a man and a Minor Canon, you were better employed." He nodded thrice, emphasizing the phrase.

Crisparkle rose, his face flushed but his composure intact.

"Mr. Honeythunder," he said, picking up the papers, "whether I am better or worse employed is a matter of taste. You might think I would be better employed enrolling myself as a member of your Society."

"Ay, indeed," Honeythunder shook his head threateningly. "It would have been better for you if you had done that long ago!"

"I think otherwise."

"Or," Honeythunder countered, "I might think one of your profession better employed discovering and punishing guilt rather than leaving that duty to a layman."

"My profession teaches that its first duty is toward those in necessity and tribulation, the desolate and the oppressed," Crisparkle said. "However, since I have determined that it is not my role to make professions, I say no more of that. But I owe it to Mr. Neville, and to his sister, to tell you that I know I understood Mr. Neville's mind and heart fully at the time of this occurrence. Without concealing what was tragic or requiring correction, I am certain his tale is true. Feeling this certainty, I befriend him. As long as it lasts, I will. If any consideration could shake this resolve, I would be so ashamed of my meanness that no man's or woman's good opinion could compensate for the loss of my own."

He spoke with a modesty akin to a schoolboy keeping a wicket in a breezy field. There was no self-assertion, only a staunch adherence to duty.

"Then who did the deed?" Honeythunder asked abruptly.

"Heaven forbid," Crisparkle replied, "that in clearing one man I should lightly criminate another! I accuse no one."

"Tcha!" Honeythunder ejaculated with disgust. This was contrary to the Brotherhood's usual principles. "And remember, sir, you are not a disinterested witness."

"How am I an interested party?" Crisparkle smiled innocently.

"There was a stipend paid to you for your pupil, which may have warped your judgment," Honeythunder said coarsely.

"Perhaps I expect to retain it?" Crisparkle returned, enlightened. "Do you mean that too?"

"Well, sir," the professional Philanthropist stood up, thrusting his hands into his pockets, "I do not measure people for caps. If people find hats that fit them, they can wear them. That is their lookout, not mine."

Crisparkle eyed him with just indignation.

"Mr. Honeythunder, I hoped to avoid commenting on the introduction of platform manners into private life. But you have provided such a specimen that silence would make me complicit. They are detestable."

"They don't suit you, I dare say."

"They are," Crisparkle repeated, ignoring the interruption, "detestable. They violate the justice due to Christians and the restraints due to gentlemen. You assume a great crime was committed by one I devoutly believe innocent. Because I disagree, what is your resource? To turn upon me, charging that I lack sense of the crime's enormity and am its accomplice! Next time, taking me as your opponent elsewhere, you set up a credulity, a unanimous profession of faith in a ridiculous delusion. I decline to believe it, and you fall back on claiming I believe nothing—that because I refuse to bow to your false god, I deny the true one! Another time, you discover War is a calamity and propose abolishing it with twisted resolutions tossed into the air like a kite's tail. I admit no discovery to you, possess no faith in your remedy. Again, you represent me as reveling in battlefield horrors like a fiend. Another time, you propose punishing the sober for the drunken. I claim consideration for the sober's comfort, and you proclaim I have a depraved desire to turn Heaven's creatures into swine! In all such cases, your movers, seconders, and supporters run amuck like mad Malays, attributing base motives recklessly and quoting figures as wilfully one-sided as an account showing only debt or only credit. Therefore, Mr. Honeythunder, I consider the platform a bad example and a bad school in public life; but carried into private life,

The stranger arrived in Cloisterham with the deliberate silence of a ghost entering a house that had been waiting for him. He was a figure of striking, almost theatrical ordinariness: white hair, black eyebrows, dressed in a tight blue surtout that strained against a buff waistcoat and gray trousers. He possessed a military posture, though it was the rigid stance of a man who had long since surrendered his command to the weight of his own insignificance.

He checked into the Crozier, the town's orthodox hotel, depositing a portmanteau that seemed to contain nothing but the dust of his travels. In the coffee-room, standing with his back to an empty fireplace while he waited for a fried sole, a veal cutlet, and a pint of sherry, he announced himself to the universe. He declared himself an idle dog living upon his means, a man intending to settle permanently in this picturesque old city for a month or two. The waiter, whose business was chronically slack and whose attention was as porous as the cathedral walls, absorbed the entire declaration without registering a single syllable of consequence.

"This gentleman," the waiter noted mentally, "has a head disproportionately large for his shoulders, and a shock of white hair so thick and ample it defies gravity."

"I suppose," the stranger asked, shaking his hair with the mechanical rhythm of a Newfoundland preparing for a meal, "that a fair lodging for a single buffer might be found in these parts?"

"Something old," the stranger specified. "Take my hat down for a moment from that peg. Look inside. What do you see written there?"

"Datchery," the waiter read aloud.

"Now you know my name," the stranger said. "Dick Datchery. Hang it up again. I require something old. Something odd and out of the way. Something venerable, architectural, and inconvenient."

"We have a good choice of inconvenient lodgings," the waiter replied, displaying a modest confidence in the town's resources that bordered on arrogance. "Indeed, I have no doubt we could suit you, however particular you might be. But 'architectural'? That seems to trouble your head, sir."

"Anything Cathedral-y, now," Mr. Datchery suggested.

"Mr. Tope," the waiter said, brightening as he rubbed his chin. "He would be the likeliest party to inform in that line."

"Who is Mr. Tope?"

The waiter explained that he was the Verger, and that Mrs. Tope had once offered lodgings, though the venture had failed so completely that her window-bill—a Cloisterham institution for years—had simply vanished, presumably tumbling down one day and never being replaced.

"I'll call on Mrs. Tope after dinner," Mr. Datchery decided.

After his meal, he followed the waiter's fatally precise directions. The Crozier, an establishment of a most retiring disposition, ensured that the path was easily lost. Mr. Datchery soon found himself boggling about the Cathedral Tower, caught in a feverish oscillation between warmth and cold. He felt warm when he glimpsed the Tower; he felt cold when it receded. Like children playing a game involving hot boiled beans and very good butter, his emotional temperature depended entirely on the visibility of the spire.

He grew very cold indeed when he discovered a fragment of burial ground where an unhappy sheep grazed. The animal was unfortunate because a hideous small boy was stoning it through the railings. The boy had already lamed one leg and was enthusiastically working toward breaking the other three, driven by a benevolent, sportsmanlike purpose to bring the beast down.

"'T'im agin!" cried the boy as the sheep leaped, leaving a dint in its wool.

"Let him be!" Mr. Datchery interjected. "Don't you see you have lamed him?"

"Yer lie," the sportsman retorted. "'E went and lamed isself. I see 'im do it, and I giv' 'im a shy as a Widdy-warning to 'im not to go a-bruisin' 'is master's mutton any more."

"Come here."

"I won't; I'll come when yer can ketch me."

"Stay there then, and show me which is Mr. Tope's."

"How can I stay here and show you which is Topeseses, when Topeseses is t'other side the Kinfreederal, and over the crossings, and round ever so many comers? Stoo-pid! Ya-a-ah!"

"Show me where it is, and I'll give you something."

"Come on, then."

The brisk dialogue concluded with the boy leading the way until they reached an arched passage.

"Lookie yonder. You see that there winder and door?"

"That's Tope's?"

"Yer lie; it ain't. That's Jarsper's."

"Indeed?" Mr. Datchery observed with a second look of genuine interest.

"Yes, and I ain't a-goin' no nearer 'IM, I tell yer."

"Why not?"

"'Cos I ain't a-goin' to be lifted off my legs and 'ave my braces bust and be choked; not if I knows it, and not by 'Im. Wait till I set a jolly good flint a-flyin' at the back o' 'is jolly old 'ed some day! Now look t'other side the harch; not the side where Jarsper's door is; t'other side."

"A little way in, o' that side, there's a low door, down two steps. That's Topeseses with 'is name on a hoval plate."

"Good. See here," Mr. Datchery produced a shilling. "You owe me half of this."

"Yer lie! I don't owe yer nothing; I never seen yer."

"I tell you you owe me half of this, because I have no sixpence in my pocket. So the next time you meet me you shall do something else for me, to pay me."

"All right, give us 'old."

"What is your name, and where do you live?"

"Deputy. Travellers' Twopenny, 'cross the green."

The boy instantly darted off with the shilling, lest Mr. Datchery should repent, stopping only at a safe distance to goad him with a demon dance expressive of its irrevocability.

Mr. Datchery, removing his hat to shake his white hair once more, seemed quite resigned and proceeded whither he had been directed.

Mr. Tope's official dwelling communicated by an upper stair with Mr. Jasper's, hence Mrs. Tope's attendance on that gentleman. It was of very modest proportions and partook of the character of a cool dungeon. Its ancient walls were massive, and the rooms seemed to have been dug out of them rather than designed with any reference to them. The main door opened onto a chamber of no describable shape with a groined roof, which in turn opened onto another chamber of identical confusion. Their windows were small and embedded in the thickness of the walls. These two chambers, close in atmosphere and swarthy in illumination, were the apartments Mrs. Tope had long offered to an unappreciative city.

Mr. Datchery, however, was more appreciative. He calculated that if he sat with the main door open, he would enjoy the passing society of all comers to and fro by the gateway and possess sufficient light. He reasoned that if Mr. and Mrs. Tope, living overhead, used for their own egress and ingress a little side stair that came plump into the Precincts by a door opening outward—to the surprise and inconvenience of a limited public of pedestrians in a narrow way—he would be alone, as in a separate residence. He found the rent moderate, and everything as quaintly inconvenient as he could desire. He agreed, therefore, to take the lodging then and there, money down, possession to be had next evening, on condition that reference was permitted him to Mr. Jasper as occupying the gatehouse, of which on the other side of the gateway, the Verger's hole-in-the-wall was an appanage or subsidiary part.

"The poor dear gentleman was very solitary and very sad," Mrs. Tope said, "but she had no doubt he would 'speak for her.' Perhaps Mr. Datchery had heard something of what had occurred there last winter?"

Mr. Datchery possessed as confused a knowledge of the event in question, on trying to recall it, as he well could have. He begged Mrs. Tope's pardon when she found it incumbent on her to correct him in every detail of his summary of the facts, but pleaded that he was merely a single buffer getting through life upon his means as idly as he could, and that so many people were so constantly making away with so many other people, as to render it difficult for a buffer of an easy temper to preserve the circumstances of the several cases unmixed in his mind.

Mr. Jasper proving willing to speak for Mrs. Tope, Mr. Datchery, who had sent up his card, was invited to ascend the postern staircase. The Mayor was there, Mr. Tope said; but he was not to be regarded in the light of company, as he and Mr. Jasper were great friends.

"I beg pardon," said Mr. Datchery, making a leg with his hat under his arm as he addressed himself equally to both gentlemen. "A selfish precaution on my part, and not personally interesting to anybody but myself. But as a buffer living on his means

The heat in Cloisterham was a physical weight, pressing down on the cobblestones and the whitewashed walls of the Nuns' House. The cathedral and the ruined monastery stood like translucent ghosts against the blinding summer sun, their stone glowing from within rather than reflecting the light. The gardens were flushed with the color of ripening fruit, a violent, organic stain against the grey masonry.

Time seemed to dissolve into the dust. Wayfarers, stripped of their names and reduced to the texture of the earth itself, lounged on doorsteps. They were men of mud and straw, attempting to repair shoes that could not be mended, or offering them to the kennels as a hopeless trade. Their bare feet cooled at the public pumps, joining the gurgle of water that bubbled up to meet thirsty hands. The local police watched these intruders with a mixture of suspicion and irritation, eager for the nomads to vanish back onto the baking highways.

Inside the house, the atmosphere was thin and brittle. Helena Landless had departed to chase her brother's fortune, and Mrs. Tisher was away on leave. Miss Twinkleton, in her temporary absence, had traded her duties for a picnic and a veal pie. Rosa was alone.

The servant entered, her face pale. "Mr. Jasper desires to see you, miss."

The news struck Rosa with the force of a physical blow. She had hoped for privacy, for the sanctuary of the empty rooms. Instead, she found herself cornered. "Why," she whispered, the words tearing from her throat, "why did you say I was at home?"

The maid offered no comfort. "He said he knew you were here. He asked to see you."

Panic seized her. She clutched her hands together, the knuckles white. She imagined the locked doors, the barred windows, the suffocating intimacy of a room shared with a man she despised. Yet, a desperate logic took root in her mind. The house was filled with windows overlooking the garden. If she refused entry, she would be trapped inside. If she went outside, she could scream, she could run, she could expose him to the gaze of the street.

She hung her hat on her arm and stepped out.

From the porch, she saw him. Mr. Jasper leaned against the sundial, a silhouette of black cloth against the brilliant afternoon. The old, primal fear coiled in her stomach, tightening her chest. She wanted to turn away, to flee into the shadows of the house, but his presence acted as a magnet, pulling her feet forward until she sat heavily on the garden bench beside him. She kept her head bowed, unable to bear the sight of him, yet she registered the detail of his attire: deep mourning. So was she. The loss of Edwin had settled over them both like a shroud.

"I have been waiting," he began, his voice smooth and low, "for some time, to be summoned back to my duty near you."

Rosa formed words in her mind, shaping them into refusals, then dissolving them into silence. "Duty, sir?"

"The duty of teaching you," he continued, "of serving you as your faithful music-master."

"I have left off that study."

"Not left off," he corrected gently. "Discontinued. Your guardian told me you ceased under the shock we have all felt. When will you resume?"

"Never, sir."

"Never? You could have done no more if you had loved my dear boy."

"I did love him!" Rosa cried out, the anger flashing across her face, a brief, dangerous spark.

"Yes; but not quite—not quite in the right way, shall I say? Not in the intended and expected way. Much as my dear boy was, unhappily, too self-conscious and self-satisfied... to love as he should have loved, or as any one in his place would have loved—must have loved!"

Rosa shrank further into the bench. "Then, to be told that you discontinued your study with me, was to be politely told that you abandoned it altogether?"

"Yes," she answered, her voice gaining a sudden, sharp edge. "The politeness was my guardian's, not mine. I told him that I was resolved to leave off, and that I was determined to stand by my resolution."

"And you still are?"

"I still am, sir. And I beg not to be questioned any more about it. At all events, I will not answer any more; I have that in my power."

She felt the weight of his gaze, a heavy, possessive scrutiny that followed her movements. She sensed his admiration for the flush of anger on her cheeks, the fire it ignited in her eyes. As her spirit rose in defiance, it faltered, crushed by a wave of shame and terror reminiscent of that night at the piano.

"I will not question you any more, since you object to it so much; I will confess—"

"I do not wish to hear you, sir," she interrupted, rising abruptly.

This time, he touched her. His hand reached out, and as she recoiled, she sank back into the seat, defeated.

"We must sometimes act in opposition to our wishes," he murmured, his voice dropping to a conspiratorial whisper. "You must do so now, or do more harm to others than you can ever set right."

"What harm?"

"Presently, presently. You question me, you see, and surely that's not fair when you forbid me to question you. Nevertheless, I will answer the question presently. Dearest Rosa! Charming Rosa!"

She started up again, fleeing the proximity of his voice. He did not touch her this time. Instead, he leaned against the sundial, his posture relaxed yet menacing, a dark blotch against the brightness of the day. The threat in his stillness was palpable.

"I do not forget how many windows command a view of us," he said, glancing toward the house. "I will not touch you again; I will come no nearer to you than I am. Sit down, and there will be no mighty wonder in your music-master's leaning idly against a pedestal and speaking with you, remembering all that has happened, and our shares in it. Sit down, my beloved."

She hovered on the brink of flight, her foot already lifting, but his face froze her movement. It was a mask of dark warning, promising consequences if she dared to move. She sat.

"Rosa, even when my dear boy was affianced to you, I loved you madly; even when I thought his happiness in having you for his wife was certain, I loved you madly; even when I strove to make him more ardently devoted to you, I loved you madly; even when he gave me the picture of your lovely face so carelessly traduced by him, which I feigned to hang always in my sight for his sake, but worshipped in torment for years, I loved you madly; in the distasteful work of the day, in the wakeful misery of the night, girded by sordid realities, or wandering through Paradises and Hells of visions into which I rushed, carrying your image in my arms, I loved you madly."

The violence of his delivery clashed grotesquely with the calm, theatrical composition of his pose. The words were hideous, amplified by the contrast.

"I endured it all in silence. So long as you were his, or so long as I supposed you to be his, I hid my secret loyally. Did I not?"

This lie, wrapped in such convincing phrasing, broke her resolve. "You were as false throughout, sir, as you are now. You were false to him, daily and hourly. You know that you made my life unhappy by your pursuit of me. You know that you made me afraid to open his generous eyes, and that you forced me, for his own trusting, good, good sake, to keep the truth from him, that you were a bad, bad man!"

His hands twitched, convulsing beneath the sleeves of his mourning coat, rendering his serene expression diabolical. "How beautiful you are! You are more beautiful in anger than in repose. I don't ask you for your love; give me yourself and your hatred; give me yourself and that pretty rage; give me yourself and that enchanting scorn; it will be enough for me."

Tears welled in her eyes, hot and impatient. As she rose to flee, seeking the safety of the porch, he stretched a hand toward the entrance, inviting her in.

"I told you, you rare charmer, you sweet witch, that you must stay and hear me, or do more harm than can ever be undone. You asked me what harm. Stay, and I will tell you. Go, and I will do it!"

Fear, instinctual and paralyzing, rooted her to the spot. Her breathing came in ragged gasps. Placing a hand over her heart to stifle the panic, she remained.

"I have made my confession that my love is mad. It is so mad, that had the ties between me and my dear lost boy been one silken thread less strong, I might have swept even him from your side, when you favoured him."

A film clouded her vision for a fleeting second, as if he had struck her. "Even him," he repeated softly. "Yes, even him! Rosa, you see me and you hear me. Judge for yourself whether any other admirer shall love you and live, whose life is in my hand."

"What do you mean, sir?"

"I mean to show you how mad my love

The air in the room was still, thick with the dust of unspoken things. Rosa opened her eyes, and the memory of the interview pressed against her, refusing to fade even as consciousness returned. It had followed her into the darkness, a persistent weight. Her mind offered no path forward, only a single, sharp command: flight. She must leave this man.

But where? How?

Helena was the only confidante, yet mentioning Jasper's threat to Helena would be an invitation to disaster. Jasper possessed the power, and worse, the will, to enact the harm he threatened. To speak of it was to invite the blow. Every hesitation, every slip in judgment, could unleash his malice upon Helena's brother.

For six months, Rosa's mind had been a storm of conflicting currents. A suspicion, half-formed and unnamed, rose and sank like a tide. Jasper's obsession with his nephew, his relentless questioning of the boy's fate, had become the local gossip, rendering the notion of foul play impossible for others to entertain. Had she imagined it? Was her revulsion a projection of her own fear, a sign of baselessness? Or was there a motive? She flinched at the thought: the desire to possess *her*. To build a crime on such trivial vanity felt like a sin greater than the act itself.

She replayed his words by the sundial. He treated the disappearance as murder, consistent with his public persona since the discovery of the watch and shirt-pin. If he feared the truth, would he not encourage the lie of voluntary absence? He had spoken of sweeping "even him" away. Was that a threat or a boast? He claimed to offer his six months of labor as a sacrifice of justice. Could he truly pour his wasted life and despair onto her altar if the foundation was a lie? His first offering was fidelity to the dead boy. These facts argued against her fear, yet he was a terrible man. The girl, unable to comprehend the criminal intellect which scholars failed to read because they sought to reconcile it with the average mind, found only one conclusion: flee.

She had been Helena's shield, assuring her of her brother's innocence and sharing in his misery. She had never seen him since the disappearance, nor had Helena mentioned his confession to Mr. Crisparkle. To her, he was simply Helena's unfortunate brother. The promise she gave her suitor was true, though now she regretted the clarity of it. Fear of him coexisted with a swelling pride that he knew it from her own lips.

Where could she go? Anywhere beyond his reach. She decided on her guardian, Miss Twinkleton, and acted immediately. The feeling of unsafety, the realization that the convent walls could not stop his spectral pursuit, had calcified into terror. The fascination of repulsion had bound her. Even glancing at the sundial through the window sent a chill through her; it seemed invested with his awful nature.

She scribbled a hurried note to Miss Twinkleton, claiming urgent need to see her guardian, and left it in plain sight. Packing a few useless items into a tiny bag, she slipped out, closing the gate softly.

It was the first time she had traversed Cloisterham High Street alone. Knowing its winding paths, she hurried to the corner where the omnibus waited. It was departing.

"Stop and take me, if you please, Joe. I am obliged to go to London."

Within a minute, she was on the road to the railway, protected by Joe. He waited until she reached the station, placing her safely inside the carriage and handing in her small bag as if it were a hundredweight trunk she could not possibly lift.

"Can you go round when you get back, and tell Miss Twinkleton that you saw me safely off, Joe?"

"It shall be done, Miss."

"With my love, please, Joe."

"Yes, Miss—and I wouldn't mind having it myself!" Joe thought the last clause, keeping it silent.

Now, whirring toward London, Rosa allowed her thoughts to return. The indignation that his declaration soiled her, cleansing only through appeal to the honest and true, bolstered her resolve. But as dusk deepened and the great city loomed closer, doubt crept in. Was this rash? How would Mr. Grewgious react? Would he be there? What if he wasn't? Alone in a strange, crowded place, she wondered if waiting and seeking counsel first would have been wiser. A multitude of uneasy questions swirled as the train crossed rooftops, revealing the gritty streets below, lit by lamps unnecessary for the heat of the summer night.

"Hiram Grewgious, Esquire, Staple Inn, London." That was her destination. Enough to send her rattling away again in a cab through deserts of grit, where crowds gathered for air and others shuffled with monotonous noise on hot stones. Everything was gritty, shabby. Music played here and there—a barrel-organ, a big drum—but it offered no relief. Only echoes from brick surfaces and dust. The wind instruments seemed broken-hearted, pining for the country.

The cab stopped at a fast-closed gateway, belonging to someone afraid of burglars. Rosa paid the driver and knocked timidly. A watchman let her in, bag and all.

"Does Mr. Grewgious live here?"

"He lives there, Miss," the watchman pointed deeper into the shadows.

Rosa proceeded, stopping on P.J.T.'s doorstep at ten o'clock, wondering what had become of the street door. Guided by the painted name, she ascended and tapped softly. No answer. The handle yielded. She entered to find her guardian sitting on a window-seat at an open window, a shaded lamp distant on a corner table.

Rosa approached in the twilight. He saw her and whispered, "Good Heaven!"

She threw herself upon his neck, weeping. He embraced her, soothing.

"My child, my child! I thought you were your mother!—But what, what, what," he added gently, "has happened? My dear, what has brought you here? Who has brought you here?"

"No one. I came alone."

"Lord bless me!" he exclaimed. "Came alone! Why didn't you write to me to come and fetch you?"

"I had no time. I took a sudden resolution. Poor, poor Eddy!"

"Ah, poor fellow, poor fellow!"

"His uncle has made love to me. I cannot bear it," Rosa burst out, stamping her little foot, "I shudder with horror of him, and I have come to you to protect me and all of us from him, if you will?"

"I will," cried Mr. Grewgious, with a sudden surge of energy. "Damn him! 'Confound his politics! Frustrate his knavish tricks! On Thee his hopes to fix? Damn him again!'"

This outburst, alternating between loyal enthusiasm and combative denunciation, left him beside himself. He wiped his face, composing himself.

"I beg your pardon, my dear, but you will be glad to know I feel better. Tell me no more just now, or I might do it again. You must be refreshed and cheered. What did you take last? Was it breakfast, lunch, dinner, tea, or supper? And what will you take next? Shall it be breakfast, lunch, dinner, tea, or supper?"

Kneeling before her, he removed her hat and disentangled her hair with respectful tenderness, a chivalrous sight unexpected from him.

"Your rest too must be provided for," he continued. "You shall have the prettiest chamber in Furnival's. Your toilet must be attended to, and you shall have everything an unlimited head chambermaid can procure. Is that a bag?" He scrutinized it closely. "And is it your property, my dear?"

"Yes, sir. I brought it with me."

"It is not an extensive bag," he admitted candidly, "though admirably calculated to contain a day's provision for a canary-bird. Perhaps you brought a canary-bird?"

Rosa smiled and shook her head.

"If you had, he should have been made welcome," Mr. Grewgious said. "I think he would have been pleased to be hung upon a nail outside and pit himself against our Staple sparrows; whose execution must be admitted to be not quite equal to their intention. Which is the case with so many of us! You didn't say what meal, my dear. Have a nice jumble of all meals."

Rosa thanked him but said she could only take tea. Mr. Grewgious ran out and in several times to order marmalade, eggs, watercress, salted fish, and frizzled ham. Soon the board was set.

"Lord bless my soul," he cried, placing the lamp on the table and sitting opposite Rosa, "what a new sensation for a poor old Angular bachelor, to be sure!"

Rosa's eyebrows raised in query.

"The sensation of having a sweet young presence in the place, that whitewashes it, paints it, papers it, decorates it with gilding, and makes it Glorious!" Mr. Grewgious sighed mournfully.

Touching him with her tea-cup, Rosa touched him with her small hand.

"Thank you, my dear," he said. "Ahem! Let's talk!"

"Do you always live here, sir?" Rosa asked.

"Yes, my dear."

"And always alone?"

"Always alone; except that I have daily company in a gentleman by the name of

The night held no wind, and the dove slept undisturbed until the morning light broke the silence. At ten o'clock, Mr. Crisparkle burst into the room, arriving from Cloisterham as if thrown from the river. He spoke of Miss Twinkleton's agitation, explaining that her wonder at receiving Rosa's note had compelled him to seize the first train. He admitted he had wished for Rosa's presence earlier, but concluded that her journey to her guardian was the wiser path.

"I considered you," Rosa replied, noting the proximity of Minor Canon Corner to her guardian. "It was natural."

Mr. Grewgious confirmed he had heard everything Rosa had shared the previous evening. He noted that Mr. Crisparkle's arrival was timely, especially since he had just departed. The conversation turned to Helena and her brother. Mr. Crisparkle confessed a deep perplexity, remarking that if Mr. Grewgious, whose intellect spanned a whole night ahead of his own, remained undecided, he was lost.

At that moment, the Unlimited entered, announcing a visitor seeking Mr. Crisparkle. When informed the Reverend Sir was occupied, the visitor clarified his description: a brown gentleman with blue eyes, not black-haired. Mr. Grewgious suggested admitting him, arguing that in moments of difficulty, one must keep every possible avenue open rather than closing doors prematurely.

The stranger entered with a frank, modest grace, apologizing for interrupting. He smiled and asked, "Who am I?"

"You are the gentleman I saw smoking under the trees at Staple Inn moments ago," Crisparkle answered.

"True," the stranger acknowledged. "There I saw you. Who else am I?"

Crisparkle studied the handsome, sunburnt face, and a faint memory of a departed boy rose in the room. The stranger noticed the flicker of recognition in the Minor Canon's features and continued, "What will you have for breakfast? You are out of jam."

"Wait!" Crisparkle raised his hand. "Tartar!"

They embraced with vigorous heartiness, extending the gesture beyond typical English reserve by placing hands on each other's shoulders and locking gazes.

"My old fag!" Crisparkle cried.
"My old master!" Tartar responded.
"You saved me from drowning!"
"After which you took to swimming, you know!"
"God bless my soul!"
"Amen!"

They resumed shaking hands. Crisparkle, eyes glistening, recounted the image of young Tartar, a small junior, diving to catch him—a large, heavy senior—and dragging him to shore like a water-giant. Tartar affirmed he would not let him sink, recalling how the boy had been his best protector despite the masters' failures. An irrational impulse had once driven Crisparkle to save him, fearing to go down with his friend.

Mr. Grewgious stepped forward, extending his hand with practiced formality. He expressed pride in meeting him, hoping Tartar had not taken cold or swallowed too much water. To Rosa, it seemed miraculous that such courage and skill existed in someone so slight and young. Tartar declined compliments but offered an idea. He mentioned believing he had seen Tartar's name listed as a tenant in the top set of the house adjacent to the corner building.

"Yes, sir," Tartar confirmed. "You are right so far."

Grewgious ticked this off mentally. He then asked for the name of the neighbor in the top set on the opposite side of the party wall.
"Landless," Tartar replied.
Another tick.
"Do you have personal knowledge of him?"
"Slight, but some."
Another tick.
"What is the nature of this knowledge?"
Tartar explained he believed the young man was in poor straits and had recently asked permission to extend his flower garden to include the neighbor's windows.

"Take seats," Grewgious commanded. "I have an idea!"

They sat, with Grewgious in the center, hands on his knees, delivering a rehearsed plan. He outlined the dangers of direct communication between Miss Rosa and either Mr. Neville or Miss Helena due to a local friend who skulked around Staple, possibly aided by informants among porters or watchmen. While Miss Rosa wished to speak with Helena, secrecy was paramount.

"If our local friend has an informant," Grewgious reasoned, "they can only monitor the chambers occupied by Mr. Neville. They cannot watch all of Staple unless... unless it is mine."

"I begin to understand," Crisparkle approved.
"I also understand," Tartar added. "Let me say at once that my chambers are freely at your disposal."

"There!" Grewgious smoothed his head triumphantly. "Now we have the idea. You have it, my dear?"
Rosa blushed slightly. "I think I have."

"The plan is simple," Grewgious instructed. "You go to Staple with Mr. Crisparkle and Mr. Tartar. I move in and out alone as usual. You ascend to Mr. Tartar's rooms, inspect his flower garden, and await Miss Helena's appearance or signal her that you are nearby. No spy can detect this movement."

Rosa hesitated, fearing she might be discovered.
"Not frightened?" Grewgious asked gently.
"No, not that," Rosa whispered. "Only in Mr. Tartar's way. We seem to be appropriating his residence so coolly."
Tartar protested that he would cherish the sound of her voice forever.

Rosa, unsure how to respond, asked if she should put on her hat. Grewgious agreed, and she withdrew. During her absence, Crisparkle summarized the distresses facing Neville and his sister to Tartar. When Rosa returned, Tartar offered his arm, and Crisparkle walked ahead.

"Poor, poor Eddy!" Rosa thought as they moved along. She glanced at Tartar's right hand, waving animatedly above her head. It was not as powerful or sun-browned as it had been when saving Crispaskle, yet it possessed a steady determination. He revealed he had been a sailor, roaming the seas for years.
"When are you going to sea again?" Rosa asked.
"Never!"

She imagined the girls' reaction to seeing her walk across the wide street supported by a sailor's arm. Passersby must view her as small and helpless compared to the strong figure capable of carrying her miles from danger. His far-seeing blue eyes seemed accustomed to watching distant threats without flinching, drawing closer until they were intimate. As she raised her own eyes, she realized he was thinking of her. This confusion accounted for her later inability to recall precisely how she ascended to his garden in the air, entering a marvelous country that bloomed suddenly like the land atop a magic beanstalk. May it flourish forever.

The air in Mr. Tartar's chambers possessed a sterility that bordered on the supernatural. It was a vacuum where dust dared not settle, a realm where the concept of grime had been exiled forever. The floors were scrubbed to a blinding whiteness, suggesting that the very London blackmen had been liberated from their labor and sent adrift into the ocean. Every brass fixture, from the smallest latch to the largest telescope mount, burned with a metallic luster, reflecting the room's inhabitants back at themselves like distorted mirrors. There was no speck, no stain, no organic residue to mar the purity of his collection.

His sitting room resembled the bridge of a frigate; his bathroom, a sterile dairy; his sleeping chamber, a meticulously organized seed merchant's warehouse. Even his cot, suspended in the center, seemed to breathe in rhythm with the ticking of unseen clocks. Belongings were not merely stored; they were quartered. Maps claimed their specific alcoves, books their shelves, brushes their hooks, boots their racks, clothes their drawers, and case-bottles their niches. Nothing was wasted. Every shelf, bracket, and drawer was engineered with mathematical precision to accommodate items that would otherwise have nowhere to exist. His silver service lay on the sideboard with such exactitude that a misplaced salt spoon would scream betrayal. His toiletries sat on the dressing table in a formation so rigid that a toothpick of slovenly intent could be identified from a distance.

Curiosities from distant shores—stuffed birds, dried fish, repolished reptiles, ancient arms, shells, seaweed, coral memorials—were displayed in their designated sanctuaries. Each object occupied a space it could not possibly share with another. Paint and varnish waited invisibly, poised to erase any stray fingerprint that might dare to breach the seal. It was a vessel kept immaculate, a ship of order sailing through a chaotic world. On this bright summer day, a neat awning stretched over his garden, rigged with the competence of a seasoned sailor, lending the entire scene a maritime completeness. It was a garden that belonged to the stern windows of a ship, ready to sail gallantly if only Mr. Tartar had raised his voice through the speaking trumpet slung in the corner and ordered the anchor hove up.

Mr. Tartar, conducting the tour of this floating citadel, embodied the spirit of his domain. When a man rides a hobby that refuses to shy away from anything, there is a peculiar charm in watching him laugh at the absurdity of his own creation. Being cordial, earnest, and genuinely fresh, he appeared at his brightest during this inspection. Rosa, though treated with the deference due to the First Lady of the Admiralty, perceived the scene differently. She saw a sunburnt sailor finding joy in his own delusions, a man half-laughing, half-rejoicing in the mechanics of his life. As the inspection concluded, he bowed her out of his admiral's cabin, gesturing toward the garden with the hand that had once held Mr. Crisparkle's life in its grip.

"Helena! Helena Landless! Are you there?"

"Who speaks to me? Not Rosa?" A second face, equally handsome, emerged from the foliage.

"Yes, my darling!"

"Why, how did you come here, dearest?"

"I—I don't quite know," Rosa replied, her cheeks flushing. "Unless I am dreaming!"

Blushes bloomed in the country of the magic beanstalk. Why did they bloom? Their faces were alone with the flowers, yet the color persisted.

"I am not dreaming," Helena smiled, her expression steady. "I should take more for granted if I were. How do we come together—or so near together—so very unexpectedly?"

Unexpectedly indeed, amidst the dingy gables of P.J.T.'s connection and the salt-tolerant blooms. Rosa, waking from her reverie, hurriedly recounted the circumstances of their meeting, explaining the why and wherefore with breathless urgency.

"And Mr. Crisparkle is here," Rosa concluded rapidly. "And, could you believe it? Long ago he saved his life!"

"I could believe any such thing of Mr. Crisparkle," Helena returned, her face flushing with admiration.

More blushes erupted in the beanstalk country.

"Yes, but it wasn't Crisparkle," Rosa corrected sharply.

"I don't understand, love."

"It was very nice of Mr. Crisparkle to be saved," Rosa said, "and he couldn't have shown his high opinion of Mr. Tartar more expressively. But it was Mr. Tartar who saved him."

Helena's dark eyes fixed intently on the bright face among the leaves. "Is Mr. Tartar with you now, dear?"

"No; because he has given up his rooms to me—to us, I mean. It is such a beautiful place!"

"Is it?"

"It is like the inside of the most exquisite ship that ever sailed. It is like—it is like—"

"Like a dream?" Helena suggested softly.

Rosa nodded, inhaling the scent of the flowers.

After a brief silence, during which Helena seemed to harbor a silent compassion for someone unseen, she spoke slowly. "My poor Neville is reading in his own room; the sun is too bright on this side just now. I think he had better not know that you are so near."

"Oh, I think so too!" Rosa agreed readily.

"I suppose," Helena continued, her tone doubtful, "that he must know by-and-by all you have told me; but I am not sure. Ask Mr. Crisparkle's advice, my darling. Ask him whether I may tell Neville as much or as little of what you have told me as I think best."

Rosa retreated into her state-cabin to pose the question. The Minor Canon gave his verdict freely: Helena's judgment was hers to exercise.

"I thank him very much," Helena said when Rosa returned. "Ask him whether it would be best to wait until any further maligning or pursuit of Neville by this wretch discloses itself, or to try to anticipate it: I mean, to discover if any such activity occurs in the shadows around us?"

The Minor Canon struggled to offer a confident opinion. After two or three failed attempts, he suggested consulting Mr. Grewgious. Helena acquiesced. With an unsuccessful attempt at feigned indifference, the Minor Canon crossed the quadrangle to P.J.T.'s and delivered the message. Mr. Grewgious adhered strictly to the principle that if one could steal a march upon a brigand or a wild beast, one ought to do so. He viewed John Jasper as precisely that combination of brigand and wild beast.

Thus advised, Mr. Crisparkle returned to report to Rosa, who in turn informed Helena. Steadfastly pursuing her train of thought at the window, Helena inquired, "We may count on Mr. Tartar's readiness to help us, Rosa?"

Oh yes! Rosa thought shyly, believing she could almost guarantee it. Should she ask Mr. Crisparkle? "I think your authority on the point is equal to his, my dear," Helena said sedately. "You needn't disappear again for that."

"You see, Neville," Helena reflected further, "knows no one else here; he hasn't even exchanged a word with anyone else. If Mr. Tartar would call to see him openly and often; if he would spare a minute for the purpose, frequently; if he would even do so, almost daily; something might come of it."

"Something might come of it, dear?" Rosa repeated, her face a study of perplexity as she surveyed her friend's beauty. "Something might?"

"If Neville's movements are truly watched, and if the purpose is to isolate him from all friends and acquaintances, wearing his daily life out grain by grain—which seems to be the threat to you—does it not appear likely," Helena reasoned, "that his enemy would somehow communicate with Mr. Tartar to warn him off from Neville? In which case, we might not only know the fact, but learn from Mr. Tartar the terms of the communication."

"I see!" Rosa cried, darting back into her state-cabin.

Soon her face reappeared, flushed with excitement. She had told Mr. Crisparkle, who had summoned Mr. Tartar. Mr. Tartar—who was waiting now, should she require him—had declared his immediate readiness to act as suggested, commencing his task that very day.

"I thank him from my heart," Helena said. "Pray tell him so."

Confused between the flower garden and the cabin, Rosa delivered the message and returned with further assurances from Mr. Tartar, standing wavering in a divided state between Helena and him. This proved that confusion is not always awkward; sometimes, it presents a very pleasant appearance.

"And now, darling," Helena said, mindful of the caution restricting their current interview, "we will part. I hear Neville moving. Are you going back?"

"To Miss Twinkleton's?" Rosa asked.

"Yes."

"Oh, I could never go there again. I couldn't, indeed, after that dreadful interview!"

"Then where _are_ you going, pretty one?"

"Now I come to think of it, I don't know," Rosa admitted. "I have settled nothing at all yet, but my guardian will take care of me. Don't be uneasy, dear. I shall be sure to be somewhere."

(It did seem likely.)

"And I shall hear of my Rosebud from Mr. Tartar?" Helena inquired.

"Yes, I suppose

The cathedral roof offered no shelter for secrets, only the weight of stone and the passage of time. For over half a year, Mr. Crisparkle and John Jasper walked the same corridors, their footsteps syncing with the rhythm of the building, yet their minds remained in separate, silent rooms. They spoke of nothing concerning Edwin Drood. Not a word. The subject hung between them like a ghost, visible only because it was absent. Jasper, the hunter of Neville Landless, and Crisparkle, his shield, existed in a state of perpetual, unspoken opposition. Neither dared name the tension; neither could bear to look directly at the other's design.

Jasper possessed a nature that rejected pretense. He would have welcomed the topic, perhaps demanded it, if he believed it would yield fruit. But his silence was not passive; it was a fortress. He was a man carved from a single, hard idea, concentrated so intensely on his fixed purpose that he had severed the connection with everything else. He moved through the world in a mechanical harmony with others, a perfect gear fitting into a machine, yet his spirit exchanged nothing with the air around him. He had once confessed this isolation to his lost nephew, before the necessity of his current rigidity became absolute.

Jasper knew Rosa had fled. He knew the cause. Whether he believed he had terrified her into silence, or if she had whispered the truth to Crisparkle, remained a question Crisparkle could not answer. As a man of justice, Crisparkle admitted that loving Rosa was not a crime, nor was offering love above revenge. Yet, the dreadful suspicion that haunted Rosa found no harbor in Crisparkle's mind. Even Helena and Neville, if the thought touched them, never voiced it. Mr. Grewgious, with his implacable dislike of Jasper, kept his distance, avoiding any mention of that specific evening when he had warmed his hands at the gatehouse fire and stared down at a pile of torn, muddy clothes on the floor.

Cloisterham slept, a drowsy entity waking occasionally to reconsider a story older than six months, dismissed by the magistrates. The town debated: had Neville been killed by a treacherous rival? By an open struggle? Or had he simply vanished, spirited away for his own ends? The narrative shifted with the wind, lifting its head to note Jasper's devotion to discovery and revenge, then dozing off again. This was the equilibrium of the world at that hour.

The cathedral doors locked for the night. The Choir-master, granted a brief leave for a few services, turned his face toward London. He traveled by the same route Rosa had taken, arriving on a hot, dusty evening. His luggage was light enough to carry in one hand. He walked to a hybrid establishment tucked behind Aldersgate Street, near the General Post Office—a place that was hotel, boarding-house, and lodging-house depending on the traveler's mood. It advertised itself in the railway papers as a novel enterprise, timidly emerging from the shadows. It apologized for not adhering to the old constitutional model of ordering a pint of sweet blacking to drink and discard; instead, it suggested the traveler might have his boots blacked, or perhaps just his bed, breakfast, and a porter for a fixed sum. From such premises, many Britons in low spirits deduced that the times were leveling, except for the high roads, which were destined to vanish entirely.

Crisparkle ate without appetite and stepped out again. He moved eastward through the stale streets until he reached a miserable court, particularly wretched among its peers. He climbed a broken staircase, opened a door, and peered into a dark, stifling room.

"Are you alone here?"

"Alone, deary; worse luck for me, and better for you," replied a croaking voice. "Come in, come in, whoever you be: I can't see you till I light a match, yet I seem to know the sound of your speaking. I'm acquainted with you, ain't I?"

"Light your match, and try."

"So I will, deary, so I will; but my hand that shakes, as I can't lay it on a match all in a moment. And I cough so, that, put my matches where I may, I never find 'em there. They jump and start, as I cough and cough, like live things. Are you off a voyage, deary?"

"No."

"Not seafaring?"

"No."

"Well, there's land customers, and there's water customers. I'm a mother to both. Different from Jack Chinaman t'other side the court. He ain't a father to neither. It ain't in him. And he ain't got the true secret of mixing, though he charges as much as me that has, and more if he can get it. Here's a match, and now where's the candle? If my cough takes me, I shall cough out twenty matches afore I gets a light."

She found the candle and lit it, but the success seized her instantly. She sank into rocking motions, gasping in intervals: "O, my lungs is awful bad! my lungs is wore away to cabbage-nets!" until the fit subsided. While the cough consumed her, she had no sight, no power save the struggle. As it receded, she strained her eyes and, upon articulating, cried out, staring:

"Why, it's you!"

"Are you so surprised to see me?"

"I thought I never should have seen you again, deary. I thought you was dead, and gone to Heaven."

"Why?"

"I didn't suppose you could have kept away, alive, so long, from the poor old soul with the real receipt for mixing it. And you are in mourning too! Why didn't you come and have a pipe or two of comfort? Did they leave you money, perhaps, and so you didn't want comfort?"

"No."

"Who was they as died, deary?"

"A relative."

"Died of what, lovey?"

"Probably, Death."

"We are short to-night!" she cried, laughing propitiously. "Short and snappish we are! But we're out of sorts for want of a smoke. We've got the all-overs, haven't us, deary? But this is the place to cure 'em in; this is the place where the all-overs is smoked off."

"You may make ready, then," replied the visitor, "as soon as you like."

He removed his shoes, loosened his cravat, and lay across the foot of the squalid bed, his head resting on his left hand.

"Now you begin to look like yourself," the woman approved. "Now I begin to know my old customer indeed! Been trying to mix for yourself this long time, poppet?"

"I have been taking it now and then in my own way."

"Never take it your own way. It ain't good for trade, and it ain't good for you. Where's my ink-bottle, and where's my thimble, and where's my little spoon? He's going to take it in a artful form now, my deary dear!"

She began her process, bubbling and blowing at the faint spark trapped in the hollow of her hands, speaking in tones of snuffling satisfaction without pause. When he spoke, he did not look at her; his thoughts were already roaming ahead by anticipation.

"I've got a pretty many smokes ready for you, first and last, haven't I, chuckey?"

"A good many."

"When you first come, you was quite new to it; warn't ye?"

"Yes, I was easily disposed of, then."

"But you got on in the world, and was able by-and-by to take your pipe with the best of 'em, warn't ye?"

"Ah; and the worst."

"It's just ready for you. What a sweet singer you was when you first come! Used to drop your head, and sing yourself off like a bird! It's ready for you now, deary."

He took the pipe with great care, bringing the mouthpiece to his lips. She seated herself beside him, ready to refill it. After inhaling a few whiffs in silence, he accosted her doubtfully:

"Is it as potent as it used to be?"

"What do you speak of, deary?"

"What should I speak of, but what I have in my mouth?"

"It's just the same. Always the identical same."

"It doesn't taste so. And it's slower."

"You've got more used to it, you see."

"That may be the cause, certainly. Look here." He stopped, becoming dreamy, forgetting he had invited her attention. She bent over him, speaking in his ear.

"I'm attending to you. Says you just now, Look here. Says I now, I'm attending to ye. We was talking just before of your being used to it."

"I know all that. I was only thinking. Look here. Suppose you had something in your mind; something you were going to do."

"Yes, deary; something I was going to do?"

"But had not quite determined to do."

"Yes, deary."

"Might or might not do, you understand."

"Yes." With the point of a needle, she stirred the contents of the bowl.

"Should you do it in your fancy, when you were lying here doing this?"

She nodded. "Over and over again."

"Just like me! I did it over and over again. I have done it hundreds of thousands of times in this room."

"It's
