The air in the saloon was thick with the scent of stale lavender and the damp wool of coats left too long by the fire. Through one door, Lady Castlewood, her son, and daughter withdrew, leaving the silence to settle over the remaining figures. By another exit, my Lord Castlewood departed, his footsteps measured and final.

From the tambour-frame, where they had been pinned to the woodwork like moths to a lantern, the demure eyes lifted. They rested on Harry Warrington. He stood beneath the great fireplace, an ancestral portrait looming above him, a silent judge of his posture. On his face, a heap of blushes had accumulated—a rare bloom, gathering on cheeks, forehead, and even the youthful ears, as if the season of gentleness had finally decided to arrive late in the year.

"Why did you refuse to go with our aunt, cousin?" the lady of the tambour frame asked, her voice small against the vast room.

"Because your ladyship bade me stay," the lad replied, the words falling flat and obedient.

"I bid you stay!" She laughed, a sharp, brittle sound. "Child! What one says in fun, you take in earnest! Are all you Virginian gentlemen so obsequious that you mistake every idle word for a command? Virginia must be a pleasant country for our sex if it be so!"

"You said—" Harry stopped, searching for the memory, his voice trembling with a sudden, violent intensity. "When—we walked in the terrace two nights since—O heaven!"

"Ah, that sweet night, cousin!" the Tambour-frame echoed, her tone shifting instantly from mockery to performance.

"When you gave me this rose from your own neck," Harry roared, tearing a crumpled, decaying vegetable from the deep fold of his waistcoat. He held it out, a shriveled thing, brown and dead. "Which I will never part with—no, by heavens, whilst this heart continues to beat! You said, 'Harry, if your aunt asks you to go away, you will go, and if you go, you will forget me.' Didn't you say so?"

"All men forget!" the Virgin sighed, a sound of weary resignation.

"In this cold, selfish country they may, cousin, not in ours," Harry continued, his voice rising in a feverish exaltation that seemed to ignore the physics of the room. "I had rather have lost an arm almost than refused the old lady. It went to my heart to say no to her, and she so kind to me, and who had been the means of introducing me to—to—O heaven!"

(A kick struck an intervening spaniel, sending the animal yelping from before the fire. Harry advanced rapidly on the tambour-frame.)

"Look here, cousin! If you were to bid me jump out of yonder window, I should do it; or murder, I should do it."

"La! but you need not squeeze one's hand so, you silly child!" Maria remarked, withdrawing her hand as if burned.

"I can't help it—we are so in the south. Where my heart is, I can't help speaking my mind out, cousin—and you know where that heart is!" He paused, breathless. "Ever since that evening—that—O heaven! I tell you I have hardly slept since—I want to do something—to distinguish myself—to be ever so great. I wish there was giants, Maria, as I have read of in—in books, that I could go and fight 'em. I wish you was in distress, that I might help you, somehow. I wish you wanted my blood, that I might spend every drop of it for you. And when you told me not to go with Madame Bernstein..."

"I tell thee, child? never."

"I thought you told me. You said you knew I preferred my aunt to my cousin, and I said then what I say now, 'Incomparable Maria! I prefer thee to all the women in the world and all the angels in Paradise—and I would go anywhere, were it to dungeons, if you ordered me!' And do you think I would not stay anywhere, when you only desired that I should be near you?" he added, after a moment's pause.

"Men always talk in that way—that is, that is, I have heard so," the spinster corrected herself, smoothing her skirts. "For what should a country-bred woman know about you creatures? When you are near us, they say you are all raptures and flames and promises and I don't know what; when you are away, you forget all about us."

"But I think I never want to go away as long as I live," groaned the young man, collapsing into a chair. "I have tired of many things; not books and that, I never cared for study much, but games and sports which I used to be fond of when I was a boy. Before I saw you, it was to be a soldier I most desired; I tore my hair with rage when my poor dear brother went away instead of me on that expedition in which we lost him. But now, I only care for one thing in the world, and you know what that is."

"You silly child! don't you know I am almost old enough to be...?"

"I know—I know! but what is that to me? Hasn't your br...—well, never mind who, some of 'em—told me stories against you, and didn't they show me the Family Bible, where all your names are down, and the dates of your birth?"

"The cowards! Who did that?" cried out Lady Maria, her composure fracturing. "Dear Harry, tell me who did that? Was it my mother-in-law, the grasping, odious, abandoned, brazen harpy? Do you know all about her? How she married my father in his cups—the horrid hussey!--and..."

"Indeed it wasn't Lady Castlewood," interposed the wondering Harry.

"Then it was my aunt," continued the infuriate lady, her voice climbing. "A pretty moralist, indeed! A bishop's widow, forsooth, and I should like to know whose widow before and afterwards. Why, Harry, she intrigues with the Pretender, and with the Court of Hanover, and, I dare say, would with the Court of Rome and the Sultan of Turkey if she had had the means. Do you know who her second husband was? A creature who..."

"But our aunt never spoke a word against you," broke in Harry, more and more amazed at the nymph's vehemence.

She checked her anger. In the inquisitive countenance opposite to her, she thought she read some alarm as to the temper which she was exhibiting.

"Well, well! I am a fool," she said softly. "I want thee to think well of me, Harry!"

A hand was somehow put out and seized, and no doubt, kissed by the rapturous youth. "Angel!" he cries, looking into her face with his eager, honest eyes.

Two fish-pools irradiated by a pair of stars would not kindle to greater warmth than did those elderly orbs into which Harry poured his gaze. Nevertheless, he plunged into their blue depths, and fancied he saw heaven in their calm brightness. So that silly dog (of whom Aesop or the Spelling-book used to tell us in youth) beheld a beef-bone in the pond, and snapped at it, and lost the beef-bone he was carrying. O absurd cur! He saw the beefbone in his own mouth reflected in the treacherous pool, which dimpled, I dare say, with ever so many smiles, coolly sucked up the meat, and returned to its usual placidity. Ah! what a heap of wreck lie beneath some of those quiet surfaces! What treasures we have dropped into them! What chased golden dishes, what precious jewels of love, what bones after bones, and sweetest heart's flesh! Do not some very faithful and unlucky dogs jump in bodily, when they are swallowed up heads and tails entirely? When some women come to be dragged, it is a marvel what will be found in the depths of them. Cavete, canes! Have a care how ye lap that water. What do they want with us, the mischievous siren sluts? A green-eyed Naiad never rests until she has inveigled a fellow under the water; she sings after him, she dances after him; she winds round him, glittering tortuously; she warbles and whispers dainty secrets at his cheek, she kisses his feet, she leers at him from out of her rushes: all her beds sigh out, "Come, sweet youth! Hither, hither, rosy Hylas!" Pop goes Hylas. (Surely the fable is renewed for ever and ever?) Has his captivator any pleasure? Doth she take any account of him? No more than a fisherman landing at Brighton does of one out of a hundred thousand herrings.... The last time. Ulysses rowed by the Sirens' bank, he and his men did not care though a whole shoal of them were singing and combing their longest locks. Young Telemachus was for jumping overboard: but the tough old crew held the silly, bawling lad. They were deaf, and could not hear his bawling nor the sea-nymphs' singing. They were dim of sight, and did not see how lovely the witches were. The stale, old, leering witches! Away with ye! I dare say you have painted your cheeks by this time; your wretched old songs are as out of fashion as Mozart,
