The air inside Madame de Bernstein's house was thick with the scent of melting tallow and the visual noise of a hundred years of accumulated clutter. Cousin Maria arrived, flanked by gardener's boys carrying baskets of flowers meant to mask the decay of the drawing-room. Three footmen, gorgeously laced with worsted, arranged card tables that seemed to multiply under their hands. A major-domo, dressed in black with fine ruffles and a bag slung over his shoulder, followed the lacquers bearing fasces of wax candles. He placed pairs of candles on the tables and in the silver sconces along the wainscoting, fighting a losing battle against the slanting rays of the sun that gilded the walls and the view of the green common beyond. Outside, groups of figures in hoops and powder sauntered, dappling the plain with shadows. Across the way lay the Pantiles, a perpetual fair where the clatter and buzz of society drowned out everything else. A band played for the visitors to the Wells.

This was a place designed not for a recluse, but for those who preferred bustle and a bright, chaotic light. Yet even here, the darkness of the era pressed in. There was not one wax candle for ten as there would be today; gas and electric illumination were fantasies. Horrible guttering tallow smoked in the passages. The candle-snuffer was a notorious officer in the theatre. In Hogarth's pictures, feasts were begrimed with grease. Even in Lord Viscount Squanderfield's grand saloons, where parties ended with yawning couples staring at horrified stewards, there were but eight candles—one per table, half a dozen in a brass chandelier. If Jack Briefless had convoked friends to oysters and beer in Pump Court, he would have needed twice as many lights. It was a relief to think that Louis Quatorze held his revels in the dark, and to bless Mr. Price and other Luciferous benefactors for eventually banishing the abominable mutton of youth.

Maria, the fairest flower among them, planted her roses and sweet-williams in various vases, adorning the apartment to the best of her art. She lingered fondly over bowls and dragon jars, casting sly, timid glances at young cousin Harry. Her blush would have become any young woman, suggesting she might intend to outstay her aunt. But the Baroness, seated in her armchair with a crooked tortoiseshell stick, pointed imperiously to the servants. She rated Tom for a darn in his stocking and John for greasing his locks too profusely from the candle-box, maintaining a stern domination over the household. This was the life of Jeames a hundred years prior: sleeping two to a bed, four to a room, likely in a cellar, washing in a trough seen nowhere in London outside the barracks of Her Majesty's Foot Guards.

If Maria hoped for a present interview, her heart was disappointed. "Where are you going to dine, Harry?" Madame de Bernstein asked. "My niece Maria and I shall have a chicken in the little parlour—I think you should go to the best ordinary. There is one at the White Horse at three; we shall hear his bell in a minute or two. Understand, sir, you ought not to spare expense. Behave like Princess Pocahontas's son. Your trunks have been taken to the lodging I engaged for you. It is not good for a lad to always hang about the aprons of two old women. Is it, Maria?"

"No," said her ladyship, dropping her meek eyes, while the other lady glared in triumph. Andromeda had been exposed to the Dragon for five or six days; if Perseus had cut the latter's head off, it would have been monstrous murder. But he bore no sword or shield; he only looked mechanically at the lacquers in tawny and blue as they creaked about the room.

"There are good mercers and tailors from London always here to wait on the company," the lady continued. "You had better see them, my dear, for your suit is not of the very last fashion—a little lace—"

"I can't go out of mourning, ma'am," said the young man, looking down at his sables.

"Ho, sir!" cried the lady, rustling up from her chair and rising on her cane. "Wear black for your brother till you are as old as Methuselah, if you like. I am sure I don't want to prevent you. I only want you to dress, and to do like other people, and make a figure worthy of your name."

"Madam," said Mr. Warrington with great state, "I have not done anything to disgrace it that I know."

Why did the old woman stop and give a little start as if struck? Let bygones be bygones. She and the boy had a score of little passages where swords were crossed and thrusts rapidly dealt or parried. She liked Harry none the worse for his courage in facing her. "Sure a little finer linen than that shirt you wear will not be a disgrace to you, sir," she said, with a forced laugh.

Harry bowed and blushed. It was one of the homely gifts of his Oakhurst friends. He felt pleased to think he wore it; thought of the new friends, so good, so pure, so simple, so kindly, with immense tenderness. While invested in this garment, he felt as if evil could not touch him. He said he would go to his lodging and return arrayed in the best linen he had.

"Come back here, sir," said Madame Bernstein. "And if our company has not arrived, Maria and I will find some ruffles for you!" Under a footman's guidance, the young fellow walked off to his new lodgings.

Harry found not only handsome and spacious apartments but a groom waiting to be engaged and a second valet, should he wish to hire one to wait upon Mr. Gumbo. Ere many minutes had passed, emissaries from a London tailor and bootmaker waited with cards and compliments from Messrs. Regnier and Tull. The best articles in his modest wardrobe were laid out by Gumbo, alongside the finest linen his thrifty Virginian mother had provided. Visions of the snow-surrounded home in his own country rose before him—the crackling logs, the trim quiet ladies working by the fire. For the first time, a thought crossed his mind that the homely clothes were not quite smart enough, the home-worked linen not so fine as it might be. That he should be ashamed of anything belonging to him or to Castlewood! That was strange. The simple folks there were only too well satisfied with all things done, said, or produced at Castlewood. Madam Esmond, when sending her son forth on his travels, thought no young nobleman need be better provided. The clothes might have fitted better and been of a later fashion, to be sure—but still, the young fellow presented a comely figure when he issued from his apartments, his toilet over. Gumbo called a chair, marched beside it, and they proceeded to the ordinary where the young gentleman was to dine.

Here he expected to find the beau he had met a few hours earlier at his aunt's lodging, the man who had indicated the White Horse was the most modish place. He mentioned the friend's name to the host. But the landlord and waiters, leading him into the room with many smiles and bows, assured his honour that he needed no other introduction than his own. They helped him hang up his coat and sword, asked if he would drink Burgundy, Pontac, or champagne, and led him to a table.

Though the most fashionable ordinary in the village, the White Horse was not crowded. Monsieur Barbeau, the landlord, informed Harry that a great entertainment at Summer Hill had taken away most of the company. Indeed, when Harry entered, there were but four other gentlemen. Two were drinking wine, having finished their dinner; the other two were young men in the midst of their meal. As the landlord passed, he must have whispered the name of the newcomer to them, for they looked at him with some appearance of interest and made a slight bow across the table as the smiling host bustled away for Harry's dinner.

Mr. Warrington returned the salute of the two gentlemen, who bade him welcome to Tunbridge and hoped he would like the place upon better acquaintance. Then they smiled and exchanged waggish looks, of which Harry did not understand the meaning, nor why they cast knowing glances at the two other guests over their wine.

One person was in a somewhat tarnished velvet coat with a huge queue and bag, voluminous ruffles, and embroidery. The other was a little beetle-browed, hook-nosed, high-shouldered gentleman, whom his opposite companion addressed as *milord*, or *my lord*, in a very high voice. My lord, sipping his wine, barely glanced at the newcomer before addressing his companion.

"And so you know the nephew of the old woman—the Croesus who comes to arrive?"

"You're thrown out there, Jack!" said one young gentleman to the other.

"Never could manage the lingo," said Jack. The two elders had begun to speak in French.

"But assuredly, my dear lord!" said the gentleman with the long queue.

"You have shown energy, my dear Baron! He has been here but two hours. My people told me of him only as I came to dinner."

"I knew him before! I have met him often in London with the Baroness and my lord, his cousin," said the Baron.

A smoking soup arrived for Harry, borne by the smiling host.
