The air in the spa town was thick with the scent of mineral water and stagnation. Madame de Bernstein remained, content enough to scold her niece and play her rubber, while Harry drifted through the assembly rooms and card tables. At twenty, nearly every place offers a semblance of life: lively company, fresh air, the promise of sport. Youth approaches pleasure with alacrity, counting the days until arrival; later life regards it with a gentle, cooling indifference. Do you not recall your first ball? Does your memory not wander to that happy past as you sit ornamenting the wall while your daughters dance? I remember thinking it delightful to walk three miles to dine with old Captain Jones. To imagine walking three miles now, to drink his half-pay port bought from a country merchant for a small sum—it lacks the flavor youth once bestowed. *Viximus nuper.*

I judge Harry's idleness less severely than his friend, the stern Colonel of the Twentieth Regiment. Blessed idleness! Divine lazy nymph! Reach me a novel as I lie in my dressing gown at three in the afternoon; compound a sherry-cobbler; bring me a cigar. Dear slatternly, smiling enchantress! They may assail thee with bad names, swear thy character away, calling thee the Mother of Evil; yet thou art the best company in the world.

Lord March departed for the North; Lord Chesterfield, finding the Tunbridge waters useless for his deafness, returned to his solitude at Blackheath. Other gentlemen remained to sport. Mr. Warrington had quite enough of companions at his ordinary at the White Horse. He soon learned to order a French dinner as well as the best man of fashion from St. James's; he spoke to Monsieur Barbeau in his native tongue more fluently than most; he discovered an elegant taste in wines, distinguishing Clos Vougeot from Romande with remarkable skill. He became the young King of the Wells, surrounded by easygoing men of the world who were not shocked by his reputation for gallantry and extravagance—a reputation that had frightened Mr. Wolfe.

Though our Virginian lived amongst the revellers, swimming and sporting in the same waters as the loose fish, the boy possessed a natural shrewdness and honesty that kept him clear of the snares set for the unwary. He made few foolish bets with the jolly idle fellows around him; the oldest hands found it difficult to take him in. He engaged in games indoors and out because he possessed a natural skill and aptitude, holding matches with almost any fair competitor. He was scrupulous to play only with gentlemen he knew and always settled his own debts on the spot. He would have made a poor figure at a college examination, yet he possessed prudence, fidelity, keen perception, great generosity, and dauntless personal courage. Occasions arose to show what stuff he was made of.

When the unhappy little Cattarina, who had brought him so much trouble, carried her importunities beyond the mark where Harry thought his generosity should stop, he withdrew from the advances of the Opera-House Siren with perfect coolness and skill, leaving her to exercise her blandishments upon some more easy victim. In vain did the mermaid's hysterical mother wait upon Harry, vowing that a cruel bailiff had seized all her daughter's goods for debt and that her venerable father languished in a London gaol. Harry declared that between himself and the bailiff there could be no dealings. Because he had the good fortune to become known to Mademoiselle Cattarina and to gratify her caprices by presenting her with various trinkets, he was not bound to pay the past debts of her family. He must decline being bail for her papa in London or settling her outstanding accounts at Tunbridge.

The Cattarina's mother first called him a monster and an ingrate, then asked, with a veteran smirk, why he did not take pay for the services he had rendered to the young person. At first, Mr. Warrington could not understand the nature of the payment. When the old woman explained, the honest lad rose in horror, thinking that a woman should traffic in her child's dishonor. He told her he came from a country where even the savages would recoil from such a bargain. Having bowed the old lady ceremoniously to the door, he ordered Gumbo to mark her well and never admit her to his lodgings again. No doubt she retired breathing vengeance against the Iroquois; no Turk or Persian, she declared, would treat a lady so. She and her daughter retreated to London as soon as their anxious landlord would let them.

Then Harry faced his perils of gaming, as well as his perils of gallantry. A man who plays at bowls must expect to meet with rubbers. After dinner at the ordinary, having declined to play piquet any further with Captain Batts, and being roughly asked his reason for refusing, Harry fairly told the Captain that he only played with gentlemen who paid, like himself. Yet he expressed himself so ready to satisfy Mr. Batts as soon as their outstanding little account was settled that the Captain declared himself satisfied *d'avance*, straightway left the Wells without paying Harry or any other creditor.

He also had an occasion to show his spirit by beating a chairman who was rude to old Miss Whiffler one evening as she went to the assembly. Finding that the calumny regarding himself and that unlucky opera-dancer was repeated by Mr. Hector Buckler, one of the fiercest frequenters of the Wells, Mr. Warrington stepped up to Mr. Buckler in the pump-room, where the latter was regaling a number of water-drinkers with the very calumny. He publicly informed Mr. Buckler that the story was a falsehood and that he should hold any person accountable to himself who henceforth uttered it. So, though our friend, being at Rome, certainly did as Rome did, he showed himself to be a valorous and worthy Roman. Hurling with the wolves, he was acknowledged by Mr. Wolfe himself to be as brave as the best of them.

If that officer had told Colonel Lambert the stories which had given the latter so much pain, we may be sure that when Mr. Wolfe found his young friend was innocent, he took the first opportunity to withdraw the odious charges against him. Joy reigned among the Lamberts, in consequence of the lad's acquittal—something, doubtless, of that pleasure felt by higher natures than ours at the recovery of sinners. Never had the little family been so happy—not even when they got the news of Brother Tom winning his scholarship—as when Colonel Wolfe rode over with the account of the conversation he had with Harry Warrington.

"Hadst thou brought me a regiment, James, I think I should not have been better pleased," said Mr. Lambert. Mrs. Lambert called to her daughters who were in the garden, kissed them both when they came in, and cried out the good news to them. Hetty jumped for joy, and Theo performed some uncommonly brilliant operations upon the harpsichord that night. When Dr. Boyle came in for his backgammon, he could not, at first, account for the illumination in all their faces until the three ladies, in a happy chorus, told him how right he had been in his sermon and how dreadfully they had wronged that poor dear, good young Mr. Warrington.

"What shall we do, my dear?" says the Colonel to his wife. "The hay is in, the corn won't be cut for a fortnight—the horses have nothing to do. Suppose we..." And here he leans over the table and whispers in her ear. "My dearest Martin! The very thing!" cries Mrs. Lambert, taking her husband's hand and pressing it. "What's the very thing, mother?" cries young Charley, who is home for his Bartlemytide holidays. "The very thing is to go to supper. Come, Doctor! We will have a bottle of wine tonight, and drink repentance to all who think evil." "Amen," says the Doctor; "with all my heart!" And with this the worthy family went to their supper.
