The Colonel's first reaction was anger. He wished the boy who stole his daughter's heart had broken his nose against a doorpost instead of theirs. "A plague upon all scapegraces," he cried. His wife, Mrs. Lambert, offered a mild interposition, suggesting the fall at their door held something providential. Who else would have sent the young gentleman to them? Perhaps it was for the blessing of them all.

"It's hard, Molly!" the Colonel groaned. "We cherish and fondle them. We toil and scheme. We hoard money in stockings and patch our own old coats. If they have a headache, we cannot sleep; if they have a wish, we work day and night to compass it. On Tuesday morning I am king of my house. On Tuesday evening, Prince Whippersnapper appears, and my reign is over. A whole life is forgotten for a pair of blue eyes and a head of yellow hair."

"'Tis written that we women should leave all to follow our husband," the matron said, laying her hand on his arm. "'Tis human nature, and what can you expect?" sighed the Colonel.

"And I think I did my duty to my husband, though I own I left my papa for him," Mrs. Lambert added softly.

"Excellent wench! Perdition catch my soul! but I do love thee, Molly!" the Colonel declared. "But, then, mind you, your father never did me; and if ever I am to have sons-in-law—"

"Ever, indeed! Of course my girls are to have husbands, Mr. Lambert!" cried mamma.

"Well, when they come, I'll hate them, madam, as your father did me; and quite right too, for taking his treasure away from him."

"Don't be irreligious and unnatural, Martin Lambert! I say you are unnatural, sir!"

"Nay, my dear, I have an old tooth in my left jaw; and 'tis natural that the tooth should come out. But when the toothdrawer pulls it, 'tis natural that I should feel pain. Do you suppose, madam, that I don't love Hetty better than any tooth in my head?"

No woman was ever averse to the idea of her daughter getting a husband, however fathers revolted against the invasion of the son-in-law. Mothers and grandmothers are married over again in the marriage of their young ones; their souls attire themselves in the laces and muslins of forty years ago; the postillion's white ribbons bloom again, and they flutter into the postchaise, and drive away. What woman, however old, has not the bridal favours and raiment stowed away, and packed in lavender, in the inmost cupboards of her heart?

"It will be a sad thing, parting with her," Mrs. Lambert sighed.

"You have settled that point already, Molly," the Colonel laughed. "Had I not best go out and order raisins and corinths for the wedding-cake?"

"And then I shall have to leave the house in their charge when I go to her, you know, in Virginia. How many miles is it to Virginia, Martin? I should think it must be thousands of miles."

"A hundred and seventy-three thousand three hundred and ninety-one and three-quarters, my dear, by the near way," answered Lambert, gravely. "That through Prester John's country. By the other route, through Persia—"

"Oh, give me the one where there is the least of the sea, and your horrid ships, which I can't bear!" cried the Colonel's spouse. "I hope Rachel Esmond and I shall be better friends. She had a very high spirit when we were girls at school."

"Had we not best go about the baby-linen, Mrs. Martin Lambert?" her husband interposed.

Mrs. Lambert thought there was no matter for wonderment at all, having remarked some very pretty lace caps and bibs in Mrs. Bobbinit's toy-shop. On that Sunday afternoon, when the discovery was made, and while little Hetty lay upon her pillow with feverish cheeks, closed eyes, and a piteous face, her mother looked at the child with the most perfect ease of mind, and seemed to be rather pleased than otherwise at Hetty's woe.

The girl was not only unhappy, but enraged with herself for having published her secret. Perhaps she had not known it until the sudden emotion acquainted her with her own state of mind; and now the little maid chose to be as much ashamed as if she had done a wrong, and been discovered in it. She was indignant with her own weakness, and broke into transports of wrath against herself. She vowed she never would forgive herself for submitting to such a humiliation. So the young pard, wounded by the hunter's dart, chafes with rage in the forest, is angry with the surprise of the rankling steel in her side, and snarls and bites at her sister-cubs, and the leopardess, her spotted mother.

Little Hetty tore and gnawed, and growled, so that I should not like to have been her fraternal cub, or her spotted dam or sire. "What business has any young woman," she cried out, "to indulge in any such nonsense? Mamma, I ought to be whipped, and sent to bed. I know perfectly well that Mr. Warrington does not care a fig about me. I dare say he likes French actresses and the commonest little milliner-girl in the toy-shop better than me. And so he ought, and so they are better than me. Why, what a fool I am to burst out crying like a ninny about nothing, and because Mr. Wolfe said Harry played cards of a Sunday! I know he is not clever, like papa. I believe he is stupid—I am certain he is stupid: but he is not so stupid as I am. Why, of course, I can't marry him. How am I to go to America, and leave you and Theo? Of course, he likes somebody else, at America, or at Tunbridge, or at Jericho, or somewhere. He is a prince in his own country, and can't think of marrying a poor half-pay officer's daughter, with twopence to her fortune. Used not you to tell me how, when I was a baby, I cried and wanted the moon? I am a baby now, a most absurd, silly, little baby—don't talk to me, Mrs. Lambert, I am. Only there is this to be said, he don't know anything about it, and I would rather cut my tongue out than tell him."

Dire were the threats with which Hetty menaced Theo, in case her sister should betray her. As for the infantile Charley, his mind being altogether set on cheese-cakes, he had not remarked or been moved by Miss Hester's emotion; and the parents and the kind sister of course all promised not to reveal the little maid's secret.

"I begin to think it had been best for us to stay at home," sighed Mrs. Lambert to her husband.

"Nay, my dear," replied the other. "Human nature will be human nature; surely Hetty's mother told me herself that she had the beginning of a liking for a certain young curate before she fell over head and ears in love with a certain young officer of Kingsley's. And as for me, my heart was wounded in a dozen places ere Miss Molly Benson took entire possession of it. Our sons and daughters must follow in the way of their parents before them, I suppose. Why, but yesterday, you were scolding me for grumbling at Miss Het's precocious fancies. To do the child justice, she disguises her feelings entirely, and I defy Mr. Warrington to know from her behaviour how she is disposed towards him."

"A daughter of mine and yours, Martin," cries the mother, with great dignity, "is not going to fling herself at a gentleman's head!"

"Neither herself nor the teacup, my dear," answers the Colonel. "Little Miss Het treats Mr. Warrington like a vixen. He never comes to us, but she boxes his ears in one fashion or t'other. I protest she is barely civil to him; but, knowing what is going on in the young hypocrite's mind, I am not going to be angry at her rudeness."

"She hath no need to be rude at all, Martin; and our girl is good enough for any gentleman in England or America. Why, if their ages suit, shouldn't they marry after all, sir?"

"Why, if he wants her, shouldn't he ask her, my dear? I am sorry we came. I am for putting the horses into the carriage, and turning their heads towards home again."

But mamma fondly said, "Depend on it, my dear, that these matters are wisely ordained for us. Depend upon it, Martin, it was not for nothing that Harry Warrington was brought to our gate in that way; and that he and our children are thus brought together again. If that marriage has been decreed in Heaven, a marriage it will be."

"At what age, Molly, I wonder, do women begin and leave off match-making? If our little chit falls in love and falls out again, she will not be the first of her sex, Mrs. Lambert. I wish we were on our way home again, and, if I had my will, would trot off this very night."

"He has promised to drink his tea here to-night. You would not take away our child's pleasure, Martin?" asked the mother, softly.

In his fashion, the father was not less
