The air in the Assembly Rooms was thick with the scent of damp wool and stale champagne, a heavy atmosphere where movement felt less like celebration and more like a series of necessary adjustments. Harry Warrington, a young Virginian whose wealth was as fluid as the currency he spent, had arranged the evening with the mechanical precision of a man fulfilling a duty. He had secured the space, divided the rooms, and populated them with the remaining company of the Wells, treating them to an entertainment that felt less like a party and more like a scheduled inspection of social hierarchy.

In one corner, card tables stood rigid, occupied by those who required the distraction of gambling to endure the evening. In another, a supper of profuse champagne and bowls of negus awaited consumption. The largest hall was reserved for the dance, though the activity within lacked the vitality of genuine joy. Minuets were called, executed by couples moving with the stiff grace of puppets on strings. Among them, Lady Maria Esmond, an earl's daughter and the highest-ranking presence save for the crippled Lady Augusta Crutchley, danced the first minuet with Harry. He acquitted himself with an elegance that satisfied the room, surpassing even Mr. Wolfe, who stood awkwardly beside Miss Lowther. Following this, Harry requested Miss Theo for the next minuet. She accepted, her cheeks flushing with a happiness that seemed artificial under the scrutiny of her parents and the seething resentment of Miss Humpleby, who had expected to follow Lady Maria.

After the minuets came the country dances, accompanied by a harp, a fiddle, and a flageolet perched precariously in a small balcony. These instruments emitted a thin, melancholy thread of sound that permeated the room. If one were to take up an old book of music today and attempt to replicate these tunes, the result would be a revelation of sorrow; the melodies possess an inherent bitterness, a *amari aliquid*, that suggests they were once joyful but have since decayed into the limbo of the past. Yet, despite this sad accompaniment, the guests laughed, courted, and frisked, oblivious to the fact that their ancestors would later mock the very music that sustained them.

Harry Warrington held the honor of dancing with the Duchess of Queensberry, a woman of considerable stature and influence. Though the Duchess deliberately turned her back on a present countess, laughing loudly and pointing at her with a fan, the entire company ignored her Grace. Instead, they bowed, cringed, and smiled toward the Countess of Yarmouth-Walmoden, a figure favored by King George II. Earlier that morning, this countess had greeted Harry with graciousness, inviting him to cards. Purblind Colonel Blinkinsop, mistakenly believing the invitation was for him, had bowed profoundly. The Countess corrected him with a dismissive "Pooh!" clarifying she meant the young Virginian. Consequently, the room thronged around Lady Yarmouth, eager for her approval. My Lady Blanche Pendragon, Sir Lancelot Quintain, and the Dean of Ealing all vied for a single smile from her. Even Lady Maria and Madame de Bernstein offered their services with meek respect and grave courtesy.

Yet, amidst this display of deference, Miss Hester chose indignation. During her dance with Harry, she spoke scarcely a word. As they moved to the supper room, passing Madame Walmoden's card table, the Countess called out cheerfully, asking if her "briddy liddle bardner" enjoyed dancing.

"I thank your ladyship," Miss Hester replied, tossing her head, "I don't like dancing, and I don't like cards." With a curtsey that resembled a falling cheese, she strutted away from the Countess's table.

Harry was visibly offended. Sarcasm from the young toward the aged pained him; flippant behavior toward himself wounded him further. He had extended courtesy to everyone he met, expecting a reciprocal politeness. Hetty, however, wore an ingenuous smile that masked her intent. Approaching the sideboard, she asked artlessly, "What a horrid, vulgar old woman that is; don't you think so?"

"What woman?" Harry asked.

"That German woman—my Lady Yarmouth—to whom all the men are bowing and cringing."

"Her ladyship has been very kind to me," Harry said grimly. "Won't you have some of this custard?"

"And you have been bowing to her, too! You look as if your negus was not nice," Hetty continued harmlessly.

"It is not very good negus," Harry admitted with a gulp.

"And the custard is bad too! I declare 'tis made with bad eggs!" cried Miss Lambert.

"Wish, Hester, that the entertainment and the company had been better to your liking," Harry said, his voice low.

"'Tis very unfortunate; but I dare say you could not help it," Hetty retorted, tossing her curly head.

Harry groaned inwardly, clenching his fists and teeth. The little torturer pressed on, "You seem disturbed: shall we go to my mamma?"

"Yes, let us go to your mamma," Harry agreed, his eyes glazing with anger. A curse escaped his lips at an unlucky waiter blocking his path.

"La! Is that the way you speak in Virginia?" asked Miss Pertness.

"We are rough there sometimes, madam, and can't help being disturbed," Harry said slowly, his whole frame trembling as fire flashed in his eyes. Hetty saw nothing clearly afterward until she reached her mother. Never before had she seen Harry appear so handsome, so noble.

"You look pale, child!" cried her mother, anxious. "'Tis the cold—or the heat. Thank you, Mr. Warrington." She offered a faint curtsey as Harry bowed tremendously and walked away among his guests, still furious.

His agitation was interrupted by another altercation involving his aunt and the Duchess of Queensberry. As the royal favorite passed the Duchess, her Grace bestowed an awful stare, her eyes lacking the brightness of her youth when she claimed to set the world on fire. Turning to her neighbor with an affected laugh, she unleashed a ceaseless barrage of giggles and sneers aimed at the Hanoverian lady. The Countess pursued her cards, seemingly unaware or unwilling to acknowledge the gibes directed at her. A feud of many years existed between the Duchesses of Queensberry and the royal family.

"How you all bow down to the idol! Don't tell me! You are as bad as the rest, my good Madame Bernstein!" the Duchess declared. "Ah, what a true Christian country this is! And how your dear first husband, the Bishop, would have liked to see such a sight!"

"Forgive me, if I fail quite to understand your Grace," Madame de Bernstein replied.

"We are both of us growing old, my good Bernstein, or perhaps we simply won't understand when we don't choose to. That is the way with us women, my good young Iroquois."

"Your Grace remarked that it was a Christian country," Madame de Bernstein said, "and I failed to perceive the point."

"Indeed, my good creature, there is very little point in it! I meant we were such good Christians because we were so forgiving. Don't you remember reading, when you were young, or your husband the Bishop reading in the pulpit, how when a woman amongst the Jews was caught doing wrong, the Pharisees were for stoning her out of hand? Far from stoning such a woman now, look how fond we are of her! Any man in this room would go round it on his knees if yonder woman bade him. Yes, Madame Walmoden, you may look up from your cards with your great painted face and frown with your great painted eyebrows at me. You know I am talking about you; and I intend to go on talking about you. I say any man here would go round the room on his knees, if you bade him!"

"I think, madam, I know two or three who wouldn't!" Harry interjected with spirit.

"Quick, let me hug them to my heart of hearts!" cried the old Duchess. "Which are they? Bring 'em to me, my dear Iroquois! Let us have a game of four—of honest men and women; that is to say, if we can find a couple more partners, Mr. Warrington!"

"Here are we three," said the Baroness Bernstein with a forced laugh, "let us play a dummy."

"Pray, madam, where is the third?" the Duchess asked, looking around.

"Madam!" cried the other elderly lady, "I leave your Grace to boast of your honesty, which I have no doubt is spotless: but I will thank you not to doubt mine before my own relatives and children!"

"See how she fires up at a word! I am sure, my dear creature, you are quite as honest as most of the company," the Duchess said.

"Which may not be good enough for her Grace the Duchess of Queensberry and Dover, who, to be sure, might have stayed away in such a case, but it is the best my nephew could get, madam, and his best he has given you. You look astonished, Harry, my dear—and well you may. He is not used to our ways, madam."

"Madam, he has found an aunt who can teach him our ways, and a great deal more!" cried the Duchess, rapping her fan.

"She will teach him to try and make all his guests welcome, old or young, rich or poor.
