The Colonel and his wife had decided to move Hetty away, believing distance would cure the ailment. Yet the disease persisted, clinging to her despite the miles and the changing climate. Men might be whipped into obedience by absence, but women require a different regimen. To secure their fidelity, one needs a judicious mixture of neglect and occasional violence—a brisk dose of the latter acting as an alterative, followed by sparse intervals of affection. Too much sweetness cloyes the palate; a young woman with every wish granted will yawn in her lover's face, preferring the petty attentions of a fool. Conversely, the woman who receives a bootjack thrown at her or curses before the servants returns at tea-time, nuzzling at the knee of the man who has just finished his wine and nap. She looks around proudly, signaling to the butler that her Henry is good. This is the dynamic of power: the henpecked versus the master who commands with a whistle.

Hetty's removal was futile. She intended to remain as devoted to Harry in his absence as she had been in his presence. Before the ball and Dobbin's departure, she should have bid him farewell, admitting her wilfulness and thanking him for his kindness. She would have shown no special emotion, too ashamed of her secret to betray it. Harry, preoccupied, failed to read the grief behind her glances or the artifice of her innocent smiles. He parted calmly, assuming she was happy to return to her music, poultry, and garden.

He did not ride partway home beside his friend's carriage. Other engagements awaited him. By the time he returned, the Lamberts were gone from Tunbridge Wells. Their windows stood open, a card in one announcing the rooms were once more to let. A fleeting sorrow at the blankness of spaces recently filled by frank, friendly faces might have crossed the young gentleman's mind, but he dined promptly at the White Horse, ate, and demanded his bottle fiercely. Meanwhile, poor little Hester choked over her tea as the Lamberts arrived at their friends' house in Westerham. Her cheeks were wan, dark circles framing her eyes. The thunder had raged; the night was hot; she could not sleep. Tomorrow, she would recover. Home they came.

There was the gate where he had fallen. There was the bed he had occupied, the chair where he used to sit. Ages seemed to have passed. What a gulf separated today from yesterday! Who was that little child calling chickens or watering roses yonder? Was she and that girl the same Hester Lambert? She seemed older than Theo now—Theo, who had always been composed, clever, and prematurely aged. But in a night or two, Hester had lived through long, long years. Poppy and mandragora would never medicine them to the sweet sleep they had tasted yesterday.

Maria Esmond watched the Lambert cavalcade depart, feeling a grim relief. When Harry entered his aunt's card-room, flushed with Barbeau's wine, she looked at him with hot eyes. He laughed, rattling in reply to his aunt's question about which girl was his sweetheart. He claimed to love them both like sisters, praising the Lamberts as the finest people he knew. Why wasn't Lambert a general? He had been a distinguished officer, favored by the Duke. Madame Bernstein suggested Harry make interest with Lady Yarmouth for his protégé.

"Elle ravvole de fous, cher bedid anche!" Madame Bernstein mimicked the Countess's German accent, delighted by her son's success. "You carry off the hearts of all the old women, don't you, Maria?" she sneered at her niece, who quivered under the stab.

"You were quite right," the Baroness continued, "not to perceive that she cheated at cards. You play like a grand seigneur."

"Did she cheat?" cried Harry, astonished. "I am sure, ma'am, I saw no unfair play."

"No more did I, my dear, but I am sure she cheated. Bah! Every woman cheats, I and Maria included, when we can get a chance. But when you play with the Walmoden, you don't do wrong to lose in moderation; and many men cheat in that way. Cultivate her. She has taken a fancy to your beaux yeux. Why should your Excellency not be Governor of Virginia, sir? You must go and pay your respects to the Duke and his Majesty at Kensington. The Countess of Yarmouth will be your best friend at court."

"Why should you not introduce me, aunt?" Harry asked.

The old lady's rouged cheek grew redder. "I am not in favour at Kensington," she said. "I may have been once; and there are no faces so unwelcome to kings as those they wish to forget. All of us want to forget something or somebody. I dare say our ingenu here would like to wipe a sum or two off the slate. Wouldst thou not, Harry?"

Harry turned red, as did Maria, and his aunt laughed one of those wicked laughs unpleasant to hear. What did those guilty signals on their cheeks mean? What account was scored upon their memories that they desired to efface? Madame Bernstein was likely right; most folks possess ugly reckonings written on their consciences, which they are glad to be quit of.

If Maria had known one of the causes of Harry's disquiet, the middle-aged spinster would have been more unquiet still. For several days, Harry had missed a pocket-book. He remembered having it the day he drank claret at the White Horse and Gumbo carried him to bed. He searched for it in the morning, but none of his servants had seen it. He inquired at the White Horse, but found no trace. He dared not cry the book, making only cautious inquiries. If Lady Maria Esmond knew that the outpourings of her heart were in the hands of the public, her condition would be dire. The letters contained disclosures: a hundred family secrets narrated by an artless correspondent, laden with satire and abuse of persons connected to Mr. Warrington. There were expostulations about his attentions to other ladies, scorn, scandal, jokes, appeals, and protests of eternal fidelity—the usual farrago of love-letters. Would she like those letters read by anyone else? Did she recall her unfavorable opinions of the Miss Browns or Mrs. Thompson? Did she remember her words regarding Jones himself, whom she subsequently married after breaking off her engagement to Edward due to settlement disputes? Would Mr. J. like to see those remarks? She knew she wouldn't. Therefore, she should withdraw the imputation she had already cast in her mind upon Lady Maria Esmond.

No doubt her letters were foolish, as most love-letters are, but it did not follow that there was anything wrong in them. They are foolish when written by young folks to one another, and how much more foolish when written by an old man to a young lass, or vice versa. No wonder Lady Maria disliked them being read. Why, the very spelling—but that mattered less in her ladyship's days, and people are just as foolish now, though they spell better. No, it is not the spelling that matters; it is the writing at all. I, for one, am determined never to speak or write my mind out regarding anything or anybody. I intend to say of every woman that she is chaste and handsome; of every man that he is handsome, clever, and rich; of every book that it is delightfully interesting; of Snobmore's manners that they are gentlemanlike; of Screwby's dinners that they are luxurious; of Jawkins's conversation that it is lively and amusing; of Xantippe, that she has a sweet temper; of Jezebel, that her colour is natural; of Bluebeard, that he really was most indulgent to his wives, and that very likely they died of bronchitis. What? A word against the spotless Messalina? What an unfavourable view of human nature! What? King Cheops was not a perfect monarch? Oh, you railer at royalty and slanderer of all that is noble and good! When this book is concluded, I shall change the jaundiced livery which my books have worn since I began to lisp in numbers, give them rose-coloured coats with cherubs on the cover, and ensure all characters within are perfect angels.

Meanwhile, we exist in a society of men and women from whose shoulders no wings have yet sprouted, who undoubtedly possess little failings. There is Madame Bernstein, who has fallen asleep after dinner, having eaten and drunk too much. Mr. Harry Warrington has gone to play billiards with Count Caramboli; I suspect idleness is his failing. This is what Mr. Chaplain Sampson remarked to Lady Maria as they spoke in a low tone, avoiding interruption of Aunt Bernstein's doze in the neighboring room.

"A gentleman of Mr. Warrington's means can afford to be idle," Lady Maria said. "Surely you love cards and billiards yourself, my good Mr. Sampson?"

"I don't say, madam, my practice is good, only my doctrine is sound," the Chaplain replied with a sigh. "This young gentleman should have some employment. He should appear at court, enter the service of his country, as befits a man of his station. He should settle down and choose a woman of suitable rank as his wife." Sampson looked in her ladyship's face as he spoke.

"Indeed, my cousin is wasting his time," Lady Maria said, blushing slightly.

"Mr. Warrington might see his relatives of his father's family," the Chaplain suggested.

"Suffolk country boobies drinking beer and hallooing
