The rain fell on London with a steady, indifferent rhythm, washing the grime from the cobblestones but doing little to cleanse the air of the city's inherent rot. Harry Warrington stood in the corner of a smoky room, watching the dice tumble across the green baize table. He was a man of bright lace and expensive velvet, a figure of golden hair and fair complexion, yet beneath the surface lay a calculation as cold as the winter wind outside.

He remembered the promise he had made to his cousin, the one extracted with such force that it now hung over him like a debt. It was a dismal engagement, one he would gladly shed if he could. Perhaps the beating he had administered to poor Will Esmond served this purpose. A boxing match would inevitably lead to a family quarrel; in that quarrel, Maria might take her brother's side. Harry would offer no retraction, no apology. Will, forced to call him to account, would discover which was the stronger man. In the chaos of the feud, the agreement would dissolve, and Harry would be free.

So honest Harry had laid his trap and lit the fuse. The explosion had occurred, leaving Will's nose swollen and his eye black for a week, but no blood had been spilled. Will had risen from the floor, shaken but standing. How many sensible men would settle their accounts in private, with no witnesses to record the score? Maria had not taken her family's side; she had declared for her cousin, as had my lord, when advised of the disturbance. Lord Castlewood claimed Will had struck the first blow, citing the chaplain's provocation. It was not the first time Will had been found quarreling in his cups. Mr. Warrington had shown proper spirit in resenting the injury, and it was for Will, not Harry, to ask pardon.

Harry refused any apology until his horse was returned or his bet paid. The chronicler cannot determine how the affair of the bet was finally resolved, but it is certain the cousins met in the houses of various friends, avoiding further mauling.

Maria's elder brother had initially been content to see his sister, who had remained unmarried for so many years, marry any gentleman who presented himself. If it were a Virginian, so much the better. She would retreat to his wigwam in the forest, where she could be disposed of. In the natural course of things, Harry would survive his elderly bride, consoling himself or not as he preferred after her departure.

But after an interview with Aunt Bernstein, which his lordship had conducted upon arriving in London, he changed his mind. He even attempted to dissuade Maria from the match, professing pity for the young fellow condemned to a life of misery because of a silly promise made at twenty-one.

Misery, indeed! Maria was at a loss to understand why he should be miserable. Pity, forsooth! My lord at Castlewood had seen no pity in it. Maria knew what pity meant. Her brother had visited Aunt Bernstein; she had offered money to break the match. She understood my lord's meaning, but Mr. Warrington was a man of honor, and she trusted him.

Away walked my lord to White's, or whatever haunt he frequented. It is probable his sister had guessed too accurately the nature of his conversation with Madame Bernstein.

"And so," he thought, "the end of my virtue is likely to be that the Mohock falls a prey to others, and there is no earthly use in my sparing him. 'Quem deus vult'—what was that schoolmaster's adage? If I do not have him, somebody else will. That is clear. My brother has had a slice; my dear sister wants to swallow the whole of him bodily. Here have I been at home respecting his youth and innocence, declining to play beyond the value of a sixpence, acting as guardian and mentor. Why am I but a fool to fatten a goose for other people to feed upon? Not many good actions have I done in this life, and here is this one that benefits whom? Others. Talk of remorse! By all the fires and furies, the remorse I feel is for things I have not done and might have done! Why did I spare Lucretia? She hated me ever after, and her husband went the way for which he was predestined. Why have I let this lad off? Those Marches and the rest, who do not want him, may pluck him! And I have a bad reputation; I am the man people point at, calling the wicked lord, against whom women warn their sons! Pardi, I am not a penny worse, only a great deal more unlucky than my neighbors, and it is only my cursed weakness that has been my greatest enemy!"

Here, manifestly, in recording a speech which a gentleman only thought, the chronicler overdraws his account with the patient reader, who has a right not to accept this draft on his credulity. Yet have not Livy, Thucydides, and a score of other historians made speeches for their heroes which the latter never thought of delivering? How much more may we, knowing my Lord Castlewood's character so intimately, declare what was passing in his mind and transcribe his thoughts onto this paper? What? A whole pack of wolves hunts this lamb, and will make a meal of him presently, while one hungry old hunter stands by, denied a single cutlet? Who has not admired that noble speech of my Lord Clive, when reproached on his return from India for making rather too free with jaghires, lakhs, gold mohurs, diamonds, pearls, and what not? "Upon my life," said the hero of Plassy, "when I think of my opportunities, I am surprised I took so little!"

To tell disagreeable stories of a gentleman until one is forced to impart them is always painful to a feeling mind. Hence, though I have known, before the very first page of this history was written, what sort of a person my Lord Castlewood was, and in what esteem he was held by his contemporaries, I have kept back much that was unpleasant about him, allowing only the candid reader to perceive that he was a nobleman who ought not to be liked. It is true that my Lord March and other gentlemen of whom he complained would have thought no more of betting with Mr. Warrington for his last shilling and taking their winnings than they would scruple to pick the bones of a chicken. They would take any advantage of the game, their superior skill, or their private knowledge of the horses. In so far, they followed the practice of all gentlemen: but when they played, they played fair; and when they lost, they paid.

Madame Bernstein was loath to tell her Virginian nephew all she knew to his family's discredit. She was even touched by my lord's forbearance regarding Harry on his first arrival in Europe, and pleased with his compliance with her wishes in this particular. But in the conversation she had with her nephew Castlewood concerning Maria's designs on Harry, he had spoken his mind with his usual cynicism. He voted himself a fool for sparing a lad whom no sparing would eventually keep from ruin. He pointed out Mr. Harry's undeniable extravagances, his spendthrift associates, his nights at faro and hazard, and his rides to Newmarket. He asked why he alone should keep his hands from the young fellow.

In vain Madame Bernstein pleaded that Harry was poor. Bah! he was heir to a principality which ought to have been his, Castlewood's, and might have set up their ruined family. Indeed, Madame Bernstein thought Mr. Warrington's Virginian property much greater than it was. Were there not money-lenders in the town who would give him money on post-obits in plenty? Castlewood knew as much to his cost: he had applied to them in his father's lifetime, and the cursed crew had eaten up two-thirds of his miserable income. He spoke with such desperate candor and ill-humor that Madame Bernstein began to be alarmed for her favorite and determined to caution him at the first opportunity.

That evening she began to pen a billet to Mr. Warrington. But all her life long she was slow with her pen and disliked using it. "I never knew any good come of writing more than bonjour or business," she used to say. "What is the use of writing ill, when there are so many clever people who can do it well? And even then, it were best left alone." So she sent one of her men to Mr. Harry's lodgings, bidding him come and drink a dish of tea with her the next day, when she proposed to warn him.

But the next morning she was indisposed and could not receive Mr. Harry when he came. She kept her chamber for a couple of days, and the next day there was a great engagement, and the next day Mr. Harry was off on some expedition of his own. In the whirl of London life, what man sees his neighbor, what brother his sister, what schoolfellow his old friend? Ever so many days passed before Mr. Warrington and his aunt had that confidential conversation which the latter desired.

She began by scolding him mildly about his extravagance and madcap frolics (though, in truth, she was charmed with him for both). He replied that young men will be young men, and that it was in dutifully waiting in attendance on his aunt that he had made the acquaintance with whom he mostly lived at present. She then, with some prelude, began to warn him regarding his cousin, Lord Castlewood. On this, he broke into a bitter laugh and said the good-natured world had told him plenty about Lord Castlewood already.
