The house in Kensington Square was a vessel designed for containment, holding the weight of the Castlewood name and the necessary machinery of its service. It was a fortress of proximity, built to keep the family close to the Palace when the King resided there, yet geographically distant from the heart of London itself. A century prior, the distance was a chasm; today, it was merely a measure of inconvenience. George Selwyn, observing the geography of his own anxiety, admitted he dared not venture forth, fearing the theft of a single night—by footpads draped in crape or by ladies powdered in rouge at the quadrille table. The threat was ambiguous, the danger statistical, but the isolation was absolute.

At noon, the day following Harry's reappearance at White's, the household convened for breakfast. The gathering was a mechanical assembly of duty: the virtuous kinsfolk, Mr. Will included, who was scheduled to depart into waiting later that afternoon. The ladies arrived first, bringing the ritual of chocolate. Mr. Will joined them in his court suit, a performance of deference. Finally, the head of the house entered, languid and unmade, clad in bedgown and nightcap, his wig still absent from his head.

Here lay the news. Will had brought it home from the Star and Garter the previous evening, sourced from whispers at White's and confirmed by sight at Ranelagh.

"Heard what? Seen what?" Lord Castlewood asked, picking up the *Daily Advertiser*, his voice flat against the silence of the morning.

"Ask Maria," Lady Fanny replied, her tone suggesting the answer was written in her expression alone. She wore a face of portentous sadness, pale as a tablecloth, a mask of grief that seemed to absorb the light of the room.

"'Tis one of Will's usual elegant and polite inventions," Maria dismissed, her voice smooth.

"No," Will swore, punctuating the denial with several oaths. "It was no invention of his. Tom Claypool of Norfolk saw them both at Ranelagh; and Jack Morris came out of White's, where he heard the story from Harry Warrington's own lips. Curse him, I'm glad of it!" Will roared, slapping the table with a force that shook the china. "What do you think of your Fortunate Youth, your Virginian, whom your lordship made so much of, turning out to be a second son?"

"The elder brother not dead?" Lord Castlewood asked, his brow furrowing.

"No more dead than you are. Never was. It's my belief that it was a cross between the two."

"Mr. Warrington is incapable of such duplicity!" Maria cried, her composure cracking.

"I never encouraged the fellow, I am sure you will do me justice there," the Lady interjected, her voice steady. "Nor did Fanny: not we, indeed!"

"Not we, indeed!" echoed Lady Fanny, her voice joining hers in a chorus of feigned innocence.

"The fellow is only a beggar, and, I dare say, has not paid for the clothes on his back," Will continued, his satisfaction palpable. "I'm glad of it, for, hang him, I hate him!"

"You don't regard him with favourable eyes; especially since he blacked yours, Will!" Lord Castlewood grinned, the humorist in him surfacing despite the gravity of the situation. "So the poor fellow has found his brother, and lost his estate!" He turned to Maria, who, though looking the picture of woe, must have suggested something ludicrous to the man beside her. For a minute, he gazed at her, then burst into a shrill laugh. The sound cut through the room, causing the poor lady's face to flush, her eyes suddenly pouring over with tears. "It's a shame! It's a shame!" she sobbed, hiding her face in her handkerchief. Maria's stepmother and sister exchanged glances, silent observers of the performance.

"We never quite understand your lordship's humour," the stepmother remarked, her voice grave.

"I don't see there is the least reason why you should," Lord Castlewood said, coolly. "Maria, my dear, pray excuse me if I have said—that is, done anything, to hurt your feelings."

"Done anything! You pillaged the poor lad in his prosperity, and laugh at him in his ruin!" Maria rose from the table, glaring around at her family, her voice rising.

"Excuse me, my dear sister, I was not laughing at him," Lord Castlewood said, gently.

"Oh, never mind at what or whom else, my lord! You have taken from him all he had to lose. All the world points at you as the man who feeds on his own flesh and blood. And now you have his all, you make merry over his misfortune!" She rustled from the room, flinging looks of defiance at the assembled party.

"Tell us what has happened, or what you have heard, Will, and my sister's grief will not interrupt us." Will recounted the tale at great length, with immense exultation at Harry's discomfiture, the story now buzzing through all of London regarding George Warrington's sudden apparition. Lord Castlewood expressed sorrow for Harry; Harry was a good, brave lad, and his kinsman liked him, as much as certain worldly folks like each other. To be sure, he played Harry at cards and took the advantage of the market upon him; but why not? The peach which other men would certainly pluck, he might as well devour. If that were all his conscience had to reproach him with, he need not be very uneasy.

"Where does Mr. Warrington live?"

Will expressed himself ready to enter upon a state of reprobation if he knew or cared.

"He shall be invited here, and treated with every respect," Lord Castlewood declared.

"Including piquet, I suppose!" Will growled.

"Or will you take him to the stables, and sell him one of your bargains of horseflesh, Will?" Lord Castlewood asked. "You would have won of Harry Warrington fast enough, if you could; but you cheat so clumsily at your game that you got paid with a cudgel. I desire, once more, that every attention may be paid to our cousin Warrington."

"And that you are not to be disturbed, when you sit down to play, of course, my lord!" cried Lady Castlewood.

"Madam, I desire fair play, for Mr. Warrington, and for myself, and for every member of this amiable family," Lord Castlewood retorted, fiercely.

"Heaven help the poor gentleman if your lordship is going to be kind to him," the stepmother said, with a curtsey. There is no knowing how far this family dispute might have been carried, had not, at this moment, a phaeton driven up to the house, in which were seated the two young Virginians.

It was the carriage the prodigal had purchased in the days of his prosperity. He drove it still. George sat by his side; their negroes were behind them. Harry had been meekly giving the whip and reins to his brother, ceding the whole property to him. "What business has a poor devil like me with horses and carriages, Georgy?" Harry had humbly said. "Beyond the coat on my back, and the purse my aunt gave me, I have nothing in the world. You take the driving-seat, brother; it will ease my mind if you will take the driving-seat." George laughingly said he did not know the way, and Harry did; and that, as for the carriage, he would claim only a half of it, as he had already done with his brother's wardrobe. "But a bargain is a bargain; if I share thy coats, thou must divide my breeches' pocket, Harry; that is but fair dealing!" Again and again Harry swore there never was such a brother on earth. How he rattled his horses over the road! How pleased and proud he was to drive such a brother! They came to Kensington in famous high spirits; and Gumbo's thunder upon Lord Castlewood's door was worthy of the biggest footman in all St. James's.

Only Lady Castlewood and her daughter Lady Fanny were in the room into which the young gentlemen were ushered. Will had no particular fancy to face Harry; my lord was not dressed; Maria had her reasons for being away, at least till her eyes were dried.

When we drive up to friends' houses nowadays in our coaches-and-six, when John carries up our noble names, when, finally, we enter the drawing-room with our best hat and best Sunday smile foremost, does it ever happen that we interrupt a family row? That we come simpering and smiling in, and stepping over the delusive ashes of a still burning domestic heat? That in the interval between the hall-door and the drawing-room, Mrs., Mr., and the Misses Jones have grouped themselves in a family tableau; this girl artlessly arranging flowers in a vase, let us say; that one reclining over an illuminated work of devotion; mamma on the sofa, with the butcher's and grocer's book pushed under the cushion, some elegant work in her hand, and a pretty little foot pushed out advantageously; while honest Jones, far from saying, "Curse that Brown, he is always calling here!" holds out a kindly hand, shows a pleased face, and exclaims, "What, Brown my boy, delighted to see you! Hope you've come to lunch!" I say, does it ever happen
