The narrative machinery of fiction requires fuel beyond the mundane. A writer dealing with the profession of arms—the clash of steel, the display of courage, the specific geometry of danger—can afford to recount actual affairs. But the lives of the rest? The sugar merchant, the lawyer buried in black-letter texts, the tailor measuring breeches on a board? To chronicle their daily grind, the rustical history of eighteenpence a day, would be unbearable. Even the poets of the age, in their desperate flight from reality, dressed shepherds in pink breeches and chintz waistcoats, tying flageolets with blue satin ribbons. They invented a pastoral that denied the labor of the soil.

So, the novelist is forced to the periphery. We wander the theatre-lobbies, the coffee-houses, the pleasure-haunts. Meanwhile, the great serious world plods in its chambers, toils at its looms, jogs on its accustomed labors. We see our characters only when they are disengaged, only when they are away from their work. Corydon carts litter and threshes barley before he can make love to Phillis; Ancillula dresses the nursery and waits on her misses before she can speak through the area-railings to Boopis, the policeman. All day, heels beat the stale pavement until the moment arrives to snatch a hasty kiss or a furtive cold pie. It is only in these stolen intervals that we can bring the character and the reader together.

Madame de Bernstein found her nephew, Harry Warrington, increasingly invisible. The macaronis and fine gentlemen at White's and Arthur's had shown him a cold shoulder; the Ring, the Mall, and the gaming-tables knew him no more. Yet the old lady, who had once loved him with such eager intensity, now took the side of the world against him. She vowed that the indifference of the world would be conquered if he possessed the courage to face it. But Harry was too honest to wear a smiling face when discontented; too genuine to disguise mortification or anger with the adroit flatteries required of society.

"You pull a long face," the old woman said, her tone shifting from warmth to patronizing dismissal. "Everybody has to put up with impertinences. If you get a box on the ear now that you are poor and cast down, you must say nothing, bear it with a smile, and revenge it ten years after. Moi qui vous parle! Do you suppose I have had no humble-pie to eat? All of us in our turn are called upon to swallow it. Win back the place you have lost. Go about more than ever. Be civil to everybody—to all women especially. Show your spirit. With economy and your brother's generosity, you can still make a genteel figure. Look out amongst the merchants in the City. They won't know you are out of fashion at the Court end. When did you go to see my Lady Yarmouth? Improve that connexion!"

Instead of the smiles and kisses of the past, she received him with coldness. She became peevish, casting gibes and scorn at him before her guests, making his honest face flush with humiliation. Her servants, once eager, barely acknowledged him. My Lady was often indisposed; her people did not press him to wait, did not volunteer to ask if he would stay to dine. Harry carried his woes to Mrs. Lambert. In a passion of sorrow, he told her of his aunt's cruelty. He sat glum in a window-seat, heart-sick and silent, while the good lady and her daughters moved to and fro, busy with the cares of the house.

"I know you are the best people alive," he would say to the ladies, "and the kindest, and that I must be the dullest company in the world."

"Well, you are not very lively, Harry," said Miss Hetty, beginning to command him, perhaps asking herself, "Is this the gentleman I took to be such a hero?"

"If he is unhappy, why should he be lively?" asked Theo, gently. "He has a good heart, and is pained at his friends' desertion. Surely there is no harm in that?"

"I would have too much spirit to show I was hurt," cried Hetty, clenching her little fists. "And I would smile, though that horrible old painted woman boxed my ears. She is horrible, mamma. You think so yourself, Theo! Own, now, you think so yourself!"

"I mayn't like her," said Theo, turning very red. "But there is no reason why I should call Harry's aunt names before Harry's face."

"You provoking thing; you are always right!" cried Hetty. "Indeed, Harry, it was very wrong of me to make rude remarks about any of your relations."

"I don't care about the others, Hetty; but it seems hard that this one should turn upon me. I had got to be very fond of her; and you see, it makes me mad, somehow, when people I'm very fond of turn away from me."

"Suppose George were to do so?" asked Hetty.

Harry stood up, looking resolute and angry. "You don't know my brother as I know him—or you wouldn't take such a liberty as to suppose my brother George could do anything unkind or unworthy!" His face flushed.

Hetty turned very white. Then she looked up at Harry, and then she did not say a single word.

Before taking leave, Harry said in his simple way, "I'm very sorry, and I beg your pardon, Hetty, if I said anything rough... but I always fight up if anybody says anything against George."

Hetty did not answer, but gave him her hand and dropped a prim little curtsey.

That night, making curl-paper confidences, Hetty whispered to Theo, "Oh! I thought it would be so happy to see him every day. And now I do see him, I go on offending him. I can't help offending him; and I know he is not clever, Theo. But oh! isn't he good, and kind, and brave? Didn't he look handsome when he was angry?"

"You silly little thing, you are always trying to make him look handsome," Theo replied.

General Lambert chose to apply the monosyllable "Bo" to his wife as a rebuke for her inveterate love of sentiment and propensity to match-making—a trait belonging to every woman whose heart is worth a fig. He hinted that Madam Lambert was a goose if she fancied the two Virginian lads would fall in love with the young women of the house. Little Het might have her fancy; little girls will, but they get it over. "And you know, Molly," the General noted, "you fancied somebody else before you fancied me." But Harry had evidently not been smitten by Hetty; he was superseded by his elder brother, and could not even claim the coat upon his back as his own. Master Harry was no great catch.

"Oh yes: now he is poor we will show him the door, as all the rest of the world does, I suppose," said Mrs. Lambert.

"That is what I always do, isn't it, Molly? Turn my back on my friends in distress?" asked the General.

"No, my dear! I am a goose, now, and that I own, Martin!" said the wife, having recourse to the usual pocket-handkerchief.

"Let the poor boy come to us and welcome: ours is almost the only house in this selfish place where so much can be said for him. He is unhappy, and to be with us puts him at ease; in God's name let him be with us!" said the kind-hearted officer. Accordingly, whenever poor crestfallen Hal wanted a dinner or an evening's entertainment, Mr. Lambert's table had a corner for him. So was George welcome, too.

George went among the Lamberts, not at first with the cordiality Harry felt, for George was colder in his manner, more mistrustful of himself and others. But there was a goodness and friendliness about the family which touched almost all who came into frequent contact with them. George soon learned to love them for their own sake, as well as for their constant regard for his brother. He saw how sad Harry was and pitied his brother's depression. In his sarcastic way, George would often take himself to task before his brother for coming to life again.

"Dear Harry, I am George the Unlucky, though you have ceased to be Harry the Fortunate. Florac would have done much better not to pass his sword through that Indian's body, and to have left my scalp as an ornament for the fellow's belt. I say he would, sir! At White's the people would have respected you. Our mother would have wept over me, as a defunct angel, instead of being angry with me for again supplanting her favourite—you are her favourite, you deserve to be her favourite: everybody's favourite: only, if I had not come back, your favourite, Maria, would have insisted on marrying you; and that is how the gods would have revenged themselves upon you for your prosperity."

"I never know whether you are laughing at me or yourself, George," said the brother. "I never know whether you are serious or jesting."

"Precisely my own case, Harry, my dear!" said George.

"But this I know, that there never was a better brother in the world; and never better people than the Lamberts."

"Never was truer word said!" cried George, taking his brother's hand.

"And
