The silence in the room was heavier than the shouting that had preceded it. George Warrington sat apart, the air thick with the residue of a quarrel he had barely fought. His cousin, Will, had withdrawn his visits to Bloomsbury, perhaps wisely, perhaps out of spite. In his absence, Mr. Will's attentions had grown assiduous, a relentless pressure that made George feel the urge to strike out, even though both parties were legally bound to peace. The law demanded restraint; George's hands demanded release.

Lydia, however, offered no resistance. Her manner had shifted with startling velocity. Six weeks prior, she had viewed George's attention to another with a jealousy that bordered on madness. Now, she greeted Theo with a warmth that felt engineered. "Miss Theo is such a quiet, gentle creature," Lydia declared, her voice soft, almost musical in its rhythm. "George is just the husband for her. How fortunate that horrible quarrel had been prevented!"

She spoke of the constables arriving just in time, saving George's life, framing the interruption as a mercy. "You won't stop and meet Mr. Esmond at dinner today?" she asked, her smile a closed loop of innocence. "He can't do you any harm; and I am sure you will do him none." These words, delivered by a small girl to a gentleman in the presence of strangers, created a wall around George. They were polite, they were kind, and they were utterly devoid of the intimacy he sought. They rendered him an outsider in his own home.

For several days, the incident remained buried in Dean Street. George avoided disturbing the household with the memory of his near-duel. But once the ladies learned of it, the atmosphere fractured.

"You were actually going to take a fellow-creature's life," Theo exclaimed, her face pale. "And you came to see us, and said not a word! Oh, George, it was shocking!"

"My dear, he had insulted me and my brother," George pleaded, the logic of defense clashing with the chaos of emotion. "Could I let him call us both cowards, and sit by and say, Thank you?"

The General sat by, his expression grave, a statue of stoicism amidst the turmoil. "You know you think, papa, it is a wicked and un-Christian practice," Theo continued, seeking validation. "And have often said you wished gentlemen would have the courage to refuse!"

"To refuse? Yes," Mr. Lambert murmured, his face gloomy. "It must require a prodigious strength of mind to refuse."

Jack Lambert nodded, matching his father's somber tone. "And I think if any man were to call me a coward, I should be apt to forget my orders."

"You see brother Jack is with me!" George cried, seizing the alliance. "I must not be against you, Mr. Warrington."

"Mr. Warrington!" George snapped, turning red. "Would you, a clergyman, have George break the Commandments, and commit murder, John?"

"I am a soldier's son, sister," Jack replied dryly, dismissing the moral weight. "Besides, Mr. Warrington has committed no murder at all. We must soon be hearing from Canada, father. The great question of the supremacy of the two races must be tried there ere long!"

He turned his back on George, and the younger man watched him with a mixture of wonder and confusion. Hetty, looking pale, was excused under a pretext. George rose and followed the retreating girls to the door, returning moments later with a sudden clarity.

"Great powers, gentlemen!" he said, stepping back into the center of the room. "I believe, on my honour, you are giving me the credit of shirking this affair with Mr. Esmond!"

The clergyman and his father exchanged a glance. "A man's nearest and dearest are always the first to insult him," George flashed out, the anger rising again.

"You mean to say, 'Not guilty?' God bless thee, my boy!" the General roared. "I told thee so, Jack." He rubbed his hand across his eyes, blushing, and wrung George's hand with all his might.

"Not guilty of what, in heaven's name?" Mr. Warrington demanded.

"Nay," the General said, "Mr. Jack, here, brought the story. Let him tell it. I believe 'tis a ------ lie, with all my heart." Uttering this wicked expression, the General walked out of the room.

The Reverend J. Lambert looked foolish. "And what is this--this d----d lie, sir, that somebody has been telling of me?" George asked, grinning at the young clergyman.

"To question the courage of any man is always an offence to him," Mr. Lambert said stiffly. "And I rejoice that yours has been belied."

"Who told the falsehood, sir, which you repeated?" Mr. Warrington bawled. "I insist on the man's name!"

"You forget you are bound over to keep the peace," Jack warned.

"Curse the peace, sir! We can go and fight in Holland. Tell me the man's name, I say!"

"Fair and softly, Mr. Warrington!" the young parson interjected. "My hearing is perfectly good. It was not a man who told me the story which, I confess, I imparted to my father."

"What?" George stopped. The truth occurred to him. "Was it that artful, wicked little vixen in Bloomsbury Square?"

"Vixen is not the word to apply to any young lady, George Warrington!" Lambert exclaimed. "Much less to the charming Miss Lydia. She artful--the most innocent of Heaven's creatures! She wicked--that angel! With unfeigned delight that the quarrel should be over--with devout gratitude to think that blood consanguineous should not be shed--she spoke in terms of the highest praise of you for declining this quarrel, and of the deepest sympathy with you for taking the painful but only method of averting it."

"What method?" George stamped his foot.

"Why, of laying an information, to be sure!" Jack said.

On this revelation, George burst forth into language too violent to repeat, highly uncomplimentary to Miss Lydia.

"Don't utter such words, sir!" the parson cried, his patience snapping. "Do not insult, in my hearing, the most charming, the most innocent of her sex! If she has been mistaken in her information regarding you, and doubted your willingness to commit what, after all, is a crime--for a crime homicide is, and of the most awful description--you, sir, have no right to blacken that angel's character with foul words: and, innocent yourself, should respect the most innocent as she is the most lovely of women! Oh, George, are you to be my brother?"

"I hope to have that honour," George answered, smiling. He began to perceive the other's drift. "What, then, what--though 'tis too much bliss to be hoped for by sinful man--what, if she should one day be your sister? Who could see her charms without being subjugated by them? I own that I am a slave. I own that those Latin Sapphics in the September number of the Gentleman's Magazine, beginning Lydicae quondam cecinit venustae (with an English version by my friend Hickson of Corpus), were mine. I have told my mother what hath passed between us, and Mrs. Lambert also thinks that the most lovely of her sex has deigned to look favourably on me. I have composed a letter--she another. She proposes to wait on Miss Lydia's grandpapa this very day, and to bring me the answer, which shall make me the happiest or the most wretched of men! It was in the unrestrained intercourse of family conversation that I chanced to impart to my father the sentiments which my dear girl had uttered. Perhaps I spoke slightingly of your courage, which I don't doubt--by Heaven, I don't doubt: it may be, she has erred, too, regarding you. It may be that the fiend jealousy has been gnawing at my bosom, and--horrible suspicion!--that I thought my sister's lover found too much favour with her I would have all my own. Ah, dear George, who knows his faults? I am as one distracted with passion. Confound it, sir! What right have you to laugh at me? I would have you to know that risu inepto..."

"What, have you two boys made it up?" the General cried, entering at that moment, in the midst of a roar of laughter from George.

"I was giving my opinion to Mr. Warrington upon laughter, and upon his laughter in particular," Jack Lambert said, in a fume.

"George is bound over to keep the peace, Jack! Thou canst not fight him for two years; and between now and then, let us trust you will have made up your quarrel. Here is dinner, boys! We will drink absent friends, and an end to the war, and no fighting out of the profession!"

George pleaded an engagement as a reason to run away early from dinner. Jack must have speedily followed him, for when the former, after transacting some brief business at his own lodgings, came to Mr. Van den Bosch's door in Bloomsbury Square, he found the young parson already in parley with a servant.

"His master and mistress had left town yesterday," the servant said.
