The silence in the room was not empty; it was heavy with the arithmetic of regret. Had your father possessed the commonest share of prudence, this chapter of his history would remain unwritten, and you, the chaotic variables of his later years, would never have entered the equation to plague him. You shouted in the passages when he sought solitude for his books; you shattered his post-dinner slumber with the biological imperative of health; you misplaced his spectacles and stole his newspapers with the casual cruelty of youth. You ruined him with the relentless accumulation of tailors', mantua-makers', and tutors' bills—a debt incurred not by malice, but by the sheer weight of your existence. When illness struck, you broke his rest; when Joan could not sleep, the utility of Darby's nightcap vanished. Every trifling ailment terrified her until tranquility became a foreign concept. Were I not the most long-suffering creature in the world, I would have discarded the entire pack.

Now, having outgrown childhood, long petticoats, chicken-pox, small-pox, whooping-cough, and scarlet fever—the delectable accidents of puerile life—what proposal could that unconscionable woman make but to convert the south rooms into a nursery for potential grandchildren? She proposed setting up the Captain with a wife, urging early marriage simply because we had done it. She claimed he was too fond of Brookes's and Goosetree's when in London. She hinted, with perverse logic, that while an entrée to Carlton House was pleasant, it was dangerous for a young gentleman; thus, Miles must live away from temptation, sow his wild oats, and marry, as we did.

"Marry!" I replied, my voice cutting through the domestic fog. "My dear creature, we had no business to marry at all! By the laws of common prudence and duty, I ought to have backed out of my little engagement with Miss Theo—who would have married someone else—and taken a rich wife. Your Uncle John was a parson and unable to fight; poor Charley was a boy at school; your grandfather was too old to hold me to account with sword or pistol. I repeat: there never was a more foolish match in the world than ours, and our relations were perfectly right in being angry with us. What are relations made for, indeed, but to be angry and find fault?"

"When Hester marries," I continued, addressing Master George, "do you mind quarreling with her if she does not take a husband of your selecting? When George has secured his living, after being senior wrangler and fellow of his college, Miss Hester, do you toss up your little nose at the young lady he shall fancy? As for you, my little Theo, I cannot part with you. You must not quit your old father; for he likes you to play Haydn to him and peel his walnuts after dinner."

On the blank leaf opposite this paragraph, written in a large, girlish hand:

"I never intend to go.—THEODOSIA."

They both married, as the note in the family Bible confirms: Miss Theodosia Warrington to Joseph Clinton, son of the Rev. Joseph Blake, subsequently Master of Rodwell Regis Grammar School; and Miss Hester Mary, in 1804, to Captain F. Handyman, R.N.

While they enjoyed the blessing of meeting daily, billing and cooing in a fool's paradise, the two young people, your parents, drifted through the world, little heeding the chatter and meddling around them. Rinaldo was as brave a warrior as ever slew a Turk, yet he loved dangling in Armida's garden. Pray, my Lady Armida, what did you mean by flinging your spells over me in youth? Not glory, not fashion, not gaming-tables, not the society of men of wit whom I encountered, could keep me long from your apron-strings or out of reach of your dear, simple prattle.

Pray, my dear, what did we say to each other during those endless hours? I never slept after dinner then. Which of us was so witty? Was it I or you? How did our conversations become so delightful? I recall a year when I cared not to attend the trial and hanging of my Lord Ferrers, while all the world ran after his lordship. The King of Prussia's capital was taken; had the Austrians and Russians been encamped round the Tower, there could have been no greater stir in London. Yet Miss Theo and her young gentleman felt no inordinate emotion of pity or indignation. What to us was the fate of Leipzig or Berlin? The truth is, that dear old house in Dean Street was an enchanted garden of delights. I have been as idle since, but never as happy. Shall we order the postchaise, my dear, leave the children to keep house, and drive up to London to see if the old lodgings are still to be let? You shall sit at your old place in the window and wave a little handkerchief as I walk up the street. Say what we did was imprudent. Would we not do it over again? My good folks, if Venus had walked into the room and challenged the apple, I was so infatuated I would have given it your mother. And had she had the choice, she would have preferred her humble servant in a threadbare coat to my Lord Clive with all his diamonds.

Once, to be sure, and for a brief time in that year, I harbored notions of going on the highway to be caught and hung as my Lord Ferrers; or of joining the King of Prussia, requesting some of his Majesty's enemies to knock my brains out; or of enlisting for the India service to perform a desperate exploit ending in my bodily destruction. Ah me! That was indeed a dreadful time! Your mother scarce dares speak of it now, save in a whisper of terror; or think of it—it was such cruel pain. She was unhappy years after on the anniversary of the day, until one of you was born on it.

Suppose we had been parted: what had come to us? What had my lot been without her? As I think of that possibility, the whole world is a blank. I do not say were we parted now. It has pleased God to give us thirty years of union. We have reached the autumn season. Our successors are appointed and ready; and that one of us who is first called away knows the survivor will follow ere long. But we were actually parted in our youth; and I tremble to think what might have been, had not a dearest friend brought us together.

Unknown to myself, and very likely meaning only my advantage, my relatives in England chose to write to Madam Esmond in Virginia, representing what they were pleased to call the folly of the engagement I had contracted. Every one of them sang the same song. I saw the letters and burned the whole cursed pack of them years afterwards when my mother showed them to me at home in Virginia. Aunt Bernstein was forward with her advice. A young person, with no wonderful good looks, of no family, with no money—was ever such an imprudent connexion, and ought it not for dear George's sake to be broken off? She had several eligible matches in view for me. With my name and prospects, 'twas a shame I should throw myself away on this young lady; her sister ought to interpose—and so forth.

My Lady Warrington must write, too, in her peculiar manner. Her ladyship's letter was garnished with scripture texts. She dressed her worldliness out in phylacteries. She pointed out how I was living in an unworthy society of player-folks and the like, who she could not say were absolutely without religion (Heaven forbid!), but who were deplorably worldly. She would not say an artful woman had inveigled me for her daughter, having in vain tried to captivate my younger brother. She was far from saying any harm of the young woman I had selected; but at least this was certain: Miss L. had no fortune or expectations, and her parents might naturally be anxious to compromise me. She had taken counsel, etc. etc. She had sought for guidance where it was, etc. Feeling what her duty was, she had determined to speak. Sir Miles, a man of excellent judgment in the affairs of this world (though he knew and sought a better), fully agreed with her in opinion, nay, desired her to write and entreat her sister to interfere, that the ill-advised match should not take place.

And who besides must put a little finger into the pie but the new Countess of Castlewood? She wrote a majestic letter to Madam Esmond, stating that having been placed by Providence at the head of the Esmond family, it was her duty to communicate with her kinswoman and warn her to break off this marriage. I believe the three women laid their heads together previously; and packet after packet, they sent off their warnings to the Virginian lady.

One raw April morning, as Corydon goes to pay his usual duty to Phillis, he finds not his charmer with her dear smile ready to welcome him, but Mrs. Lambert, with very red eyes, and the General as pale as death. "Read this, George Warrington!" he says, as his wife's head drops between her hands; and he puts a letter before me, of which I recognized the handwriting. I can hear now the sobs of the good Aunt Lambert, and to this day the noise of fire-irons stirring a fire in a room overhead gives me a tremor. I heard such a noise that day in the girls' room where the sisters were together
