The guilt settled upon us not as a single weight, but as a treble chord, resonating whenever we glanced at the man we had broken. He was the object of our deepest love and highest respect, yet he was the victim of our collective treachery. The shock he endured was a peculiar, pitiful thing to witness for those of us holding the hammer. Our child of the heart had deceived him; our entire family had conspired against him. In the silence of heaven, where he dwells among spirits purified by earthly lessons in love and pardon, surely he forgives. With such a man, beneficence was instinctual, humility a gentle smile; to wound him was to commit a savagery akin to torturing a child or striking a nursing mother. Once the deed was done, we all groveled in the dust before the man we had injured.

I omit the scenes of forgiveness, the reconciliation, the shared worship, and the final separation when he departed for his government. The ship sailed away before us, leaving me and Theo stranded on the shore. We stood there, hand in hand, horribly abashed, silent, and guilty. My wife did not join me until her father had gone. During the interval between the ceremony of our marriage and his departure, she had remained at home, occupying her old place by her father's side and beside her sister. He was as kind as ever, but the women were almost speechless among themselves. Aunt Lambert, for once, was unkind and fretful in her temper; little Hetty was feverish and strange, murmuring, "I wish we were gone. I wish we were gone." Though admitted to the house and forgiven, I slunk away during those last days, seeing my wife only for a minute or two in the street or with her family. She was not truly mine until they were gone.

We traveled to Winchester and Hampton for what may be called our wedding. It was a dismal business. For a while, we felt utterly lonely, grieving for our dear father as if we had buried him or driven him to the grave by our undutifulness.

I instructed Sampson to announce our marriage in the newspapers. (My wife used to hang her head low before the poor fellow afterward.) I took Mrs. Warrington back to my old lodgings in Bloomsbury, where there was ample room for us, and our modest married life began. I wrote home to my mother in Virginia, revealing no particulars save that Mr. Lambert was departing for his government and that, bound in honor, I intended to fulfill my promise to his dearest daughter. I also stated my intention to complete my studies for the Bar, qualifying myself for employment at home or in any colony. My good Mrs. Mountain answered this letter, acting on the desire of Madam Esmond, who deemed it best for the sake of peace that my communications be conducted through her.

I found my relatives in a fury that was perfectly amusing to witness. The butler's face, as he said, "Not at home," at my uncle's house in Hill Street, was a blank tragedy that might have been studied by Garrick. My poor little wife was on my arm, and we were tripping away, laughing at the fellow's accueil, when we came upon my lady in a street stoppage in her chair. I took off my hat and made her the lowest possible bow. I affectionately asked after my dear cousins. "I—I wonder you dare look me in the face!" Lady Warrington gasped out. "Nay, don't deprive me of that precious privilege!" I replied. "Move on, Peter," she screamed to her chairman. "Your ladyship would not impale your own husband's flesh and blood!" I retorted. She rattled up the glass of her chair in a fury. I kissed my hand, removed my hat, and performed another of my very finest bows.

Shortly thereafter, walking in Hyde Park with my dearest companion, I met my little cousin exercising on horseback with a groom behind him. As soon as he saw us, he galloped up to us, the groom powdering afterwards and bawling out, "Stop, Master Miles, stop!"

"I am not to speak to my cousin," said Miles, "but telling you to send my love to Harry is not speaking to you, is it? Is that my new cousin? I'm not told not to speak to her. I'm Miles, cousin, Sir Miles Warrington Baronet's son, and you are very pretty!" "Now, duee now, Master Miles," said the groom, touching his hat to us, and the boy trotted away laughing, glancing back over his shoulder. "You see how my relations have determined to treat me," I said to my partner. "As if I married you for your relations!" said Theo, her eyes beaming with joy and love into mine. Ah, how happy we were! How brisk and pleasant the winter! How snug the kettle by the fire, where the abashed Sampson sometimes came to make the punch; how delightful the night at the theatre, for which our friends brought us tickets, and where we daily expected our new play of *Pocahontas* would rival the successes of all former tragedies.

The fickle old aunt of Clarges Street, who had received me on my first coming to London with my wife in a burst of scorn, mollified presently. As soon as she came to know Theo—who she had pronounced to be an insignificant little country-faced chit—she fell utterly in love with her, inviting her to tea and supper every day when there was no other company. "As for company, my dears," she would say, "I don't ask you. You are no longer *du monde*. Your marriage has put that entirely out of the question." So she would have us come to amuse her, entering and exiting by the back stairs. My wife was fine lady enough to feel only amused at this reception; and I must do the Baroness's domestics the justice to say that, had we been duke and duchess, we could not have been received with more respect. Madame de Bernstein was very much tickled and amused with my story of Lady Warrington and the chair. I acted it for her, giving her anecdotes of the pious Baronet's lady and her daughters, which pleased the mischievous, lively old woman.

The Dowager Countess of Castlewood, now established in her house at Kensington, gave us that kind of welcome which genteel ladies extend to their poorer relatives. We went once or twice to her ladyship's draws at Kensington; but, losing more money at cards and spending more money in coach-hire than I liked to afford, we speedily gave up those entertainments. I dare say we were no more missed or regretted than other people in the fashionable world, who are carried by death, debt, or other accident out of the polite sphere. My Theo did not in the least regret this exclusion. She had made her appearance at one of these draws, attired in some little ornaments which her mother had left behind, by which the good lady set some store; but I thought her own white neck was a great deal prettier than these poor twinkling stones. There were dowagers whose wrinkled old bones blazed with rubies and diamonds, which, I am sure, they would gladly have exchanged for her modest parure of beauty and freshness. Not a soul spoke to her—except, to be sure, Beau Lothair, a friend of Mr. Will's, who prowled about Bloomsbury afterwards and even sent my wife a billet. I met him in Covent Garden shortly after and promised to break his ugly face if ever I saw it in the neighborhood of my lodgings, and Madam Theo was molested no further.

The only one of our relatives who came to see us (Madame de Bernstein never came; she sent her coach for us sometimes, or made inquiries regarding us by her woman or her major-domo) was our poor Maria, who, with her husband, Mr. Hagan, often took a share of our homely dinner. Then we had friend Spencer from the Temple, who admired our Arcadian felicity and gently asked our sympathy for his less fortunate loves; and twice or thrice the famous Doctor Johnson came in for a dish of Theo's tea. A dish? A pailful! "And a pail the best thing to feed him, sar!" said Mr. Gumbo, indignantly; for the Doctor's appearance was not pleasant, nor his linen particularly white. He snorted, he grew red, and sputtered in feeding; he flung his meat about and bawled out in contradiction, annoying my Theo, whom he professed to admire greatly, by saying every time he saw her, "Madam, you do not love me; I see by your manner you do not love me; though I admire you, and come here for your sake. Here is my friend Mr. Reynolds that shall paint you: he has no ceruse in his paint-box that is as brilliant as your complexion." And so Mr. Reynolds, a most perfect and agreeable gentleman, would have painted my wife; but I knew what his price was and did not choose to incur that expense. I wish I had now, for the sake of the children, that they might see what yonder face was like some fifty-three years ago. To me, madam, 'tis the same now as ever; and your ladyship is always young!

What annoyed Mrs. Warrington with Dr. Johnson more than his contradictions, his sputterings, and his dirty nails, was, I think, an unfavorable opinion which he formed of my new tragedy. Hagan once proposed that he should read some scenes from it after tea
