The earth beneath the boots of the Continental army was hard-packed clay, scarred by the tread of armies that had come and gone. Breed's Hill stood as a monument not to victory, but to the stubborn refusal of the enemy to yield. The British chiefs, observing the slaughter inflicted from behind those lines, developed a peculiar respect for the American barricades. Whether constructed of stone or merely rows of blankets, they became immovable objects in the calculus of war. Even at White Plains, when Washington's forces were at the mercy of the victors, the conquering troops halted before a barrier of cornstalks and straw.

Winter followed, a season of dwindling spirits and empty bellies. The Congress troops lay starving and unarmed under the grasp of a superior force, while General Howe, in Philadelphia, allowed his great army to fiddle, gamble, and feast. Triumphal arches were erected in Britain, mocking the middle ages with tournaments and garlands offered by ladies to a clement chief. Yet, no statue was raised in America for this general. No one remembered the officer who fought their battles better, who retrieved their errors with adroitness, who ensured their defeats were little hurtful, and who, when the stronger force inevitably prevailed, showed an untiring tenderness in helping the disabled opponent rise again.

One imagines the fiery young warrior England sent to the continent, pacing endlessly around the defenses behind which the foe lay sheltered. Sleepless by day and night, consumed by a fierce wrath and a longing that ate away at him, he watched with intent eyes. He wound the track with an untiring scent, panting and hungry for blood, prowling through midnight forests or climbing silent precipices before dawn. He waited until his great heart was almost worn out, until the foe finally showed himself, springing upon him to grapple and die. Think of Wolfe at Quebec, and then hear Howe's fiddles as he sits smiling among the dancers in Philadelphia.

This contrast fueled a favorite scheme of the ministers at home and some generals in America: to establish a communication between Canada and New York, thereby cutting off New England. Burgoyne was entrusted with this plan, setting forth from Quebec with trumpets blowing before him, summoning the misguided rebels to lay down their arms. He brought a formidable force: German veterans, Indian warriors, and a brilliant train of artillery. It was expected that the people along his march would rally to the Royal cause. Initially, the Continental force opposing him was small, further weakened by the withdrawal of troops hurrying to meet the Canadian invasion. A British detachment from New York was to sweep up the Hudson, forcing a junction with Burgoyne at Albany. This was the moment when Washington's weakened army should have been struck; but a greater Power willed otherwise.

Looking over the game now, the blunders of the losing side appear with crystalline clarity. From beginning to end, they arrived too late. Supplies and reinforcements from home were too late. Troops were in difficulty, and succor reached them too late. The fleet appeared off York Town just too late, after Cornwallis had surrendered. A way of escape was opened to Burgoyne, but he resolved upon retreat too late. Officers in later days speculated infallibly on how a different wind would have saved America, how the French fleet might have been destroyed but for a tempest, how Washington might have fallen but for nightfall. Who has not speculated upon the "has been" and the "might have been"? I take my tattered old map-book from the shelf and see the board on which the great contest was played. I wonder at the curious chances that lost it. Putting aside any talk of national bravery, one cannot help but see that we held the best cards, and yet we lost the game.

The sport possessed a considerable fascination, stirring a languid blood. My brother Hal, settled on his plantation in Virginia, was perfectly satisfied with the sports and occupations he found there. The company of country neighbors sufficed him; he never tired of looking after his crops and people, fishing, shooting ducks, hunting in the woods, or enjoying his rubber and supper. Happy Hal, in his great barn of a house, under his roomy porches, with dogs lying round his feet; his friends, the Virginian Will Wimbles, at free quarters in his mansion; his negroes fat, lazy, and ragged; his shrewd little wife ruling over them and her husband, who always obeyed her implicitly when living, and who was pretty speedily consoled when she died! I say happy, though his lot would have been intolerable to me. Wife, friends, plantation, and town life at Richmond—how happy he whose foot fits the shoe which fortune gives him!

My income was five times as great; my house in England was larger, built of bricks and faced with freestone. My wife... would I have changed her for any other wife in the world? My children... well, I am contented with my Lady Warrington's opinion about them. But with all these plums and peaches and rich fruits poured into my lap, I fear I have been but an ingrate. Hodge, my gatekeeper, who shares his bread and scrap of bacon with a family as large as my own, seems to enjoy his meal as much as I do, though Mrs. Molly prepares her best dishes and Mr. Gumbo uncorks the choicest bottle from the cellar. Ah me! Sweetmeats have lost their savour for me, however they may rejoice my young ones from the nursery, and the perfume of claret palls upon old noses.

Our parson has poured out his sermons many and many a time. Perhaps I did not care for them much when he first broached them. Dost thou remember, honest friend? I say, Joe Blake, thou rememberest full well that October evening when we scrambled up an embrasure at Fort Clinton and a clubbed musket would have dashed these valuable brains out, had not Joe's sword whipped my rebellious countryman through the gizzard. Joe wore a red coat in those days—the uniform of the brave Sixty-third, whose leader, the bold Sill, fell pierced with many wounds beside him. He exchanged his red for black and my pulpit. His doctrines are sound, and his sermons short. We read the papers together over our wine. Not two months ago we read our old friend Howe's glorious deed of the first of June. We were told how the noble Rawdon, who fought with us at Fort Clinton, had joined the Duke of York; and to-day his Royal Highness is in full retreat before Pichegru, and he and my son Miles have taken Valenciennes for nothing! Ah, parson! Would you not like to put on your old Sixty-third coat? Though I doubt Mrs. Blake could never make the buttons and button-holes meet again over your big body. The boys were acting a play with my militia sword. Oh, that I were young again, Mr. Blake! That I had not the gout in my toe; and I would saddle Rosinante and ride back into the world, and feel the pulses beat again, and play a little of life's glorious game!

The last "hit" which I saw played was gallantly won by our side, though even in this party the Americans won the rubber. Our people gained only the ground they stood on, capturing and destroying the guns, stores, and ships, whilst our efforts at rescue were too late to prevent the catastrophe impending over Burgoyne's unfortunate army. After one of those delays which always retarded our plans and weakened the blows our chiefs intended to deliver, an expedition was got under weigh from New York at the close of September, 1777. Had it advanced a fortnight earlier, it might have saved the doomed force of Burgoyne. *Sed Dis aliter visum.* The delay here was not Sir Henry Clinton's fault, who could not leave his city unprotected, but the winds and weather which delayed the arrival of reinforcements we had long awaited from England. The fleet which brought them also brought long and fond letters from home, containing the very last news of the children under the care of their good Aunt Hetty and their grandfather. The mother's heart yearned towards the absent young ones. She made me no reproaches; but I could read her importunities in her anxious eyes, her terrors for me, and her longing for her children. "Why stay longer?" she seemed to say. "You who have no calling to this war, or to draw the sword against your countrymen—why continue to imperil your life and my happiness?" I understood her appeal. We were to enter upon no immediate service of danger. I told her Sir Henry was only going to accompany the expedition for part of the way. I would return with him, the reconnaissance over, and Christmas, please Heaven, should see our family once more united in England.

A force of three thousand men, including a couple of slender regiments of American Loyalists and New York Militia—with which latter my distinguished relative, Mr. Will Esmond, went as captain—was embarked at New York. Our armament sailed up the noble Hudson River, which presents finer aspects than the Rhine in Europe to my mind. Nor was any fire opened upon us from those beetling cliffs and precipitous "palisades," as they are called, by which we sailed; the enemy, strange to say, being for once unaware of the movement we contemplated. Our first landing was on the Eastern bank, at a place called Verplancks Point, whence the Congress troops withdrew after a slight resistance. Their leader, the tough old Putnam, so famous during the war, supposed that our march was to be directed towards the Eastern Highlands, by which we intended to penetrate to Burgoyne. Putnam
