Jeeves—my man, you know—is really a most extraordinary chap. So capable. Honestly, I shouldn’t know what to do without him. On broader lines he’s like those chappies who sit peering sadly over the marble battlements at the Pennsylvania Station in the place marked “Inquiries.” You know the Johnnies I mean. You go up to them and say: “When’s the next train for Melonsquashville, Tennessee?” and they reply, without stopping to think, “Two-forty-three, track ten, change at San Francisco.” And they’re right every time. Well, Jeeves gives you just the same impression of omniscience. As an instance of what I mean, I remember meeting Monty Byng in Bond Street one morning, looking the last word in a grey check suit, and I felt I should never be happy till I had one like it. I dug the address of the tailors out of him, and had them working on the thing inside the hour.

These things are just Life’s mysteries, and that’s all there is to it. But it isn’t only that Jeeves’s judgment about clothes is infallible, though, of course, that’s really the main thing. The man knows everything. There was the matter of that tip on the “Lincolnshire.” I forget now how I got it, but it had the aspect of being the real, red-hot tabasco. “Jeeves,” I said, for I’m fond of the man, and like to do him a good turn when I can, “if you want to make a bit of money have something on Wonderchild for the ‘Lincolnshire.’” He shook his head. “I’d rather not, sir.” “But it’s the straight goods. I’m going to put my shirt on him.” “I do not recommend it, sir. The animal is not intended to win. Second place is what the stable is after.” Perfect piffle, I thought, of course.

than for use, don’t you know; but give me five minutes to talk the thing over with Jeeves, and I’m game to advise any one about anything. And that’s why, when Bruce Corcoran came to me with his troubles, my first act was to ring the bell and put it up to the lad with the bulging forehead. “Leave it to Jeeves,” I said. I first got to know Corky when I came to New York. He was a pal of my cousin Gussie, who was in with a lot of people down Washington Square way. I don’t know if I ever told you about it, but the reason why I left England was because I was sent over by my Aunt Agatha to try to stop young Gussie marrying a girl on the vaudeville stage, and I got the whole thing so mixed up that I decided that it would be a sound scheme for me to stop on in America for a bit instead of going back and having long cosy chats about the thing with aunt.

and I’m a wealthy bird, so everything was fine. Chappies introduced me to other chappies, and so on and so forth, and it wasn’t long before I knew squads of the right sort, some who rolled in dollars in houses up by the Park, and others who lived with the gas turned down mostly around Washington Square—artists and writers and so forth. Brainy coves. Corky was one of the artists. A portrait-painter, he called himself, but he hadn’t painted any portraits. He was sitting on the side-lines with a blanket over his shoulders, waiting for a chance to get into the game. You see, the catch about portrait-painting—I’ve looked into the thing a bit—is that you can’t start painting portraits till people come along and ask you to, and they won’t come and ask you to until you’ve painted a lot first.

was a robust sort of cove, who looked like living for ever. He was fifty-one, and it seemed as if he might go to par. It was not this, however, that distressed poor old Corky, for he was not bigoted and had no objection to the man going on living. What Corky kicked at was the way the above Worple used to harry him. Corky’s uncle, you see, didn’t want him to be an artist. He didn’t think he had any talent in that direction. He was always urging him to chuck Art and go into the jute business and start at the bottom and work his way up. Jute had apparently become a sort of obsession with him. He seemed to attach almost a spiritual importance to it. And what Corky said was that, while he didn’t know what they did at the bottom of the jute business, instinct told him that it was something too beastly for words.

Corky, moreover, believed in his future as an artist. Some day, he said, he was going to make a hit. Meanwhile, by using the utmost tact and persuasiveness, he was inducing his uncle to cough up very grudgingly a small quarterly allowance. He wouldn’t have got this if his uncle hadn’t had a hobby. Mr. Worple was peculiar in this respect. As a rule, from what I’ve observed, the American captain of industry doesn’t do anything out of business hours. When he has put the cat out and locked up the office for the night, he just relapses into a state of coma from which he emerges only to start being a captain of industry again. But Mr.

bottle, bored him stiff. To complete the character-study of Mr. Worple, he was a man of extremely uncertain temper, and his general tendency was to think that Corky was a poor chump and that whatever step he took in any direction on his own account, was just another proof of his innate idiocy. I should imagine Jeeves feels very much the same about me. So when Corky trickled into my apartment one afternoon, shooing a girl in front of him, and said, “Bertie, I want you to meet my fiancée, Miss Singer,” the aspect of the matter which hit me first was precisely the one which he had come to consult me about. The very first words I spoke were, “Corky, how about your uncle?” The poor chap gave one of those mirthless laughs. He was looking anxious and worried, like a man who has done the murder all right but can’t think what the deuce to do with the body.

“We’re so scared, Mr. Wooster,” said the girl. “We were hoping that you might suggest a way of breaking it to him.” Muriel Singer was one of those very quiet, appealing girls who have a way of looking at you with their big eyes as if they thought you were the greatest thing on earth and wondered that you hadn’t got on to it yet yourself. She sat there in a sort of shrinking way, looking at me as if she were saying to herself, “Oh, I do hope this great strong man isn’t going to hurt me.” She gave a fellow a protective kind of feeling, made him want to stroke her hand and say, “There, there, little one!” or words to that effect.

did like Muriel he wouldn’t admit it. That’s the sort of pig-headed guy he is. It would be a matter of principle with him to kick. All he would consider would be that I had gone and taken an important step without asking his advice, and he would raise Cain automatically. He’s always done it.” I strained the old bean to meet this emergency. “You want to work it so that he makes Miss Singer’s acquaintance without knowing that you know her. Then you come along——” “But how can I work it that way?” I saw his point. That was the catch. “There’s only one thing to do,” I said. “What’s that?” “Leave it to Jeeves.” And I rang the bell. “Sir?” said Jeeves, kind of manifesting himself. One of the rummy things about Jeeves is that, unless you watch like a hawk, you very seldom see him come into a room.

boiled down Corky’s painful case into a few well-chosen words. “So you see what it amount to, Jeeves. We want you to suggest some way by which Mr. Worple can make Miss Singer’s acquaintance without getting on to the fact that Mr. Corcoran already knows her. Understand?” “Perfectly, sir.” “Well, try to think of something.” “I have thought of something already, sir.” “You have!” “The scheme I would suggest cannot fail of success, but it has what may seem to you a drawback, sir, in that it requires a certain financial outlay.” “He means,” I translated to Corky, “that he has got a pippin of an idea, but it’s going to cost a bit.” Naturally the poor chap’s face dropped, for this seemed to dish the whole thing. But I was still under the influence of the girl’s melting gaze, and I saw that this was where I started in as a knight-errant.

larger treatise on the same subject. I should recommend the dispatching of a presentation copy to Mr. Worple, immediately on publication, accompanied by a letter in which the young lady asks to be allowed to make the acquaintance of one to whom she owes so much. This would, I fancy, produce the desired result, but as I say, the expense involved would be considerable.” I felt like the proprietor of a performing dog on the vaudeville stage when the tyke has just pulled off his trick without a hitch. I had betted on Jeeves all along, and I had known that he wouldn’t let me down. It beats me sometimes why a man with his genius is satisfied to hang around pressing my clothes and what-not. If I had half Jeeves’s brain, I should have a stab at being Prime Minister or something.

Agatha’s attitude in the matter of Gussie and the vaudeville girl was still fresh in my mind. I don’t know why it is—one of these psychology sharps could explain it, I suppose—but uncles and aunts, as a class, are always dead against the drama, legitimate or otherwise. They don’t seem able to stick it at any price. But Jeeves had a solution, of course. “I fancy it would be a simple matter, sir, to find some impecunious author who would be glad to do the actual composition of the volume for a small fee. It is only necessary that the young lady’s name should appear on the title page.” “That’s true,” said Corky. “Sam Patterson would do it for a hundred dollars. He writes a novelette, three short stories, and ten thousand words of a serial for one of the all-fiction magazines under different names every month.

it, and underneath the girl’s name in gold letters. I opened a copy at random. “Often of a spring morning,” it said at the top of page twenty-one, “as you wander through the fields, you will hear the sweet-toned, carelessly flowing warble of the purple finch linnet. When you are older you must read all about him in Mr. Alexander Worple’s wonderful book— American Birds .” You see. A boost for the uncle right away. And only a few pages later there he was in the limelight again in connection with the yellow-billed cuckoo. It was great stuff. The more I read, the more I admired the chap who had written it and Jeeves’s genius in putting us on to the wheeze. I didn’t see how the uncle could fail to drop. You can’t call a chap the world’s greatest authority on the yellow-billed cuckoo without rousing a certain disposition towards chumminess in him.

when I don’t feel inclined for the bright lights, I found Muriel Singer there, sitting by herself at a table near the door. Corky, I took it, was out telephoning. I went up and passed the time of day. “Well, well, well, what?” I said. “Why, Mr. Wooster! How do you do?” “Corky around?” “I beg your pardon?” “You’re waiting for Corky, aren’t you?” “Oh, I didn’t understand. No, I’m not waiting for him.” It seemed to me that there was a sort of something in her voice, a kind of thingummy, you know. “I say, you haven’t had a row with Corky, have you?” “A row?” “A spat, don’t you know—little misunderstanding—faults on both sides—er—and all that sort of thing.” “Why, whatever makes you think that?” “Oh, well, as it were, what? What I mean is—I thought you usually dined with him before you went to the theatre.” “I’ve left the stage now.” Suddenly the whole thing dawned on me.

playing at painting. But I have an idea that he is steadying down. I noticed it first that night he came to dinner with us, my dear, to be introduced to you. He seemed altogether quieter and more serious. Something seemed to have sobered him. Perhaps you will give us the pleasure of your company at dinner to-night, Mr. Wooster? Or have you dined?” I said I had. What I needed then was air, not dinner. I felt that I wanted to get into the open and think this thing out. When I reached my apartment I heard Jeeves moving about in his lair. I called him. “Jeeves,” I said, “now is the time for all good men to come to the aid of the party. A stiff b.-and-s. first of all, and then I’ve a bit of news for you.” He came back with a tray and a long glass.

sir.” “Well, she’s slid. She’s married the uncle.” He took it without blinking. You can’t rattle Jeeves. “That was always a development to be feared, sir.” “You don’t mean to tell me that you were expecting it?” “It crossed my mind as a possibility.” “Did it, by Jove! Well, I think, you might have warned us!” “I hardly liked to take the liberty, sir.” Of course, as I saw after I had had a bite to eat and was in a calmer frame of mind, what had happened wasn’t my fault, if you come down to it. I couldn’t be expected to foresee that the scheme, in itself a cracker-jack, would skid into the ditch as it had done; but all the same I’m bound to admit that I didn’t relish the idea of meeting Corky again until time, the great healer, had been able to get in a bit of soothing work.

touch my breakfast. I told Jeeves to drink it himself. I was bowled over. Absolutely. It was the limit. I hardly knew what to do. I wanted, of course, to rush down to Washington Square and grip the poor blighter silently by the hand; and then, thinking it over, I hadn’t the nerve. Absent treatment seemed the touch. I gave it him in waves. But after a month or so I began to hesitate again. It struck me that it was playing it a bit low-down on the poor chap, avoiding him like this just when he probably wanted his pals to surge round him most. I pictured him sitting in his lonely studio with no company but his bitter thoughts, and the pathos of it got me to such an extent that I bounded straight into a taxi and told the driver to go all out for the studio.

standing in the fairway. “At the same hour to-morrow, Mr. Corcoran?” “Yes, please.” “Good afternoon.” “Good afternoon.” Corky stood there, looking at the door, and then he turned to me and began to get it off his chest. Fortunately, he seemed to take it for granted that I knew all about what had happened, so it wasn’t as awkward as it might have been. “It’s my uncle’s idea,” he said. “Muriel doesn’t know about it yet. The portrait’s to be a surprise for her on her birthday. The nurse takes the kid out ostensibly to get a breather, and they beat it down here. If you want an instance of the irony of fate, Bertie, get acquainted with this. Here’s the first commission I have ever had to paint a portrait, and the sitter is that human poached egg that has butted in and bounced me out of my inheritance.

from the studio for some time after that, because it didn’t seem right to me to intrude on the poor chappie’s sorrow. Besides, I’m bound to say that nurse intimidated me. She reminded me so infernally of Aunt Agatha. She was the same gimlet-eyed type. But one afternoon Corky called me on the ’phone. “Bertie.” “Halloa?” “Are you doing anything this afternoon?” “Nothing special.” “You couldn’t come down here, could you?” “What’s the trouble? Anything up?” “I’ve finished the portrait.” “Good boy! Stout work!” “Yes.” His voice sounded rather doubtful. “The fact is, Bertie, it doesn’t look quite right to me. There’s something about it—My uncle’s coming in half an hour to inspect it, and—I don’t know why it is, but I kind of feel I’d like your moral support!” I began to see that I was letting myself in for something.

“Very good, sir,” said Jeeves. That’s the sort of chap he is. You can’t rattle him. We found Corky near the door, looking at the picture, with one hand up in a defensive sort of way, as if he thought it might swing on him. “Stand right where you are, Bertie,” he said, without moving. “Now, tell me honestly, how does it strike you?” The light from the big window fell right on the picture. I took a good look at it. Then I shifted a bit nearer and took another look. Then I went back to where I had been at first, because it hadn’t seemed quite so bad from there. “Well?” said Corky, anxiously. I hesitated a bit. “Of course, old man, I only saw the kid once, and then only for a moment, but—but it was an ugly sort of kid, wasn’t it, if I remember rightly?” “As ugly as that?” I looked again, and honesty compelled me to be frank.

But, as it worked out, he looks positively dissipated.” “Just what I was going to suggest, old man. He looks as if he were in the middle of a colossal spree, and enjoying every minute of it. Don’t you think so, Jeeves?” “He has a decidedly inebriated air, sir.” Corky was starting to say something when the door opened, and the uncle came in. For about three seconds all was joy, jollity, and goodwill. The old boy shook hands with me, slapped Corky on the back, said that he didn’t think he had ever seen such a fine day, and whacked his leg with his stick. Jeeves had projected himself into the background, and he didn’t notice him. “Well, Bruce, my boy; so the portrait is really finished, is it—really finished? Well, bring it out. Let’s have a look at it.

And for perhaps a minute there was one of the scaliest silences I’ve ever run up against. “Is this a practical joke?” he said at last, in a way that set about sixteen draughts cutting through the room at once. I thought it was up to me to rally round old Corky. “You want to stand a bit farther away from it,” I said. “You’re perfectly right!” he snorted. “I do! I want to stand so far away from it that I can’t see the thing with a telescope!” He turned on Corky like an untamed tiger of the jungle who has just located a chunk of meat. “And this—this—is what you have been wasting your time and my money for all these years! A painter! I wouldn’t let you paint a house of mine! I gave you this commission, thinking that you were a competent worker, and this—this—this extract from a comic coloured supplement is the result!” He swung towards the door, lashing his tail and growling to himself.

off supplies. You heard what he said. I shall have to go to the office on Monday.” I couldn’t think of a thing to say. I knew exactly how he felt about the office. I don’t know when I’ve been so infernally uncomfortable. It was like hanging round trying to make conversation to a pal who’s just been sentenced to twenty years in quod. And then a soothing voice broke the silence. “If I might make a suggestion, sir!” It was Jeeves. He had slid from the shadows and was gazing gravely at the picture. Upon my word, I can’t give you a better idea of the shattering effect of Corky’s uncle Alexander when in action than by saying that he had absolutely made me forget for the moment that Jeeves was there. “I wonder if I have ever happened to mention to you, sir, a Mr.

said, “what on earth are you talking about?” Corky was glaring at the picture, and making a sort of dry, sucking noise with his mouth. He seemed completely overwrought. And then suddenly he began to laugh in a wild way. “Corky, old man!” I said, massaging him tenderly. I feared the poor blighter was hysterical. He began to stagger about all over the floor. “He’s right! The man’s absolutely right! Jeeves, you’re a life-saver! You’ve hit on the greatest idea of the age! Report at the office on Monday! Start at the bottom of the business! I’ll buy the business if I feel like it. I know the man who runs the comic section of the Sunday Star . He’ll eat this thing. He was telling me only the other day how hard it was to get a good new series.

make up on the roundabouts. Look at Mr. Corcoran, for instance. There was a fellow, one would have said, clear up to the eyebrows in the soup. To all appearances he had got it right in the neck. Yet look at him now. Have you seen these pictures?” “I took the liberty of glancing at them before bringing them to you, sir. Extremely diverting.” “They have made a big hit, you know.” “I anticipated it, sir.” I leaned back against the pillows. “You know, Jeeves, you’re a genius. You ought to be drawing a commission on these things.” “I have nothing to complain of in that respect, sir. Mr. Corcoran has been most generous. I am putting out the brown suit, sir.” “No, I think I’ll wear the blue with the faint red stripe.” “Not the blue with the faint red stripe, sir.” “But I rather fancy myself in it.” “Not the blue with the faint red stripe, sir.” “Oh, all right, have it your own way.” “Very good, sir.

I’m not absolutely certain of my facts, but I rather fancy it’s Shakespeare—or, if not, it’s some equally brainy lad—who says that it’s always just when a chappie is feeling particularly top-hole, and more than usually braced with things in general that Fate sneaks up behind him with a bit of lead piping. There’s no doubt the man’s right. It’s absolutely that way with me. Take, for instance, the fairly rummy matter of Lady Malvern and her son Wilmot. A moment before they turned up, I was just thinking how thoroughly all right everything was.

It was one of those topping mornings, and I had just climbed out from under the cold shower, feeling like a two-year-old. As a matter of fact, I was especially bucked just then because the day before I had asserted myself with Jeeves—absolutely asserted myself, don’t you know. You see, the way things had been going on I was rapidly becoming a dashed serf. The man had jolly well oppressed me. I didn’t so much mind when he made me give up one of my new suits, because Jeeves’s judgment about suits is sound.

bathroom, wondering what there was going to be for breakfast while I massaged the good old spine with a rough towel and sang slightly, when there was a tap at the door. I stopped singing and opened the door an inch. “What ho without there!” “Lady Malvern wishes to see you, sir,” said Jeeves. “Eh?” “Lady Malvern, sir. She is waiting in the sitting-room.” “Pull yourself together, Jeeves, my man,” I said, rather severely, for I bar practical jokes before breakfast. “You know perfectly well there’s no one waiting for me in the sitting-room. How could there be when it’s barely ten o’clock yet?” “I gathered from her ladyship, sir, that she had landed from an ocean liner at an early hour this morning.” This made the thing a bit more plausible. I remembered that when I had arrived in America about a year before, the proceedings had begun at some ghastly hour like six, and that I had been shot out on to a foreign shore considerably before eight.

came back from the Durbar.” “Yes, sir? Pardon me, sir, but not that tie!” “Eh?” “Not that tie with the heather-mixture lounge, sir!” It was a shock to me. I thought I had quelled the fellow. It was rather a solemn moment. What I mean is, if I weakened now, all my good work the night before would be thrown away. I braced myself. “What’s wrong with this tie? I’ve seen you give it a nasty look before. Speak out like a man! What’s the matter with it?” “Too ornate, sir.” “Nonsense! A cheerful pink. Nothing more.” “Unsuitable, sir.” “Jeeves, this is the tie I wear!” “Very good, sir.” Dashed unpleasant. I could see that the man was wounded. But I was firm. I tied the tie, got into the coat and waistcoat, and went into the sitting-room. “Halloa! Halloa!

and meek-looking. He had the same yellow hair as his mother, but he wore it plastered down and parted in the middle. His eyes bulged, too, but they weren’t bright. They were a dull grey with pink rims. His chin gave up the struggle about half-way down, and he didn’t appear to have any eyelashes. A mild, furtive, sheepish sort of blighter, in short. “Awfully glad to see you,” I said. “So you’ve popped over, eh? Making a long stay in America?” “About a month. Your aunt gave me your address and told me to be sure and call on you.” I was glad to hear this, as it showed that Aunt Agatha was beginning to come round a bit. There had been some unpleasantness a year before, when she had sent me over to New York to disentangle my Cousin Gussie from the clutches of a girl on the music-hall stage.

rather! Absolutely!” “Thank you so much. I want you to put dear Motty up for a little while.” I didn’t get this for a moment. “Put him up? For my clubs?” “No, no! Darling Motty is essentially a home bird. Aren’t you, Motty darling?” Motty, who was sucking the knob of his stick, uncorked himself. “Yes, mother,” he said, and corked himself up again. “I should not like him to belong to clubs. I mean put him up here. Have him to live with you while I am away.” These frightful words trickled out of her like honey. The woman simply didn’t seem to understand the ghastly nature of her proposal. I gave Motty the swift east-to-west. He was sitting with his mouth nuzzling the stick, blinking at the wall. The thought of having this planted on me for an indefinite period appalled me.

but a month should be ample. I was less than a month in India, and my dear friend Sir Roger Cremorne wrote his America from Within after a stay of only two weeks. I should love to take dear Motty with me, but the poor boy gets so sick when he travels by train. I shall have to pick him up on my return.” From where I sat I could see Jeeves in the dining-room, laying the breakfast-table. I wished I could have had a minute with him alone. I felt certain that he would have been able to think of some way of putting a stop to this woman. “It will be such a relief to know that Motty is safe with you, Mr. Wooster. I know what the temptations of a great city are. Hitherto dear Motty has been sheltered from them.

be such a help. Good-bye, Mr. Wooster. I will send Motty back early in the afternoon.” They went out, and I howled for Jeeves. “Jeeves! What about it?” “Sir?” “What’s to be done? You heard it all, didn’t you? You were in the dining-room most of the time. That pill is coming to stay here.” “Pill, sir?” “The excrescence.” “I beg your pardon, sir?” I looked at Jeeves sharply. This sort of thing wasn’t like him. It was as if he were deliberately trying to give me the pip. Then I understood. The man was really upset about that tie. He was trying to get his own back. “Lord Pershore will be staying here from to-night, Jeeves,” I said coldly. “Very good, sir. Breakfast is ready, sir.” I could have sobbed into the bacon and eggs. That there wasn’t any sympathy to be got out of Jeeves was what put the lid on it.

to Aunt Agatha, and I didn’t like to think what would happen then. Sooner or later, I should be wanting to go back to England, and I didn’t want to get there and find Aunt Agatha waiting on the quay for me with a stuffed eelskin. There was absolutely nothing for it but to put the fellow up and make the best of it. About midday Motty’s luggage arrived, and soon afterward a large parcel of what I took to be nice books. I brightened up a little when I saw it. It was one of those massive parcels and looked as if it had enough in it to keep the chappie busy for a year. I felt a trifle more cheerful, and I got my Country Gentleman hat and stuck it on my head, and gave the pink tie a twist, and reeled out to take a bite of lunch with one or two of the lads at a neighbouring hostelry; and what with excellent browsing and sluicing and cheery conversation and what-not, the afternoon passed quite happily.

“His lordship came in shortly after six-thirty, and, having dressed, went out again.” At this moment there was a noise outside the front door, a sort of scrabbling noise, as if somebody were trying to paw his way through the woodwork. Then a sort of thud. “Better go and see what that is, Jeeves.” “Very good, sir.” He went out and came back again. “If you would not mind stepping this way, sir, I think we might be able to carry him in.” “Carry him in?” “His lordship is lying on the mat, sir.” I went to the front door. The man was right. There was Motty huddled up outside on the floor. He was moaning a bit. “He’s had some sort of dashed fit,” I said. I took another look. “Jeeves! Someone’s been feeding him meat!” “Sir?” “He’s a vegetarian, you know.

down a thoughtful cup of tea, I went into Motty’s room to investigate. I expected to find the fellow a wreck, but there he was, sitting up in bed, quite chirpy, reading Gingery stories. “What ho!” I said. “What ho!” said Motty. “What ho! What ho!” “What ho! What ho! What ho!” After that it seemed rather difficult to go on with the conversation. “How are you feeling this morning?” I asked. “Topping!” replied Motty, blithely and with abandon. “I say, you know, that fellow of yours—Jeeves, you know—is a corker. I had a most frightful headache when I woke up, and he brought me a sort of rummy dark drink, and it put me right again at once. Said it was his own invention. I must see more of that lad. He seems to me distinctly one of the ones!” I couldn’t believe that this was the same blighter who had sat and sucked his stick the day before.

holy exaltation, “tap me on the shoulder and say, ‘Tut! Tut!’ and I’ll apologize and remedy the defect.” “But I say, you know, what about me?” “What about you?” “Well, I’m, so to speak, as it were, kind of responsible for you. What I mean to say is, if you go doing this sort of thing I’m apt to get in the soup somewhat.” “I can’t help your troubles,” said Motty firmly. “Listen to me, old thing: this is the first time in my life that I’ve had a real chance to yield to the temptations of a great city. What’s the use of a great city having temptations if fellows don’t yield to them? Makes it so bally discouraging for a great city. Besides, mother told me to keep my eyes open and collect impressions.” I sat on the edge of the bed.

for the long winter evenings. This is my only chance to collect a past, and I’m going to do it. Now tell me, old sport, as man to man, how does one get in touch with that very decent chappie Jeeves? Does one ring a bell or shout a bit? I should like to discuss the subject of a good stiff b.-and-s. with him!” I had had a sort of vague idea, don’t you know, that if I stuck close to Motty and went about the place with him, I might act as a bit of a damper on the gaiety. What I mean is, I thought that if, when he was being the life and soul of the party, he were to catch my reproving eye he might ease up a trifle on the revelry. So the next night I took him along to supper with me.

with Motty. The only time I met him late at night after that was once when I passed the door of a fairly low-down sort of restaurant and had to step aside to dodge him as he sailed through the air en route for the opposite pavement, with a muscular sort of looking chappie peering out after him with a kind of gloomy satisfaction. In a way, I couldn’t help sympathizing with the fellow. He had about four weeks to have the good time that ought to have been spread over about ten years, and I didn’t wonder at his wanting to be pretty busy. I should have been just the same in his place. Still, there was no denying that it was a bit thick. If it hadn’t been for the thought of Lady Malvern and Aunt Agatha in the background, I should have regarded Motty’s rapid work with an indulgent smile.

to have chucked all the principles of a well-spent boyhood. He has got it up his nose!” “Yes, sir.” “Well, I shall get blamed, don’t you know. You know what my Aunt Agatha is!” “Yes, sir.” “Very well, then.” I waited a moment, but he wouldn’t unbend. “Jeeves,” I said, “haven’t you any scheme up your sleeve for coping with this blighter?” “No, sir.” And he shimmered off to his lair. Obstinate devil! So dashed absurd, don’t you know. It wasn’t as if there was anything wrong with that Country Gentleman hat. It was a remarkably priceless effort, and much admired by the lads. But, just because he preferred the Longacre, he left me flat. It was shortly after this that young Motty got the idea of bringing pals back in the small hours to continue the gay revels in the home.

Street the atmosphere wasn’t right, and when Motty turned up at three in the morning with a collection of hearty lads, who only stopped singing their college song when they started singing “The Old Oaken Bucket,” there was a marked peevishness among the old settlers in the flats. The management was extremely terse over the telephone at breakfast-time, and took a lot of soothing. The next night I came home early, after a lonely dinner at a place which I’d chosen because there didn’t seem any chance of meeting Motty there. The sitting-room was quite dark, and I was just moving to switch on the light, when there was a sort of explosion and something collared hold of my trouser-leg. Living with Motty had reduced me to such an extent that I was simply unable to cope with this thing.

down as if he had had a bromide, and rolled over on his back with all his paws in the air. If Jeeves had been his rich uncle he couldn’t have been more chummy. Yet directly he caught sight of me again, he got all worked up and seemed to have only one idea in life—to start chewing me where he had left off. “Rollo is not used to you yet, sir,” said Jeeves, regarding the bally quadruped in an admiring sort of way. “He is an excellent watchdog.” “I don’t want a watchdog to keep me out of my rooms.” “No, sir.” “Well, what am I to do?” “No doubt in time the animal will learn to discriminate, sir. He will learn to distinguish your peculiar scent.” “What do you mean—my peculiar scent? Correct the impression that I intend to hang about in the hall while life slips by, in the hope that one of these days that dashed animal will decide that I smell all right.” I thought for a bit.

“Jeeves!” “Sir?” “I’m going away—to-morrow morning by the first train. I shall go and stop with Mr. Todd in the country.” “Do you wish me to accompany you, sir?” “No.” “Very good, sir.” “I don’t know when I shall be back. Forward my letters.” “Yes, sir.” As a matter of fact, I was back within the week. Rocky Todd, the pal I went to stay with, is a rummy sort of a chap who lives all alone in the wilds of Long Island, and likes it; but a little of that sort of thing goes a long way with me. Dear old Rocky is one of the best, but after a few days in his cottage in the woods, miles away from anywhere, New York, even with Motty on the premises, began to look pretty good to me.

he had a lot of intelligence in him. “Ripping!” I said. “Is Lord Pershore in, Jeeves?” “No, sir.” “Do you expect him back to dinner?” “No, sir.” “Where is he?” “In prison, sir.” Have you ever trodden on a rake and had the handle jump up and hit you? That’s how I felt then. “In prison!” “Yes, sir.” “You don’t mean—in prison?” “Yes, sir.” I lowered myself into a chair. “Why?” I said. “He assaulted a constable, sir.” “Lord Pershore assaulted a constable!” “Yes, sir.” I digested this. “But, Jeeves, I say! This is frightful!” “Sir?” “What will Lady Malvern say when she finds out?” “I do not fancy that her ladyship will find out, sir.” “But she’ll come back and want to know where he is.” “I rather fancy, sir, that his lordship’s bit of time will have run out by then.” “But supposing it hasn’t?” “In that event, sir, it may be judicious to prevaricate a little.” “How?” “If I might make the suggestion, sir, I should inform her ladyship that his lordship has left for a short visit to Boston.” “Why Boston?” “Very interesting and respectable centre, sir.” “Jeeves, I believe you’ve hit it.” “I fancy so, sir.” “Why, this is really the best thing that could have happened.

If this hadn’t turned up to prevent him, young Motty would have been in a sanatorium by the time Lady Malvern got back.” “Exactly, sir.” The more I looked at it in that way, the sounder this prison wheeze seemed to me. There was no doubt in the world that prison was just what the doctor ordered for Motty. It was the only thing that could have pulled him up. I was sorry for the poor blighter, but, after all, I reflected, a chappie who had lived all his life with Lady Malvern, in a small village in the interior of Shropshire, wouldn’t have much to kick at in a prison.

the announcement that he had just loosed her into the sitting-room. I draped a few garments round me and went in. There she was, sitting in the same arm-chair, looking as massive as ever. The only difference was that she didn’t uncover the teeth, as she had done the first time. “Good morning,” I said. “So you’ve got back, what?” “I have got back.” There was something sort of bleak about her tone, rather as if she had swallowed an east wind. This I took to be due to the fact that she probably hadn’t breakfasted. It’s only after a bit of breakfast that I’m able to regard the world with that sunny cheeriness which makes a fellow the universal favourite. I’m never much of a lad till I’ve engulfed an egg or two and a beaker of coffee. “I suppose you haven’t breakfasted?” “I have not yet breakfasted.” “Won’t you have an egg or something?

morning, and have a bit of lunch at some good vegetarian place, and then toddle along to a sacred concert in the afternoon, and home to an early dinner. We usually played dominoes after dinner. And then the early bed and the refreshing sleep. We had a great time. I was awfully sorry when he went away to Boston.” “Oh! Wilmot is in Boston?” “Yes. I ought to have let you know, but of course we didn’t know where you were. You were dodging all over the place like a snipe—I mean, don’t you know, dodging all over the place, and we couldn’t get at you. Yes, Motty went off to Boston.” “You’re sure he went to Boston?” “Oh, absolutely.” I called out to Jeeves, who was now messing about in the next room with forks and so forth: “Jeeves, Lord Pershore didn’t change his mind about going to Boston, did he?” “No, sir.” “I thought I was right.

how you have looked after my poor, dear boy, Mr. Wooster! So this is how you have abused my trust! I left him in your charge, thinking that I could rely on you to shield him from evil. He came to you innocent, unversed in the ways of the world, confiding, unused to the temptations of a large city, and you led him astray!” I hadn’t any remarks to make. All I could think of was the picture of Aunt Agatha drinking all this in and reaching out to sharpen the hatchet against my return. “You deliberately——” Far away in the misty distance a soft voice spoke: “If I might explain, your ladyship.” Jeeves had projected himself in from the dining-room and materialized on the rug. Lady Malvern tried to freeze him with a look, but you can’t do that sort of thing to Jeeves.

I took the liberty of telling him that his lordship had gone away for a visit. It might have been hard for Mr. Wooster to believe that his lordship had gone to prison voluntarily and from the best motives, but your ladyship, knowing him better, will readily understand.” “What!” Lady Malvern goggled at him. “Did you say that Lord Pershore went to prison voluntarily?” “If I might explain, your ladyship. I think that your ladyship’s parting words made a deep impression on his lordship. I have frequently heard him speak to Mr. Wooster of his desire to do something to follow your ladyship’s instructions and collect material for your ladyship’s book on America. Mr. Wooster will bear me out when I say that his lordship was frequently extremely depressed at the thought that he was doing so little to help.” “Absolutely, by Jove!

I hadn’t lured that blighter into riotous living.” “I fancy you are right, sir.” I champed my egg for a bit. I was most awfully moved, don’t you know, by the way Jeeves had rallied round. Something seemed to tell me that this was an occasion that called for rich rewards. For a moment I hesitated. Then I made up my mind. “Jeeves!” “Sir?” “That pink tie!” “Yes, sir?” “Burn it!” “Thank you, sir.” “And, Jeeves!” “Yes, sir?” “Take a taxi and get me that Longacre hat, as worn by John Drew!” “Thank you very much, sir.” I felt most awfully braced. I felt as if the clouds had rolled away and all was as it used to be. I felt like one of those chappies in the novels who calls off the fight with his wife in the last chapter and decides to forget and forgive.

Sometimes of a morning, as I’ve sat in bed sucking down the early cup of tea and watched my man Jeeves flitting about the room and putting out the raiment for the day, I’ve wondered what the deuce I should do if the fellow ever took it into his head to leave me. It’s not so bad now I’m in New York, but in London the anxiety was frightful. There used to be all sorts of attempts on the part of low blighters to sneak him away from me. Young Reggie Foljambe to my certain knowledge offered him double what I was giving him, and Alistair Bingham-Reeves, who’s got a valet who had been known to press his trousers sideways, used to look at him, when he came to see me, with a kind of glittering hungry eye which disturbed me deucedly.

the hard-boiled egg. It happened after I had been in America for a few months. I got back to the flat latish one night, and when Jeeves brought me the final drink he said: “Mr. Bickersteth called to see you this evening, sir, while you were out.” “Oh?” I said. “Twice, sir. He appeared a trifle agitated.” “What, pipped?” “He gave that impression, sir.” I sipped the whisky. I was sorry if Bicky was in trouble, but, as a matter of fact, I was rather glad to have something I could discuss freely with Jeeves just then, because things had been a bit strained between us for some time, and it had been rather difficult to hit on anything to talk about that wasn’t apt to take a personal turn. You see, I had decided—rightly or wrongly—to grow a moustache and this had cut Jeeves to the quick.

bulldog pluck and defy the blighter. “He said that he would call again later, sir.” “Something must be up, Jeeves.” “Yes, sir.” I gave the moustache a thoughtful twirl. It seemed to hurt Jeeves a good deal, so I chucked it. “I see by the paper, sir, that Mr. Bickersteth’s uncle is arriving on the Carmantic .” “Yes?” “His Grace the Duke of Chiswick, sir.” This was news to me, that Bicky’s uncle was a duke. Rum, how little one knows about one’s pals! I had met Bicky for the first time at a species of beano or jamboree down in Washington Square, not long after my arrival in New York. I suppose I was a bit homesick at the time, and I rather took to Bicky when I found that he was an Englishman and had, in fact, been up at Oxford with me.

time to time by sending him monthly remittances. “If the Duke of Chiswick is his uncle,” I said, “why hasn’t he a title? Why isn’t he Lord What-Not?” “Mr. Bickersteth is the son of his grace’s late sister, sir, who married Captain Rollo Bickersteth of the Coldstream Guards.” Jeeves knows everything. “Is Mr. Bickersteth’s father dead, too?” “Yes, sir.” “Leave any money?” “No, sir.” I began to understand why poor old Bicky was always more or less on the rocks. To the casual and irreflective observer, if you know what I mean, it may sound a pretty good wheeze having a duke for an uncle, but the trouble about old Chiswick was that, though an extremely wealthy old buster, owning half London and about five counties up north, he was notoriously the most prudent spender in England. He was what American chappies would call a hard-boiled egg.

was thinking just now myself.” “Well, I wish,” said Bicky gloomily, “that he knew a way to get me out of the hole I’m in.” Jeeves shimmered in with the glass, and stuck it competently on the table. “Mr. Bickersteth is in a bit of a hole, Jeeves,” I said, “and wants you to rally round.” “Very good, sir.” Bicky looked a bit doubtful. “Well, of course, you know, Bertie, this thing is by way of being a bit private and all that.” “I shouldn’t worry about that, old top. I bet Jeeves knows all about it already. Don’t you, Jeeves?” “Yes, sir.” “Eh!” said Bicky, rattled. “I am open to correction, sir, but is not your dilemma due to the fact that you are at a loss to explain to his grace why you are in New York instead of in Colorado?” Bicky rocked like a jelly in a high wind.

call it, at some bally ranch or farm or whatever it’s called. I didn’t fancy the idea a bit. I should have had to ride horses and pursue cows, and so forth. I hate horses. They bite at you. I was all against the scheme. At the same time, don’t you know, I had to have that remittance.” “I get you absolutely, dear boy.” “Well, when I got to New York it looked a decent sort of place to me, so I thought it would be a pretty sound notion to stop here. So I cabled to my uncle telling him that I had dropped into a good business wheeze in the city and wanted to chuck the ranch idea. He wrote back that it was all right, and here I’ve been ever since. He thinks I’m doing well at something or other over here.

I can for you, of course, Bicky, old man.” “Then, if I might make the suggestion, sir, you might lend Mr. Bickersteth——” “No, by Jove!” said Bicky firmly. “I never have touched you, Bertie, and I’m not going to start now. I may be a chump, but it’s my boast that I don’t owe a penny to a single soul—not counting tradesmen, of course.” “I was about to suggest, sir, that you might lend Mr. Bickersteth this flat. Mr. Bickersteth could give his grace the impression that he was the owner of it. With your permission I could convey the notion that I was in Mr. Bickersteth’s employment, and not in yours. You would be residing here temporarily as Mr. Bickersteth’s guest. His grace would occupy the second spare bedroom. I fancy that you would find this answer satisfactorily, sir.” Bicky had stopped rocking himself and was staring at Jeeves in an awed sort of way.

that meet the situation, sir?” “Absolutely.” “Thank you, sir.” Bicky followed him with his eye till the door closed. “How does he do it, Bertie?” he said. “I’ll tell you what I think it is. I believe it’s something to do with the shape of his head. Have you ever noticed his head, Bertie, old man? It sort of sticks out at the back!” I hopped out of bed early next morning, so as to be among those present when the old boy should arrive. I knew from experience that these ocean liners fetch up at the dock at a deucedly ungodly hour. It wasn’t much after nine by the time I’d dressed and had my morning tea and was leaning out of the window, watching the street for Bicky and his uncle. It was one of those jolly, peaceful mornings that make a chappie wish he’d got a soul or something, and I was just brooding on life in general when I became aware of the dickens of a spate in progress down below.

you do, sir?” I said, bustling up and being the ray of sunshine. “Your nephew went down to the dock to meet you, but you must have missed him. My name’s Wooster, don’t you know. Great pal of Bicky’s, and all that sort of thing. I’m staying with him, you know. Would you like a cup of tea? Jeeves, bring a cup of tea.” Old Chiswick had sunk into an arm-chair and was looking about the room. “Does this luxurious flat belong to my nephew Francis?” “Absolutely.” “It must be terribly expensive.” “Pretty well, of course. Everything costs a lot over here, you know.” He moaned. Jeeves filtered in with the tea. Old Chiswick took a stab at it to restore his tissues, and nodded. “A terrible country, Mr. Wooster! A terrible country! Nearly eight shillings for a short cab-drive!

of. It sort of develops them. Something in the air, don’t you know. I imagine that Bicky in the past, when you knew him, may have been something of a chump, but it’s quite different now. Devilish efficient sort of chappie, and looked on in commercial circles as quite the nib!” “I am amazed! What is the nature of my nephew’s business, Mr. Wooster?” “Oh, just business, don’t you know. The same sort of thing Carnegie and Rockefeller and all these coves do, you know.” I slid for the door. “Awfully sorry to leave you, but I’ve got to meet some of the lads elsewhere.” Coming out of the lift I met Bicky bustling in from the street. “Halloa, Bertie! I missed him. Has he turned up?” “He’s upstairs now, having some tea.” “What does he think of it all?” “He’s absolutely rattled.” “Ripping!

Mr. Bickersteth is doing well in business, and all that sort of thing?” “Exactly, sir. With the result that he has decided to cancel Mr. Bickersteth’s monthly allowance, on the ground that, as Mr. Bickersteth is doing so well on his own account, he no longer requires pecuniary assistance.” “Great Scot, Jeeves! This is awful.” “Somewhat disturbing, sir.” “I never expected anything like this!” “I confess I scarcely anticipated the contingency myself, sir.” “I suppose it bowled the poor blighter over absolutely?” “Mr. Bickersteth appeared somewhat taken aback, sir.” My heart bled for Bicky. “We must do something, Jeeves.” “Yes, sir.” “Can you think of anything?” “Not at the moment, sir.” “There must be something we can do.” “Well, have a stab at it, Jeeves!” “I will spare no pains, sir.” I went and dressed sadly. It will show you pretty well how pipped I was when I tell you that I near as a toucher put on a white tie with a dinner-jacket.

the aspect of one who had been soaked with what the newspaper chappies call “some blunt instrument.” “This is a bit thick, old thing—what!” I said. He picked up his glass and drained it feverishly, overlooking the fact that it hadn’t anything in it. “I’m done, Bertie!” he said. He had another go at the glass. It didn’t seem to do him any good. “If only this had happened a week later, Bertie! My next month’s money was due to roll in on Saturday. I could have worked a wheeze I’ve been reading about in the magazine advertisements. It seems that you can make a dashed amount of money if you can only collect a few dollars and start a chicken-farm. Jolly sound scheme, Bertie! Say you buy a hen—call it one hen for the sake of argument. It lays an egg every day of the week.

He had begun to get quite worked up at the thought of it, but he slopped back in his chair at this juncture with a good deal of gloom. “But, of course, it’s no good,” he said, “because I haven’t the cash.” “You’ve only to say the word, you know, Bicky, old top.” “Thanks awfully, Bertie, but I’m not going to sponge on you.” That’s always the way in this world. The chappies you’d like to lend money to won’t let you, whereas the chappies you don’t want to lend it to will do everything except actually stand you on your head and lift the specie out of your pockets. As a lad who has always rolled tolerably free in the right stuff, I’ve had lots of experience of the second class. Many’s the time, back in London, I’ve hurried along Piccadilly and felt the hot breath of the toucher on the back of my neck and heard his sharp, excited yapping as he closed in on me.

thing startled poor old Bicky considerably. He rose from his seat like a rocketing pheasant. I’m used to Jeeves now, but often in the days when he first came to me I’ve bitten my tongue freely on finding him unexpectedly in my midst. “Did you call, sir?” “Oh, there you are, Jeeves!” “Precisely, sir.” “Jeeves, Mr. Bickersteth is still up the pole. Any ideas?” “Why, yes, sir. Since we had our recent conversation I fancy I have found what may prove a solution. I do not wish to appear to be taking a liberty, sir, but I think that we have overlooked his grace’s potentialities as a source of revenue.” Bicky laughed, what I have sometimes seen described as a hollow, mocking laugh, a sort of bitter cackle from the back of the throat, rather like a gargle. “I do not allude, sir,” explained Jeeves, “to the possibility of inducing his grace to part with money.

uncle?” “I have an aunt, sir, who paid five shillings to a young fellow for bringing a moving-picture actor to tea at her house one Sunday. It gave her social standing among the neighbours.” Bicky wavered. “If you think it could be done——” “I feel convinced of it, sir.” “What do you think, Bertie?” “I’m for it, old boy, absolutely. A very brainy wheeze.” “Thank you, sir. Will there be anything further? Good night, sir.” And he floated out, leaving us to discuss details. Until we started this business of floating old Chiswick as a money-making proposition I had never realized what a perfectly foul time those Stock Exchange chappies must have when the public isn’t biting freely. Nowadays I read that bit they put in the financial reports about “The market opened quietly” with a sympathetic eye, for, by Jove, it certainly opened quietly for us!

have been off if it hadn’t been for Jeeves. There is no doubt that Jeeves is in a class of his own. In the matter of brain and resource I don’t think I have ever met a chappie so supremely like mother made. He trickled into my room one morning with a good old cup of tea, and intimated that there was something doing. “Might I speak to you with regard to that matter of his grace, sir?” “It’s all off. We’ve decided to chuck it.” “Sir?” “It won’t work. We can’t get anybody to come.” “I fancy I can arrange that aspect of the matter, sir.” “Do you mean to say you’ve managed to get anybody?” “Yes, sir. Eighty-seven gentlemen from Birdsburg, sir.” I sat up in bed and spilt the tea. “Birdsburg?” “Birdsburg, Missouri, sir.” “How did you get them?” “I happened last night, sir, as you had intimated that you would be absent from home, to attend a theatrical performance, and entered into conversation between the acts with the occupant of the adjoining seat.

been introduced to and had shaken hands with a well-known prizefighter, that it occurred to me to broach the subject of his grace. To make a long story short, sir, I have arranged, subject to your approval, that the entire convention shall be presented to his grace to-morrow afternoon.” I was amazed. This chappie was a Napoleon. “Eighty-seven, Jeeves. At how much a head?” “I was obliged to agree to a reduction for quantity, sir. The terms finally arrived at were one hundred and fifty dollars for the party.” I thought a bit. “Payable in advance?” “No, sir. I endeavoured to obtain payment in advance, but was not successful.” “Well, any way, when we get it I’ll make it up to five hundred. Bicky’ll never know. Do you suspect Mr. Bickersteth would suspect anything, Jeeves, if I made it up to five hundred?” “I fancy not, sir.

boat was approaching the dock. I will not be subjected to this persecution again.” “That’ll be absolutely all right, uncle. There won’t be a newspaper-man in the place.” “In that case I shall be glad to make the acquaintance of your friends.” “You’ll shake hands with them and so forth?” “I shall naturally order my behaviour according to the accepted rules of civilized intercourse.” Bicky thanked him heartily and came off to lunch with me at the club, where he babbled freely of hens, incubators, and other rotten things. After mature consideration we had decided to unleash the Birdsburg contingent on the old boy ten at a time. Jeeves brought his theatre pal round to see us, and we arranged the whole thing with him. A very decent chappie, but rather inclined to collar the conversation and turn it in the direction of his home-town’s new water-supply system.

chatty. “What message have you for Birdsburg, Duke?” asked our pal. The old boy seemed a bit rattled. “I have never been to Birdsburg.” The chappie seemed pained. “You should pay it a visit,” he said. “The most rapidly-growing city in the country. Boost for Birdsburg!” “Boost for Birdsburg!” said the other chappies reverently. The chappie who had been brooding suddenly gave tongue. “Say!” He was a stout sort of well-fed cove with one of those determined chins and a cold eye. The assemblage looked at him. “As a matter of business,” said the chappie—“mind you, I’m not questioning anybody’s good faith, but, as a matter of strict business—I think this gentleman here ought to put himself on record before witnesses as stating that he really is a duke.” “What do you mean, sir?” cried the old boy, getting purple.

guarantees of good faith. We are paying Mr. Bickersteth here a hundred and fifty dollars for this reception, and we naturally want to know——” Old Chiswick gave Bicky a searching look; then he turned to the water-supply chappie. He was frightfully calm. “I can assure you that I know nothing of this,” he said, quite politely. “I should be grateful if you would explain.” “Well, we arranged with Mr. Bickersteth that eighty-seven citizens of Birdsburg should have the privilege of meeting and shaking hands with you for a financial consideration mutually arranged, and what my friend Simms here means—and I’m with him—is that we have only Mr. Bickersteth’s word for it—and he is a stranger to us—that you are the Duke of Chiswick at all.” Old Chiswick gulped. “Allow me to assure you, sir,” he said, in a rummy kind of voice, “that I am the Duke of Chiswick.” “Then that’s all right,” said the chappie heartily.

Then old Chiswick turned to Bicky: “Well?” Bicky didn’t seem to have anything to say. “Was it true what that man said?” “Yes, uncle.” “What do you mean by playing this trick?” Bicky seemed pretty well knocked out, so I put in a word. “I think you’d better explain the whole thing, Bicky, old top.” Bicky’s Adam’s-apple jumped about a bit; then he started: “You see, you had cut off my allowance, uncle, and I wanted a bit of money to start a chicken farm. I mean to say it’s an absolute cert if you once get a bit of capital. You buy a hen, and it lays an egg every day of the week, and you sell the eggs, say, seven for twenty-five cents. “Keep of hens cost nothing. Profit practically——” “What is all this nonsense about hens? You led me to suppose you were a substantial business man.” “Old Bicky rather exaggerated, sir,” I said, helping the chappie out.

wants is a bit of capital. Don’t you think it would be rather a wheeze if you were to——” “After what has happened? After this—this deceit and foolery? Not a penny!” “But——” “Not a penny!” There was a respectful cough in the background. “If I might make a suggestion, sir?” Jeeves was standing on the horizon, looking devilish brainy. “Go ahead, Jeeves!” I said. “I would merely suggest, sir, that if Mr. Bickersteth is in need of a little ready money, and is at a loss to obtain it elsewhere, he might secure the sum he requires by describing the occurrences of this afternoon for the Sunday issue of one of the more spirited and enterprising newspapers.” “By Jove!” I said. “By George!” said Bicky. “Great heavens!” said old Chiswick. “Very good, sir,” said Jeeves. Bicky turned to old Chiswick with a gleaming eye.

is a recognized figure——” “The only figure I’ll recognize,” said Bicky firmly, “is five hundred quid a year, paid quarterly.” “My dear boy!” “Absolutely!” “But your recompense, my dear Francis, would consist in the unrivalled opportunities you would have, as my secretary, to gain experience, to accustom yourself to the intricacies of political life, to—in fact, you would be in an exceedingly advantageous position.” “Five hundred a year!” said Bicky, rolling it round his tongue. “Why, that would be nothing to what I could make if I started a chicken farm. It stands to reason. Suppose you have a dozen hens. Each of the hens has a dozen chickens. After a bit the chickens grow up and have a dozen chickens each themselves, and then they all start laying eggs! There’s a fortune in it. You can get anything you like for eggs in America.

I want to tell you all about dear old Bobbie Cardew. It’s a most interesting story. I can’t put in any literary style and all that; but I don’t have to, don’t you know, because it goes on its Moral Lesson. If you’re a man you mustn’t miss it, because it’ll be a warning to you; and if you’re a woman you won’t want to, because it’s all about how a girl made a man feel pretty well fed up with things. If you’re a recent acquaintance of Bobbie’s, you’ll probably be surprised to hear that there was a time when he was more remarkable for the weakness of his memory than anything else. Dozens of fellows, who have only met Bobbie since the change took place, have been surprised when I told them that. Yet it’s true. Believe me .

then the day before send him a telegram and a phone-call on the day itself, and—half an hour before the time we’d fixed—a messenger in a taxi, whose business it was to see that he got in and that the chauffeur had the address all correct. By doing this I generally managed to get him, unless he had left town before my messenger arrived. The funny thing was that he wasn’t altogether a fool in other ways. Deep down in him there was a kind of stratum of sense. I had known him, once or twice, show an almost human intelligence. But to reach that stratum, mind you, you needed dynamite. At least, that’s what I thought. But there was another way which hadn’t occurred to me. Marriage, I mean. Marriage, the dynamite of the soul; that was what hit Bobbie.

those determined chins. She was a hospital nurse. When Bobbie smashed himself up at polo, she was told off by the authorities to smooth his brow and rally round with cooling unguents and all that; and the old boy hadn’t been up and about again for more than a week before they popped off to the registrar’s and fixed it up. Quite the romance. Bobbie broke the news to me at the club one evening, and next day he introduced me to her. I admired her. I’ve never worked myself—my name’s Pepper, by the way. Almost forgot to mention it. Reggie Pepper. My uncle Edward was Pepper, Wells, and Co., the Colliery people. He left me a sizable chunk of bullion—I say I’ve never worked myself, but I admire any one who earns a living under difficulties, especially a girl.

running along as smoothly as you could want. If this was marriage, I thought, I couldn’t see why fellows were so frightened of it. There were a lot of worse things that could happen to a man. But we now come to the incident of the quiet Dinner, and it’s just here that love’s young dream hits a snag, and things begin to occur. I happened to meet Bobbie in Piccadilly, and he asked me to come back to dinner at the flat. And, like a fool, instead of bolting and putting myself under police protection, I went. When we got to the flat, there was Mrs. Bobbie looking—well, I tell you, it staggered me. Her gold hair was all piled up in waves and crinkles and things, with a what-d’-you-call-it of diamonds in it. And she was wearing the most perfectly ripping dress.

if she had never seen him before. Then she turned scarlet. Then she turned as white as a sheet. Then she gave a little laugh. It was most interesting to watch. Made me wish I was up a tree about eight hundred miles away. Then she recovered herself. “I am so glad you were able to come, Mr. Pepper,” she said, smiling at me. And after that she was all right. At least, you would have said so. She talked a lot at dinner, and chaffed Bobbie, and played us ragtime on the piano afterwards, as if she hadn’t a care in the world. Quite a jolly little party it was—not. I’m no lynx-eyed sleuth, and all that sort of thing, but I had seen her face at the beginning, and I knew that she was working the whole time and working hard, to keep herself in hand, and that she would have given that diamond what’s-its-name in her hair and everything else she possessed to have one good scream—just one.

arranged to take Mary to the Savoy, and on to Covent Garden. She particularly wanted to hear Caruso. I had the ticket for the box in my pocket. Do you know, all through dinner I had a kind of rummy idea that there was something I’d forgotten, but I couldn’t think what?” “Till your wife mentioned it?” He nodded—— “She—mentioned it,” he said thoughtfully. I didn’t ask for details. Women with hair and chins like Mary’s may be angels most of the time, but, when they take off their wings for a bit, they aren’t half-hearted about it. “To be absolutely frank, old top,” said poor old Bobbie, in a broken sort of way, “my stock’s pretty low at home.” There didn’t seem much to be done. I just lit a cigarette and sat there. He didn’t want to talk.

one’s friends’ marriages, hoping they’ll turn out well and all that; but this was different. The average man isn’t like Bobbie, and the average girl isn’t like Mary. It was that old business of the immovable mass and the irresistible force. There was Bobbie, ambling gently through life, a dear old chap in a hundred ways, but undoubtedly a chump of the first water. And there was Mary, determined that he shouldn’t be a chump. And Nature, mind you, on Bobbie’s side. When Nature makes a chump like dear old Bobbie, she’s proud of him, and doesn’t want her handiwork disturbed. She gives him a sort of natural armour to protect him against outside interference. And that armour is shortness of memory. Shortness of memory keeps a man a chump, when, but for it, he might cease to be one.

the thin edge of the wedge, you see, and she knew it. A man who forgets what day he was married, when he’s been married one year, will forget, at about the end of the fourth, that he’s married at all. If she meant to get him in hand at all, she had got to do it now, before he began to drift away. I saw that clearly enough, and I tried to make Bobbie see it, when he was by way of pouring out his troubles to me one afternoon. I can’t remember what it was that he had forgotten the day before, but it was something she had asked him to bring home for her—it may have been a book. “It’s such a little thing to make a fuss about,” said Bobbie. “And she knows that it’s simply because I’ve got such an infernal memory about everything.

twenty odd.” “So you do remember some things?” I said. He got quite excited. Said that if I thought he was the sort of rotter who forgot to pay when he lost a bet, it was pretty rotten of me after knowing him all these years, and a lot more like that. “Subside, laddie,” I said. Then I spoke to him like a father. “What you’ve got to do, my old college chum,” I said, “is to pull yourself together, and jolly quick, too. As things are shaping, you’re due for a nasty knock before you know what’s hit you. You’ve got to make an effort. Don’t say you can’t. This two quid business shows that, even if your memory is rocky, you can remember some things. What you’ve got to do is to see that wedding anniversaries and so on are included in the list.

much as if I were a memorizing freak at the halls.” “That’s not enough for a woman,” I said. “They want to be shown. Bear that in mind, and you’re all right. Forget it, and there’ll be trouble.” He chewed the knob of his stick. “Women are frightfully rummy,” he said gloomily. “You should have thought of that before you married one,” I said. I don’t see that I could have done any more. I had put the whole thing in a nutshell for him. You would have thought he’d have seen the point, and that it would have made him brace up and get a hold on himself. But no. Off he went again in the same old way. I gave up arguing with him. I had a good deal of time on my hands, but not enough to amount to anything when it was a question of reforming dear old Bobbie by argument.

his eyes bulging and his face the colour of an oyster, waving a piece of paper in his hand. “Reggie,” he said. “Reggie, old top, she’s gone!” “Gone!” I said. “Who?” “Mary, of course! Gone! Left me! Gone!” “Where?” I said. Silly question? Perhaps you’re right. Anyhow, dear old Bobbie nearly foamed at the mouth. “Where? How should I know where? Here, read this.” He pushed the paper into my hand. It was a letter. “Go on,” said Bobbie. “Read it.” So I did. It certainly was quite a letter. There was not much of it, but it was all to the point. This is what it said: “MY DEAR BOBBIE,—I am going away. When you care enough about me to remember to wish me many happy returns on my birthday, I will come back. My address will be Box 341, London Morning News .” I read it twice, then I said, “Well, why don’t you?” “Why don’t I what?” “Why don’t you wish her many happy returns?

you get to it?” “I know it came somewhere between the first of January and the thirty-first of December. That’s how near I get to it.” “Think.” “Think? What’s the use of saying ‘Think’? Think I haven’t thought? I’ve been knocking sparks out of my brain ever since I opened that letter.” “And you can’t remember?” “No.” I rang the bell and ordered restoratives. “Well, Bobbie,” I said, “it’s a pretty hard case to spring on an untrained amateur like me. Suppose someone had come to Sherlock Holmes and said, ‘Mr. Holmes, here’s a case for you. When is my wife’s birthday?’ Wouldn’t that have given Sherlock a jolt? However, I know enough about the game to understand that a fellow can’t shoot off his deductive theories unless you start him with a clue, so rouse yourself out of that pop-eyed trance and come across with two or three.

like golf. Some days you’re right off, others it’s as easy as falling off a log. I don’t suppose dear old Bobbie had ever had two ideas in the same morning before in his life; but now he did it without an effort. He just loosed another dry Martini into the undergrowth, and before you could turn round it had flushed quite a brain-wave. Do you know those little books called When were you Born ? There’s one for each month. They tell you your character, your talents, your strong points, and your weak points at fourpence halfpenny a go. Bobbie’s idea was to buy the whole twelve, and go through them till we found out which month hit off Mary’s character. That would give us the month, and narrow it down a whole lot. A pretty hot idea for a non-thinker like dear old Bobbie.

a barrier to a happy married life”; but I plumped for February, because February women “are unusually determined to have their own way, are very earnest, and expect a full return in their companion or mates.” Which he owned was about as like Mary as anything could be. In the end he tore the books up, stamped on them, burnt them, and went home. It was wonderful what a change the next few days made in dear old Bobbie. Have you ever seen that picture, “The Soul’s Awakening”? It represents a flapper of sorts gazing in a startled sort of way into the middle distance with a look in her eyes that seems to say, “Surely that is George’s step I hear on the mat! Can this be love?” Well, Bobbie had a soul’s awakening too. I don’t suppose he had ever troubled to think in his life before—not really think .

could see that he had had an idea. He looked happier than he had done in weeks. “Reggie,” he said, “I’m on the trail. This time I’m convinced that I shall pull it off. I’ve remembered something of vital importance.” “Yes?” I said. “I remember distinctly,” he said, “that on Mary’s last birthday we went together to the Coliseum. How does that hit you?” “It’s a fine bit of memorizing,” I said; “but how does it help?” “Why, they change the programme every week there.” “Ah!” I said. “Now you are talking.” “And the week we went one of the turns was Professor Some One’s Terpsichorean Cats. I recollect them distinctly. Now, are we narrowing it down, or aren’t we? Reggie, I’m going round to the Coliseum this minute, and I’m going to dig the date of those Terpsichorean Cats out of them, if I have to use a crowbar.” So that got him within six days; for the management treated us like brothers; brought out the archives, and ran agile fingers over the pages till they treed the cats in the middle of May.

the Coliseum.” I heard him give a sort of howl. “Bobbie,” I said. My feet were freezing, but I was fond of him. “Well?” “I’ve remembered something too. It’s this. The day you went to the Coliseum I lunched with you both at the Ritz. You had forgotten to bring any money with you, so you wrote a cheque.” “But I’m always writing cheques.” “You are. But this was for a tenner, and made out to the hotel. Hunt up your cheque-book and see how many cheques for ten pounds payable to the Ritz Hotel you wrote out between May the fifth and May the tenth.” He gave a kind of gulp. “Reggie,” he said, “you’re a genius. I’ve always said so. I believe you’ve got it. Hold the line.” Presently he came back again. “Halloa!” he said. “I’m here,” I said.

don’t you know. Bobbie’s howl and gulp and Mrs. Bobbie’s scream and all about my feet and all that. Most interesting it must be. “He’s remembered it!” she gasped. “Did you tell him?” “No.” Well, I hadn’t. “Mr. Pepper.” “Yes?” “Was he—has he been—was he very worried?” I chuckled. This was where I was billed to be the life and soul of the party. “Worried! He was about the most worried man between here and Edinburgh. He has been worrying as if he was paid to do it by the nation. He has started out to worry after breakfast, and——” Oh, well, you can never tell with women. My idea was that we should pass the rest of the night slapping each other on the back across the wire, and telling each other what bally brainy conspirators we were, don’t you know, and all that.

wish to be unjust, Mr. Pepper, but I must say that to me there seems to be something positively fiendish in a man who can go out of his way to separate a husband from his wife, simply in order to amuse himself by gloating over his agony——” “But——!” “When one single word would have——” “But you made me promise not to——” I bleated. “And if I did, do you suppose I didn’t expect you to have the sense to break your promise?” I had finished. I had no further observations to make. I hung up the receiver, and crawled into bed. I still see Bobbie when he comes to the club, but I do not visit the old homestead. He is friendly, but he stops short of issuing invitations. I ran across Mary at the Academy last week, and her eyes went through me like a couple of bullets through a pat of butter.

I don’t want to bore you, don’t you know, and all that sort of rot, but I must tell you about dear old Freddie Meadowes. I’m not a flier at literary style, and all that, but I’ll get some writer chappie to give the thing a wash and brush up when I’ve finished, so that’ll be all right. Dear old Freddie, don’t you know, has been a dear old pal of mine for years and years; so when I went into the club one morning and found him sitting alone in a dark corner, staring glassily at nothing, and generally looking like the last rose of summer, you can understand I was quite disturbed about it. As a rule, the old rotter is the life and soul of our set. Quite the little lump of fun, and all that sort of thing.

him come near her, refused to talk on the phone, and sent back his letters unopened. I was sorry for poor old Freddie. I knew what it felt like. I was once in love myself with a girl called Elizabeth Shoolbred, and the fact that she couldn’t stand me at any price will be recorded in my autobiography. I knew the thing for Freddie. “Change of scene is what you want, old scout,” I said. “Come with me to Marvis Bay. I’ve taken a cottage there. Jimmy’s coming down on the twenty-fourth. We’ll be a cosy party.” “He’s absolutely right,” said Jimmy. “Change of scene’s the thing. I knew a man. Girl refused him. Man went abroad. Two months later girl wired him, ‘Come back. Muriel.’ Man started to write out a reply; suddenly found that he couldn’t remember girl’s surname; so never answered at all.” But Freddie wouldn’t be comforted.

seemed to suit poor old Freddie. Once the moon was up and the breeze sighing in the trees, you couldn’t drag him from that beach with a rope. He became quite a popular pet with the gnats. They’d hang round waiting for him to come out, and would give perfectly good strollers the miss-in-baulk just so as to be in good condition for him. Yes, it was a peaceful sort of life, but by the end of the first week I began to wish that Jimmy Pinkerton had arranged to come down earlier: for as a companion Freddie, poor old chap, wasn’t anything to write home to mother about. When he wasn’t chewing a pipe and scowling at the carpet, he was sitting at the piano, playing “The Rosary” with one finger. He couldn’t play anything except “The Rosary,” and he couldn’t play much of that.

hands. I’ll see you through. Now, what you want,” I said, “is to place her under some obligation to you. What you want is to get her timidly thanking you. What you want——” “But what’s she going to thank me timidly for?” I thought for a moment. “Look out for a chance and save her from drowning,” I said. “I can’t swim,” said Freddie. That was Freddie all over, don’t you know. A dear old chap in a thousand ways, but no help to a fellow, if you know what I mean. He cranked up the piano once more and I sprinted for the open. I strolled out on to the sands and began to think this thing over. There was no doubt that the brain-work had got to be done by me. Dear old Freddie had his strong qualities.

it. Personally I couldn’t manage it. I don’t think I ever saw a child who made me feel less sentimental. He was one of those round, bulging kids. After he had finished the castle he seemed to get bored with life, and began to whimper. The girl took him off to where a fellow was selling sweets at a stall. And I walked on. Now, fellows, if you ask them, will tell you that I’m a chump. Well, I don’t mind. I admit it. I am a chump. All the Peppers have been chumps. But what I do say is that every now and then, when you’d least expect it, I get a pretty hot brain-wave; and that’s what happened now. I doubt if the idea that came to me then would have occurred to a single one of any dozen of the brainiest chappies you care to name.

country and practically saved his life, why, the girl’s gratitude is bound to make her chuck hostilities and be friends again. So I gathered in the kid and made off with him. All the way home I pictured that scene of reconciliation. I could see it so vividly, don’t you know, that, by George, it gave me quite a choky feeling in my throat. Freddie, dear old chap, was rather slow at getting on to the fine points of the idea. When I appeared, carrying the kid, and dumped him down in our sitting-room, he didn’t absolutely effervesce with joy, if you know what I mean. The kid had started to bellow by this time, and poor old Freddie seemed to find it rather trying. “Stop it!” he said. “Do you think nobody’s got any troubles except you? What the deuce is all this, Reggie?” The kid came back at him with a yell that made the window rattle.

I saw the old boy returning, and, by George, the kid was still with him. And Freddie looked as if he hadn’t a friend in the world. “Hello!” I said. “Couldn’t you find her?” “Yes, I found her,” he replied, with one of those bitter, hollow laughs. “Well, then——?” Freddie sank into a chair and groaned. “This isn’t her cousin, you idiot!” he said. “He’s no relation at all. He’s just a kid she happened to meet on the beach. She had never seen him before in her life.” “What! Who is he, then?” “I don’t know. Oh, Lord, I’ve had a time! Thank goodness you’ll probably spend the next few years of your life in Dartmoor for kidnapping. That’s my only consolation. I’ll come and jeer at you through the bars.” “Tell me all, old boy,” I said. It took him a good long time to tell the story, for he broke off in the middle of nearly every sentence to call me names, but I gathered gradually what had happened.

swapping stories, it would be about the biggest duel on record. And then he had crawled away with the kid, licked to a splinter. “And mind, this is your affair,” he concluded. “I’m not mixed up in it at all. If you want to escape your sentence, you’d better go and find the kid’s parents and return him before the police come for you.” By Jove, you know, till I started to tramp the place with this infernal kid, I never had a notion it would have been so deuced difficult to restore a child to its anxious parents. It’s a mystery to me how kidnappers ever get caught. I searched Marvis Bay like a bloodhound, but nobody came forward to claim the infant. You’d have thought, from the lack of interest in him, that he was stopping there all by himself in a cottage of his own.

I’ve brought back your son.” “I see him. Peep-bo, Tootles! Dadda can see ’oo!” The face disappeared with a jerk. I could hear voices. The face reappeared. “Hi!” I churned the gravel madly. “Do you live here?” said the face. “I’m staying here for a few weeks.” “What’s your name?” “Pepper. But——” “Pepper? Any relation to Edward Pepper, the colliery owner?” “My uncle. But——” “I used to know him well. Dear old Edward Pepper! I wish I was with him now.” “I wish you were,” I said. He beamed down at me. “This is most fortunate,” he said. “We were wondering what we were to do with Tootles. You see, we have the mumps here. My daughter Bootles has just developed mumps. Tootles must not be exposed to the risk of infection. We could not think what we were to do with him.

The window flew up again. “Hi!” A package weighing about a ton hit me on the head and burst like a bomb. “Did you catch it?” said the face, reappearing. “Dear me, you missed it! Never mind. You can get it at the grocer’s. Ask for Bailey’s Granulated Breakfast Chips. Tootles takes them for breakfast with a little milk. Be certain to get Bailey’s.” My spirit was broken, if you know what I mean. I accepted the situation. Taking Tootles by the hand, I walked slowly away. Napoleon’s retreat from Moscow was a picnic by the side of it. As we turned up the road we met Freddie’s Angela. The sight of her had a marked effect on the kid Tootles. He pointed at her and said, “Wah!” The girl stopped and smiled. I loosed the kid, and he ran to her.

such expressions. “Well,” he said, when he had finished, “say something! Heavens! man, why don’t you say something?” “You don’t give me a chance, old top,” I said soothingly. “What are you going to do about it?” “What can we do about it?” “We can’t spend our time acting as nurses to this—this exhibit.” He got up. “I’m going back to London,” he said. “Freddie!” I cried. “Freddie, old man!” My voice shook. “Would you desert a pal at a time like this?” “I would. This is your business, and you’ve got to manage it.” “Freddie,” I said, “you’ve got to stand by me. You must. Do you realize that this child has to be undressed, and bathed, and dressed again? You wouldn’t leave me to do all that single-handed? Freddie, old scout, we were at school together. Your mother likes me.

he was thinking. To get the kid undressed had been simple—a mere matter of muscle. But how were we to get him into his clothes again? I stirred the pile with my foot. There was a long linen arrangement which might have been anything. Also a strip of pink flannel which was like nothing on earth. We looked at each other and smiled wanly. But in the morning I remembered that there were children at the next bungalow but one. We went there before breakfast and borrowed their nurse. Women are wonderful, by George they are! She had that kid dressed and looking fit for anything in about eight minutes. I showered wealth on her, and she promised to come in morning and evening. I sat down to breakfast almost cheerful again. It was the first bit of silver lining there had been to the cloud up to date.

said. “It wouldn’t make a bad situation for act two of a farce.” “Farce!” snarled poor old Freddie. “Rather. Curtain of act one on hero, a well-meaning, half-baked sort of idiot just like—that is to say, a well-meaning, half-baked sort of idiot, kidnapping the child. Second act, his adventures with it. I’ll rough it out to-night. Come along and show me the hotel, Reggie.” As we went I told him the rest of the story—the Angela part. He laid down his portmanteau and looked at me like an owl through his glasses. “What!” he said. “Why, hang it, this is a play, ready-made. It’s the old ‘Tiny Hand’ business. Always safe stuff. Parted lovers. Lisping child. Reconciliation over the little cradle. It’s big. Child, centre. Girl L.C.; Freddie, up stage, by the piano. Can Freddie play the piano?” “He can play a little of ‘The Rosary’ with one finger.” Jimmy shook his head.

line for the child. ‘Boofer lady, does ’oo love dadda?’ isn’t definite enough. We want something more—ah! ‘Kiss Freddie,’ that’s it. Short, crisp, and has the punch.” “But, Jimmy, old top,” I said, “the only objection is, don’t you know, that there’s no way of getting the girl to the cottage. She cuts Freddie. She wouldn’t come within a mile of him.” Jimmy frowned. “That’s awkward,” he said. “Well, we shall have to make it an exterior set instead of an interior. We can easily corner her on the beach somewhere, when we’re ready. Meanwhile, we must get the kid letter-perfect. First rehearsal for lines and business eleven sharp to-morrow.” Poor old Freddie was in such a gloomy state of mind that we decided not to tell him the idea till we had finished coaching the kid. He wasn’t in the mood to have a thing like that hanging over him.

old professional. And then he’d go all to pieces again. And time was flying. “We must hurry up, Jimmy,” I said. “The kid’s uncle may arrive any day now and take him away.” “And we haven’t an understudy,” said Jimmy. “There’s something in that. We must work! My goodness, that kid’s a bad study. I’ve known deaf-mutes who would have learned the part quicker.” I will say this for the kid, though: he was a trier. Failure didn’t discourage him. Whenever there was any kind of sweet near he had a dash at his line, and kept on saying something till he got what he was after. His only fault was his uncertainty. Personally, I would have been prepared to risk it, and start the performance at the first opportunity, but Jimmy said no. “We’re not nearly ready,” said Jimmy.

away, mind you, Freddie smiting the piano in the sitting-room. It was a dash disturbing situation, don’t you know. At any minute Freddie might take it into his head to come out on to the veranda, and we hadn’t even begun to rehearse him in his part. I tried to break up the scene. “We were just going down to the beach,” I said. “Yes?” said the girl. She listened for a moment. “So you’re having your piano tuned?” she said. “My aunt has been trying to find a tuner for ours. Do you mind if I go in and tell this man to come on to us when he’s finished here?” “Er—not yet!” I said. “Not yet, if you don’t mind. He can’t bear to be disturbed when he’s working. It’s the artistic temperament. I’ll tell him later.” “Very well,” she said, getting up to go.

the girl, and the girl looked at him. I looked at the ground, and the kid looked at the toffee. “Kiss Fweddie!” he yelled. “Kiss Fweddie!” The girl was still holding up the toffee, and the kid did what Jimmy Pinkerton would have called “business of outstretched hands” towards it. “Kiss Fweddie!” he shrieked. “What does this mean?” said the girl, turning to me. “You’d better give it to him, don’t you know,” I said. “He’ll go on till you do.” She gave the kid his toffee, and he subsided. Poor old Freddie still stood there gaping, without a word. “What does it mean?” said the girl again. Her face was pink, and her eyes were sparkling in the sort of way, don’t you know, that makes a fellow feel as if he hadn’t any bones in him, if you know what I mean.

told her all about it. And all the while Idiot Freddie stood there gaping, without a word. And the girl didn’t speak, either. She just stood listening. And then she began to laugh. I never heard a girl laugh so much. She leaned against the side of the veranda and shrieked. And all the while Freddie, the World’s Champion Chump, stood there, saying nothing. Well I sidled towards the steps. I had said all I had to say, and it seemed to me that about here the stage-direction “exit” was written in my part. I gave poor old Freddie up in despair. If only he had said a word, it might have been all right. But there he stood, speechless. What can a fellow do with a fellow like that? Just out of sight of the house I met Jimmy Pinkerton.

I think one of the rummiest affairs I was ever mixed up with, in the course of a lifetime devoted to butting into other people’s business, was that affair of George Lattaker at Monte Carlo. I wouldn’t bore you, don’t you know, for the world, but I think you ought to hear about it. We had come to Monte Carlo on the yacht Circe , belonging to an old sportsman of the name of Marshall. Among those present were myself, my man Voules, a Mrs. Vanderley, her daughter Stella, Mrs. Vanderley’s maid Pilbeam and George. George was a dear old pal of mine. In fact, it was I who had worked him into the party. You see, George was due to meet his Uncle Augustus, who was scheduled, George having just reached his twenty-fifth birthday, to hand over to him a legacy left by one of George’s aunts, for which he had been trustee.

struck me that a far better plan was for George to go to his uncle at Monte Carlo instead. Kill two birds with one stone, don’t you know. Fix up his affairs and have a pleasant holiday simultaneously. So George had tagged along, and at the time when the trouble started we were anchored in Monaco Harbour, and Uncle Augustus was due next day. Looking back, I may say that, so far as I was mixed up in it, the thing began at seven o’clock in the morning, when I was aroused from a dreamless sleep by the dickens of a scrap in progress outside my state-room door. The chief ingredients were a female voice that sobbed and said: “Oh, Harold!” and a male voice “raised in anger,” as they say, which after considerable difficulty, I identified as Voules’s. I hardly recognized it.

roof. Who was that with you?” “Miss Pilbeam, sir; Mrs. Vanderley’s maid.” “What was all the trouble about?” “I was breaking our engagement, sir.” I couldn’t help gaping. Somehow one didn’t associate Voules with engagements. Then it struck me that I’d no right to butt in on his secret sorrows, so I switched the conversation. “I think I’ll get up,” I said. “Yes, sir.” “I can’t wait to breakfast with the rest. Can you get me some right away?” “Yes, sir.” So I had a solitary breakfast and went up on deck to smoke. It was a lovely morning. Blue sea, gleaming Casino, cloudless sky, and all the rest of the hippodrome. Presently the others began to trickle up. Stella Vanderley was one of the first. I thought she looked a bit pale and tired. She said she hadn’t slept well.

Lattaker,” she said. I didn’t pursue the subject. George’s stock was apparently low that a.m. The next item in the day’s programme occurred a few minutes later when the morning papers arrived. Mrs. Vanderley opened hers and gave a scream. “The poor, dear Prince!” she said. “What a shocking thing!” said old Marshall. “I knew him in Vienna,” said Mrs. Vanderley. “He waltzed divinely.” Then I got at mine and saw what they were talking about. The paper was full of it. It seemed that late the night before His Serene Highness the Prince of Saxburg-Leignitz (I always wonder why they call these chaps “Serene”) had been murderously assaulted in a dark street on his way back from the Casino to his yacht. Apparently he had developed the habit of going about without an escort, and some rough-neck, taking advantage of this, had laid for him and slugged him with considerable vim.

looked round the group, and fixed on old Marshall as the probable owner of the yacht. “Good morning,” he said. “I believe you have a Mr. Lattaker on board—Mr. George Lattaker?” “Yes,” said Marshall. “He’s down below. Want to see him? Whom shall I say?” “He would not know my name. I should like to see him for a moment on somewhat urgent business.” “Take a seat. He’ll be up in a moment. Reggie, my boy, go and hurry him up.” I went down to George’s state-room. “George, old man!” I shouted. No answer. I opened the door and went in. The room was empty. What’s more, the bunk hadn’t been slept in. I don’t know when I’ve been more surprised. I went on deck. “He isn’t there,” I said. “Not there!” said old Marshall. “Where is he, then? Perhaps he’s gone for a stroll ashore.

the sense of it? How do you suppose you can ever make yourself popular if you go about touching people on the shoulder? My nerves are sticking a yard out of my body this morning, Reggie!” “Yes, old boy?” “I did a murder last night.” “What?” “It’s the sort of thing that might happen to anybody. Directly Stella Vanderley broke off our engagement I——” “Broke off your engagement? How long were you engaged?” “About two minutes. It may have been less. I hadn’t a stop-watch. I proposed to her at ten last night in the saloon. She accepted me. I was just going to kiss her when we heard someone coming. I went out. Coming along the corridor was that infernal what’s-her-name—Mrs. Vanderley’s maid—Pilbeam. Have you ever been accepted by the girl you love, Reggie?” “Never. I’ve been refused dozens——” “Then you won’t understand how I felt.

worth. I woke up this morning in the Casino gardens. I’ve lost my hat.” I dived for the paper. “Read,” I said. “It’s all there.” He read. “Good heavens!” he said. “You didn’t do a thing to His Serene Nibs, did you?” “Reggie, this is awful.” “Cheer up. They say he’ll recover.” “That doesn’t matter.” “It does to him.” He read the paper again. “It says they’ve a clue.” “They always say that.” “But—My hat!” “Eh?” “My hat. I must have dropped it during the scrap. This man, Denman Sturgis, must have found it. It had my name in it!” “George,” I said, “you mustn’t waste time. Oh!” He jumped a foot in the air. “Don’t do it!” he said, irritably. “Don’t bark like that. What’s the matter?” “The man!” “What man?” “A tall, thin man with an eye like a gimlet.

Voules came up the companion-way, carrying a letter on a tray. “What’s the matter!” I said. “What do you want?” “I beg your pardon, sir. I thought I heard Mr. Lattaker’s voice. A letter has arrived for him.” “He isn’t here.” “No, sir. Shall I remove the letter?” “No; give it to me. I’ll give it to him when he comes.” “Very good, sir.” “Oh, Voules! Are they all still at breakfast? The gentleman who came to see Mr. Lattaker? Still hard at it?” “He is at present occupied with a kippered herring, sir.” “Ah! That’s all, Voules.” “Thank you, sir.” He retired. I called to George, and he came out. “Who was it?” “Only Voules. He brought a letter for you. They’re all at breakfast still. The sleuth’s eating kippers.” “That’ll hold him for a bit. Full of bones.” He began to read his letter.

He gave a kind of grunt of surprise at the first paragraph. “Well, I’m hanged!” he said, as he finished. “Reggie, this is a queer thing.” “What’s that?” He handed me the letter, and directly I started in on it I saw why he had grunted. This is how it ran: “My dear George—I shall be seeing you to-morrow, I hope; but I think it is better, before we meet, to prepare you for a curious situation that has arisen in connection with the legacy which your father inherited from your Aunt Emily, and which you are expecting me, as trustee, to hand over to you, now that you have reached your twenty-fifth birthday. You have doubtless heard your father speak of your twin-brother Alfred, who was lost or kidnapped—which, was never ascertained—when you were both babies.

some time. But I will go fully into the matter with you when we meet.—Your affectionate uncle, “AUGUSTUS ARBUTT.” I read it through twice, and the second time I had one of those ideas I do sometimes get, though admittedly a chump of the premier class. I have seldom had such a thoroughly corking brain-wave. “Why, old top,” I said, “this lets you out.” “Lets me out of half the darned money, if that’s what you mean. If this chap’s not an imposter—and there’s no earthly reason to suppose he is, though I’ve never heard my father say a word about him—we shall have to split the money. Aunt Emily’s will left the money to my father, or, failing him, his ‘offspring.’ I thought that meant me, but apparently there are a crowd of us. I call it rotten work, springing unexpected offspring on a fellow at the eleventh hour like this.” “Why, you chump,” I said, “it’s going to save you.

to sink into him. His face brightened. “Why, I really do believe it would work,” he said. “Of course it would work. If they want proof, show them your mole. I’ll swear George hadn’t one.” “And as Alfred I should get a chance of talking to Stella and making things all right for George. Reggie, old top, you’re a genius.” “No, no.” “You are .” “Well, it’s only sometimes. I can’t keep it up.” And just then there was a gentle cough behind us. We spun round. “What the devil are you doing here, Voules,” I said. “I beg your pardon, sir. I have heard all.” I looked at George. George looked at me. “Voules is all right,” I said. “Decent Voules! Voules wouldn’t give us away, would you, Voules?” “Yes, sir.” “You would?” “Yes, sir.” “But, Voules, old man,” I said, “be sensible.

promise of another hundred when we had got safely away, before he was satisfied. But we fixed it up at last, and poor old George got down to his state-room and changed his clothes. He’d hardly gone when the breakfast-party came on deck. “Did you meet him?” I asked. “Meet whom?” said old Marshall. “George’s twin-brother Alfred.” “I didn’t know George had a brother.” “Nor did he till yesterday. It’s a long story. He was kidnapped in infancy, and everyone thought he was dead. George had a letter from his uncle about him yesterday. I shouldn’t wonder if that’s where George has gone, to see his uncle and find out about it. In the meantime, Alfred has arrived. He’s down in George’s state-room now, having a brush-up. It’ll amaze you, the likeness between them. You’ll think it is George at first.

mole. His collar hid it at ordinary times. I had seen it often when we were bathing together. “Has George a mole like that?” he asked. “No,” I said. “Oh, no.” “You would have noticed it if he had?” “Yes,” I said. “Oh, yes.” “I’m glad of that,” said George. “It would be a nuisance not to be able to prove one’s own identity.” That seemed to satisfy them all. They couldn’t get away from it. It seemed to me that from now on the thing was a walk-over. And I think George felt the same, for, when old Marshall asked him if he had had breakfast, he said he had not, went below, and pitched in as if he hadn’t a care in the world. Everything went right till lunch-time. George sat in the shade on the foredeck talking to Stella most of the time.

intend to stay here? He seems to have taken root.” “I fancy he thinks that you’re bound to come back sooner or later, and is waiting for you.” “He’s an absolute nuisance,” said George. We were moving towards the companion way, to go below for lunch, when a boat hailed us. We went to the side and looked over. “It’s my uncle,” said George. A stout man came up the gangway. “Halloa, George!” he said. “Get my letter?” “I think you are mistaking me for my brother,” said George. “My name is Alfred Lattaker.” “What’s that?” “I am George’s brother Alfred. Are you my Uncle Augustus?” The stout man stared at him. “You’re very like George,” he said. “So everyone tells me.” “And you’re really Alfred?” “I am.” “I’d like to talk business with you for a moment.” He cocked his eye at me.

have given him the afternoon off.” She broke down—absolutely collapsed. Devilish unpleasant it was. I’m hopeless in a situation like this. After I’d said, “There, there!” which didn’t seem to help much, I hadn’t any remarks to make. “He s-said he was going to the tables to gamble away all his savings and then shoot himself, because he had nothing left to live for.” I suddenly remembered the scrap in the small hours outside my state-room door. I hate mysteries. I meant to get to the bottom of this. I couldn’t have a really first-class valet like Voules going about the place shooting himself up. Evidently the girl Pilbeam was at the bottom of the thing. I questioned her. She sobbed. I questioned her more. I was firm. And eventually she yielded up the facts. Voules had seen George kiss her the night before; that was the trouble.

the last remnant of the stuff. He had to find a way of holding me for a while and postponing the squaring of accounts while he got away, and he invented this twin-brother business. He knew I should find out sooner or later, but meanwhile he would be able to get off to South America, which he has done. He’s on his way now.” “You let him go?” “What could I do? I can’t afford to make a fuss with that man Sturgis around. I can’t prove there’s no Alfred when my only chance of avoiding prison is to be Alfred.” “Well, you’ve made things right for yourself with Stella Vanderley, anyway,” I said, to cheer him up. “What’s the good of that now? I’ve hardly any money and no prospects. How can I marry her?” I pondered. “It looks to me, old top,” I said at last, “as if things were in a bit of a mess.” “You’ve guessed it,” said poor old George.

up. We had been talking of George, and old Marshall was suggesting the advisability of sending out search-parties. He was worried. So was Stella Vanderley. So, for that matter, were George and I, only not for the same reason. We were just arguing the thing out when the visitor appeared. He was a well-built, stiff sort of fellow. He spoke with a German accent. “Mr. Marshall?” he said. “I am Count Fritz von Cöslin, equerry to His Serene Highness”—he clicked his heels together and saluted—“the Prince of Saxburg-Leignitz.” Mrs. Vanderley jumped up. “Why, Count,” she said, “what ages since we met in Vienna! You remember?” “Could I ever forget? And the charming Miss Stella, she is well, I suppose not?” “Stella, you remember Count Fritz?” Stella shook hands with him. “And how is the poor, dear Prince?” asked Mrs. Vanderley.

said. “I am Alfred. You can tell me by my mole.” He exhibited the mole. He was taking no risks. The Count clicked his tongue regretfully. “I am sorry,” he said. George didn’t offer to console him, “Don’t worry,” said Sturgis. “He won’t escape me. I shall find him.” “Do, Mr. Sturgis, do. And quickly. Find swiftly that noble young man.” “What?” shouted George. “That noble young man, George Lattaker, who, at the risk of his life, saved my high-born master from the assassin.” George sat down suddenly. “I don’t understand,” he said feebly. “We were wrong, Mr. Sturgis,” went on the Count. “We leaped to the conclusion—was it not so?—that the owner of the hat you found was also the assailant of my high-born master. We were wrong. I have heard the story from His Serene Highness’s own lips.

land; you must scour the sea to find George Lattaker.” “He needn’t take all that trouble,” said a voice from the gangway. It was Voules. His face was flushed, his hat was on the back of his head, and he was smoking a fat cigar. “I’ll tell you where to find George Lattaker!” he shouted. He glared at George, who was staring at him. “Yes, look at me,” he yelled. “Look at me. You won’t be the first this afternoon who’s stared at the mysterious stranger who won for two hours without a break. I’ll be even with you now, Mr. Blooming Lattaker. I’ll learn you to break a poor man’s heart. Mr. Marshall and gents, this morning I was on deck, and I over’eard ’im plotting to put up a game on you. They’d spotted that gent there as a detective, and they arranged that blooming Lattaker was to pass himself off as his own twin-brother.

chair, and flung herself into the arms of Voules. “Oh, Harold!” she cried. “I thought you were dead. I thought you’d shot yourself.” He sort of braced himself together to fling her off, and then he seemed to think better of it and fell into the clinch. It was all dashed romantic, don’t you know, but there are limits. “Voules, you’re sacked,” I said. “Who cares?” he said. “Think I was going to stop on now I’m a gentleman of property? Come along, Emma, my dear. Give a month’s notice and get your ’at, and I’ll take you to dinner at Ciro’s.” “And you, Mr. Lattaker,” said the Count, “may I conduct you to the presence of my high-born master? He wishes to show his gratitude to his preserver.” “You may,” said George. “May I have my hat, Mr. Sturgis?” There’s just one bit more.

Have you ever thought about—and, when I say thought about, I mean really carefully considered the question of—the coolness, the cheek, or, if you prefer it, the gall with which Woman, as a sex, fairly bursts? I have, by Jove! But then I’ve had it thrust on my notice, by George, in a way I should imagine has happened to pretty few fellows. And the limit was reached by that business of the Yeardsley “Venus.” To make you understand the full what-d’you-call-it of the situation, I shall have to explain just how matters stood between Mrs. Yeardsley and myself. When I first knew her she was Elizabeth Shoolbred. Old Worcestershire family; pots of money; pretty as a picture. Her brother Bill was at Oxford with me. I loved Elizabeth Shoolbred. I loved her, don’t you know. And there was a time, for about a week, when we were engaged to be married.

But just as I was beginning to take a serious view of life and study furniture catalogues and feel pretty solemn when the restaurant orchestra played “The Wedding Glide,” I’m hanged if she didn’t break it off, and a month later she was married to a fellow of the name of Yeardsley—Clarence Yeardsley, an artist. What with golf, and billiards, and a bit of racing, and fellows at the club rallying round and kind of taking me out of myself, as it were, I got over it, and came to look on the affair as a closed page in the book of my life, if you know what I mean. It didn’t seem likely to me that we should meet again, as she and Clarence had settled down in the country somewhere and never came to London, and I’m bound to own that, by the time I got her letter, the wound had pretty well healed, and I was to a certain extent sitting up and taking nourishment.

Wire your train, and I will send the car to meet you. —Yours most sincerely, ELIZABETH YEARDSLEY. “P.S.—We can give you new milk and fresh eggs. Think of that! “P.P.S.—Bill says our billiard-table is one of the best he has ever played on. “P.P.S.S.—We are only half a mile from a golf course. Bill says it is better than St. Andrews. “P.P.S.S.S.—You must come!” Well, a fellow comes down to breakfast one morning, with a bit of a head on, and finds a letter like that from a girl who might quite easily have blighted his life! It rattled me rather, I must confess. However, that bit about the golf settled me. I knew Bill knew what he was talking about, and, if he said the course was so topping, it must be something special. So I went. Old Bill met me at the station with the car.

dog through gallery after gallery, though pictures are poison to me, just as they are to old Bill. Somehow it had never struck me that she would still be going on in this way after marrying an artist. I should have thought that by this time the mere sight of a picture would have fed her up. Not so, however, according to old Bill. “They talk pictures at every meal,” he said. “I tell you, it makes a chap feel out of it. How long are you down for?” “A few days.” “Take my tip, and let me send you a wire from London. I go there to-morrow. I promised to play against the Scottish. The idea was that I was to come back after the match. But you couldn’t get me back with a lasso.” I tried to point out the silver lining.

out in billiards,” I said. “I’m glad the table’s good.” “It depends what you call good. It’s half-size, and there’s a seven-inch cut just out of baulk where Clarence’s cue slipped. Elizabeth has mended it with pink silk. Very smart and dressy it looks, but it doesn’t improve the thing as a billiard-table.” “But she said you said——” “Must have been pulling your leg.” We turned in at the drive gates of a good-sized house standing well back from the road. It looked black and sinister in the dusk, and I couldn’t help feeling, you know, like one of those Johnnies you read about in stories who are lured to lonely houses for rummy purposes and hear a shriek just as they get there. Elizabeth knew me well enough to know that a specially good golf course was a safe draw to me.

figure appeared. “Have you got him, Bill?” she said, which in my present frame of mind struck me as a jolly creepy way of putting it. The sort of thing Lady Macbeth might have said to Macbeth, don’t you know. “Do you mean me?” I said. She came down into the light. It was Elizabeth, looking just the same as in the old days. “Is that you, Reggie? I’m so glad you were able to come. I was afraid you might have forgotten all about it. You know what you are. Come along in and have some tea.” Have you ever been turned down by a girl who afterwards married and then been introduced to her husband? If so you’ll understand how I felt when Clarence burst on me. You know the feeling. First of all, when you hear about the marriage, you say to yourself, “I wonder what he’s like.” Then you meet him, and think, “There must be some mistake.

earlier model. I took him, correctly, to be Mr. Yeardsley, senior. Elizabeth introduced us. “Father,” said Clarence, “did you meet a mewing cat outside? I feel positive I heard a cat mewing.” “No,” said the father, shaking his head; “no mewing cat.” “I can’t bear mewing cats,” said Clarence. “A mewing cat gets on my nerves!” “A mewing cat is so trying,” said Elizabeth. “ I dislike mewing cats,” said old Mr. Yeardsley. That was all about mewing cats for the moment. They seemed to think they had covered the ground satisfactorily, and they went back to pictures. We talked pictures steadily till it was time to dress for dinner. At least, they did. I just sort of sat around. Presently the subject of picture-robberies came up. Somebody mentioned the “Monna Lisa,” and then I happened to remember seeing something in the evening paper, as I was coming down in the train, about some fellow somewhere having had a valuable painting pinched by burglars the night before.

passed through Midford——” “Dryden Park is only two miles from this house,” said Elizabeth. I noticed her eyes were sparkling. “Only two miles!” she said. “It might have been us! It might have been the ‘Venus’!” Old Mr. Yeardsley bounded in his chair. “The ‘Venus’!” he cried. They all seemed wonderfully excited. My little contribution to the evening’s chat had made quite a hit. Why I didn’t notice it before I don’t know, but it was not till Elizabeth showed it to me after dinner that I had my first look at the Yeardsley “Venus.” When she led me up to it, and switched on the light, it seemed impossible that I could have sat right through dinner without noticing it. But then, at meals, my attention is pretty well riveted on the foodstuffs. Anyway, it was not till Elizabeth showed it to me that I was aware of its existence.

to me: “Do you remember, Reggie, once saying you would do anything in the world for me?” There! That’s what I meant when I said that about the cheek of Woman as a sex. What I mean is, after what had happened, you’d have thought she would have preferred to let the dead past bury its dead, and all that sort of thing, what? Mind you, I had said I would do anything in the world for her. I admit that. But it was a distinctly pre-Clarence remark. He hadn’t appeared on the scene then, and it stands to reason that a fellow who may have been a perfect knight-errant to a girl when he was engaged to her, doesn’t feel nearly so keen on spreading himself in that direction when she has given him the miss-in-baulk, and gone and married a man who reason and instinct both tell him is a decided blighter.

my back to it—was a large oil-painting. It was what you’d call a classical picture, I suppose. What I mean is—well, you know what I mean. All I can say is that it’s funny I hadn’t noticed it. “Is that the ‘Venus’?” I said. She nodded. “How would you like to have to look at that every time you sat down to a meal?” “Well, I don’t know. I don’t think it would affect me much. I’d worry through all right.” She jerked her head impatiently. “But you’re not an artist,” she said. “Clarence is.” And then I began to see daylight. What exactly was the trouble I didn’t understand, but it was evidently something to do with the good old Artistic Temperament, and I could believe anything about that. It explains everything. It’s like the Unwritten Law, don’t you know, which you plead in America if you’ve done anything they want to send you to chokey for and you don’t want to go.

off your rocker, but don’t find it convenient to be scooped into the luny-bin, you simply explain that, when you said you were a teapot, it was just your Artistic Temperament, and they apologize and go away. So I stood by to hear just how the A.T. had affected Clarence, the Cat’s Friend, ready for anything. And, believe me, it had hit Clarence badly. It was this way. It seemed that old Yeardsley was an amateur artist and that this “Venus” was his masterpiece. He said so, and he ought to have known. Well, when Clarence married, he had given it to him, as a wedding present, and had hung it where it stood with his own hands. All right so far, what? But mark the sequel. Temperamental Clarence, being a professional artist and consequently some streets ahead of the dad at the game, saw flaws in the “Venus.” He couldn’t stand it at any price.

to swoon, or yell, or something. I took a steady look at Clarence’s effort. It was another Classical picture. It seemed to me very much like the other one. Some sort of art criticism was evidently expected of me, so I made a dash at it. “Er—‘Venus’?” I said. Mark you, Sherlock Holmes would have made the same mistake. On the evidence, I mean. “No. ‘Jocund Spring,’” she snapped. She switched off the light. “I see you don’t understand even now. You never had any taste about pictures. When we used to go to the galleries together, you would far rather have been at your club.” This was so absolutely true, that I had no remark to make. She came up to me, and put her hand on my arm. “I’m sorry, Reggie. I didn’t mean to be cross. Only I do want to make you understand that Clarence is suffering .

old man suspecting anything and having his feelings hurt. Why, it’s the most wonderful compliment to him. Think! One night thieves steal a splendid Romney; the next the same gang take his ‘Venus.’ It will be the proudest moment of his life. Do it to-night, Reggie. I’ll give you a sharp knife. You simply cut the canvas out of the frame, and it’s done.” “But one moment,” I said. “I’d be delighted to be of any use to you, but in a purely family affair like this, wouldn’t it be better—in fact, how about tackling old Bill on the subject?” “I have asked Bill already. Yesterday. He refused.” “But if I’m caught?” “You can’t be. All you have to do is to take the picture, open one of the windows, leave it open, and go back to your room.” It sounded simple enough.

feeling there was a catch somewhere, and I’ve never known time pass slower. The kick-off was scheduled for one o’clock in the morning, when the household might be expected to be pretty sound asleep, but at a quarter to I couldn’t stand it any longer. I lit the lantern I had taken from Bill’s bicycle, took a grip of my knife, and slunk downstairs. The first thing I did on getting to the dining-room was to open the window. I had half a mind to smash it, so as to give an extra bit of local colour to the affair, but decided not to on account of the noise. I had put my lantern on the table, and was just reaching out for it, when something happened. What it was for the moment I couldn’t have said. It might have been an explosion of some sort or an earthquake.

I didn’t stop to make inquiries. I just let go at his jaw for all I was worth. What on earth do you think you’re doing? Were you walking in your sleep?” “It was Elizabeth,” I said. “Why, you know all about it. She said she had told you.” “You don’t mean——” “The picture. You refused to take it on, so she asked me.” “Reggie, old man,” he said. “I’ll never believe what they say about repentance again. It’s a fool’s trick and upsets everything. If I hadn’t repented, and thought it was rather rough on Elizabeth not to do a little thing like that for her, and come down here to do it after all, you wouldn’t have stopped that sleep-producer with your chin. I’m sorry.” “Me, too,” I said, giving my head another shake to make certain it was still on.

whisky, soda, and glasses. “We’ve got a long evening before us,” he said. “You can’t burn a picture of that size in one chunk. You’d set the chimney on fire. Let’s do the thing comfortably. Clarence can’t grudge us the stuff. We’ve done him a bit of good this trip. To-morrow’ll be the maddest, merriest day of Clarence’s glad New Year. On we go.” We went up to my room, and sat smoking and yarning away and sipping our drinks, and every now and then cutting a slice off the picture and shoving it in the fire till it was all gone. And what with the cosiness of it and the cheerful blaze, and the comfortable feeling of doing good by stealth, I don’t know when I’ve had a jollier time since the days when we used to brew in my study at school.

well. I felt like it. Old Bill collared the knife. We crept downstairs. “We’ll fling the door open and make a rush,” said Bill. “Supposing they shoot, old scout?” “Burglars never shoot,” said Bill. Which was comforting provided the burglars knew it. Old Bill took a grip of the handle, turned it quickly, and in he went. And then we pulled up sharp, staring. The room was in darkness except for a feeble splash of light at the near end. Standing on a chair in front of Clarence’s “Jocund Spring,” holding a candle in one hand and reaching up with a knife in the other, was old Mr. Yeardsley, in bedroom slippers and a grey dressing-gown. He had made a final cut just as we rushed in. Turning at the sound, he stopped, and he and the chair and the candle and the picture came down in a heap together.

to the same gang, Clarence, my boy. I——” It seemed to dawn upon him at this point that Clarence was not among those present. “Clarence?” he said hesitatingly. “He’s in bed,” I said. “In bed! Then he doesn’t know? Even now—Young men, I throw myself on your mercy. Don’t be hard on me. Listen.” He grabbed at Bill, who sidestepped. “I can explain everything—everything.” He gave a gulp. “You are not artists, you two young men, but I will try to make you understand, make you realise what this picture means to me. I was two years painting it. It is my child. I watched it grow. I loved it. It was part of my life. Nothing would have induced me to sell it. And then Clarence married, and in a mad moment I gave my treasure to him. You cannot understand, you two young men, what agonies I suffered.

frightfully sorry for the poor old chap by this time, don’t you know, but I thought it would be kindest to give it him straight instead of breaking it by degrees. “I won’t say a word to Clarence, Mr. Yeardsley,” I said. “I quite understand your feelings. The Artistic Temperament, and all that sort of thing. I mean—what? I know. But I’m afraid—Well, look!” I went to the door and switched on the electric light, and there, staring him in the face, were the two empty frames. He stood goggling at them in silence. Then he gave a sort of wheezy grunt. “The gang! The burglars! They have been here, and they have taken Clarence’s picture!” He paused. “It might have been mine! My Venus!” he whispered It was getting most fearfully painful, you know, but he had to know the truth.

Now that it’s all over, I may as well admit that there was a time during the rather funny affair of Rockmetteller Todd when I thought that Jeeves was going to let me down. The man had the appearance of being baffled. Jeeves is my man, you know. Officially he pulls in his weekly wages for pressing my clothes and all that sort of thing; but actually he’s more like what the poet Johnnie called some bird of his acquaintance who was apt to rally round him in times of need—a guide, don’t you know; philosopher, if I remember rightly, and—I rather fancy—friend. I rely on him at every turn. So naturally, when Rocky Todd told me about his aunt, I didn’t hesitate. Jeeves was in on the thing from the start. The affair of Rocky Todd broke loose early one morning of spring.

I was in bed, restoring the good old tissues with about nine hours of the dreamless, when the door flew open and somebody prodded me in the lower ribs and began to shake the bedclothes. After blinking a bit and generally pulling myself together, I located Rocky, and my first impression was that it was some horrid dream. Rocky, you see, lived down on Long Island somewhere, miles away from New York; and not only that, but he had told me himself more than once that he never got up before twelve, and seldom earlier than one. Constitutionally the laziest young devil in America, he had hit on a walk in life which enabled him to go the limit in that direction. He was a poet. At least, he wrote poems when he did anything; but most of his time, as far as I could make out, he spent in a sort of trance.

your red blood! Be! It was printed opposite the frontispiece of a magazine with a sort of scroll round it, and a picture in the middle of a fairly-nude chappie, with bulging muscles, giving the rising sun the glad eye. Rocky said they gave him a hundred dollars for it, and he stayed in bed till four in the afternoon for over a month. As regarded the future he was pretty solid, owing to the fact that he had a moneyed aunt tucked away somewhere in Illinois; and, as he had been named Rockmetteller after her, and was her only nephew, his position was pretty sound. He told me that when he did come into the money he meant to do no work at all, except perhaps an occasional poem recommending the young man with life opening out before him, with all its splendid possibilities, to light a pipe and shove his feet upon the mantelpiece.

to hear him saying: “So what on earth am I to do?” Jeeves trickled in with the tray, like some silent stream meandering over its mossy bed; and I saw daylight. “Read it again, Rocky, old top,” I said. “I want Jeeves to hear it. Mr. Todd’s aunt has written him a rather rummy letter, Jeeves, and we want your advice.” “Very good, sir.” He stood in the middle of the room, registering devotion to the cause, and Rocky started again: “MY DEAR ROCKMETTELLER.—I have been thinking things over for a long while, and I have come to the conclusion that I have been very thoughtless to wait so long before doing what I have made up my mind to do now.” “What do you make of that, Jeeves?” “It seems a little obscure at present, sir, but no doubt it becomes cleared at a later point in the communication.” “It becomes as clear as mud!” said Rocky.

has to agree with her. She’s got a fixed idea that the trip to New York would kill her; so, though it’s been her ambition all her life to come here, she stays where she is.” “Rather like the chappie whose heart was ‘in the Highlands a-chasing of the deer,’ Jeeves?” “The cases are in some respects parallel, sir.” “Carry on, Rocky, dear boy.” “So I have decided that, if I cannot enjoy all the marvels of the city myself, I can at least enjoy them through you. I suddenly thought of this yesterday after reading a beautiful poem in the Sunday paper about a young man who had longed all his life for a certain thing and won it in the end only when he was too old to enjoy it. It was very sad, and it touched me.” “A thing,” interpolated Rocky bitterly, “that I’ve not been able to do in ten years.” “As you know, you will have my money when I am gone; but until now I have never been able to see my way to giving you an allowance.

and all that is going on in the city, so that I may enjoy at second-hand what my wretched health prevents my enjoying for myself. Remember that I shall expect full details, and that no detail is too trivial to interest.—Your affectionate Aunt, “ISABEL ROCKMETTELLER.” “What about it?” said Rocky. “What about it?” I said. “Yes. What on earth am I going to do?” It was only then that I really got on to the extremely rummy attitude of the chappie, in view of the fact that a quite unexpected mess of the right stuff had suddenly descended on him from a blue sky. To my mind it was an occasion for the beaming smile and the joyous whoop; yet here the man was, looking and talking as if Fate had swung on his solar plexus. It amazed me. “Aren’t you bucked?” I said.

a hit-the-trail campaign, and I had popped in at the Garden a couple of days before, for half an hour or so, to hear him. He had certainly told New York some pretty straight things about itself, having apparently taken a dislike to the place, but, by Jove, you know, dear old Rocky made him look like a publicity agent for the old metrop! “Pretty soft!” he cried. “To have to come and live in New York! To have to leave my little cottage and take a stuffy, smelly, over-heated hole of an apartment in this Heaven-forsaken, festering Gehenna. To have to mix night after night with a mob who think that life is a sort of St. Vitus’s dance, and imagine that they’re having a good time because they’re making enough noise for six and drinking too much for ten.

“Jeeves,” I said coldly. The man was still standing like a statue by the door. “How many suits of evening clothes have I?” “We have three suits full of evening dress, sir; two dinner jackets——” “Three.” “For practical purposes two only, sir. If you remember we cannot wear the third. We have also seven white waistcoats.” “And shirts?” “Four dozen, sir.” “And white ties?” “The first two shallow shelves in the chest of drawers are completely filled with our white ties, sir.” I turned to Rocky. “You see?” The chappie writhed like an electric fan. “I won’t do it! I can’t do it! I’ll be hanged if I’ll do it! How on earth can I dress up like that? Do you realize that most days I don’t get out of my pyjamas till five in the afternoon, and then I just put on an old sweater?” I saw Jeeves wince, poor chap!

him in the shape of a careful report, on which it would be possible for him, with the aid of his imagination, to base the suggested correspondence.” Having got which off the old diaphragm, Jeeves was silent. Rocky looked at me in a helpless sort of way. He hasn’t been brought up on Jeeves as I have, and he isn’t on to his curves. “Could he put it a little clearer, Bertie?” he said. “I thought at the start it was going to make sense, but it kind of flickered. What’s the idea?” “My dear old man, perfectly simple. I knew we could stand on Jeeves. All you’ve got to do is to get somebody to go round the town for you and take a few notes, and then you work the notes up into letters. That’s it, isn’t it, Jeeves?” “Precisely, sir.” The light of hope gleamed in Rocky’s eyes.

She wants an earful of cabaret stuff. The place you ought to go to first, Jeeves, is Reigelheimer’s. It’s on Forty-second Street. Anybody will show you the way.” Jeeves shook his head. “Pardon me, sir. People are no longer going to Reigelheimer’s. The place at the moment is Frolics on the Roof.” “You see?” I said to Rocky. “Leave it to Jeeves. He knows.” It isn’t often that you find an entire group of your fellow-humans happy in this world; but our little circle was certainly an example of the fact that it can be done. We were all full of beans. Everything went absolutely right from the start. Jeeves was happy, partly because he loves to exercise his giant brain, and partly because he was having a corking time among the bright lights. I saw him one night at the Midnight Revels.

mention of it gave Rocky a tired feeling; yet here is a letter I wrote to a pal of mine in London: “DEAR FREDDIE,—Well, here I am in New York. It’s not a bad place. I’m not having a bad time. Everything’s pretty all right. The cabarets aren’t bad. Don’t know when I shall be back. How’s everybody? Cheer-o!—Yours, “BERTIE. “PS.—Seen old Ted lately?” Not that I cared about Ted; but if I hadn’t dragged him in I couldn’t have got the confounded thing on to the second page. Now here’s old Rocky on exactly the same subject: “DEAREST AUNT ISABEL,—How can I ever thank you enough for giving me the opportunity to live in this astounding city! New York seems more wonderful every day. “Fifth Avenue is at its best, of course, just now. The dresses are magnificent!” Wads of stuff about the dresses.

into a letter than it is for a chappie like me. Anyway, there’s no doubt that Rocky’s correspondence was hot stuff. I called Jeeves in and congratulated him. “Jeeves, you’re a wonder!” “Thank you, sir.” “How you notice everything at these places beats me. I couldn’t tell you a thing about them, except that I’ve had a good time.” “It’s just a knack, sir.” “Well, Mr. Todd’s letters ought to brace Miss Rockmetteller all right, what?” “Undoubtedly, sir,” agreed Jeeves. And, by Jove, they did! They certainly did, by George! What I mean to say is, I was sitting in the apartment one afternoon, about a month after the thing had started, smoking a cigarette and resting the old bean, when the door opened and the voice of Jeeves burst the silence like a bomb. It wasn’t that he spoke loudly.

dangerous if put upon; and something seemed to tell me that she would certainly regard herself as put upon if she ever found out the game which poor old Rocky had been pulling on her. “Good afternoon,” I managed to say. “How do you do?” she said. “Mr. Cohan?” “Er—no.” “Mr. Fred Stone?” “Not absolutely. As a matter of fact, my name’s Wooster—Bertie Wooster.” She seemed disappointed. The fine old name of Wooster appeared to mean nothing in her life. “Isn’t Rockmetteller home?” she said. “Where is he?” She had me with the first shot. I couldn’t think of anything to say. I couldn’t tell her that Rocky was down in the country, watching worms. There was the faintest flutter of sound in the background. It was the respectful cough with which Jeeves announces that he is about to speak without having been spoken to.

in exactly the same way many a time, and it never fails to make my spine curl. “You seem very much at home here, young man. Are you a great friend of Rockmetteller’s?” “Oh, yes, rather!” She frowned as if she had expected better things of old Rocky. “Well, you need to be,” she said, “the way you treat his flat as your own!” I give you my word, this quite unforeseen slam simply robbed me of the power of speech. I’d been looking on myself in the light of the dashing host, and suddenly to be treated as an intruder jarred me. It wasn’t, mark you, as if she had spoken in a way to suggest that she considered my presence in the place as an ordinary social call. She obviously looked on me as a cross between a burglar and the plumber’s man come to fix the leak in the bathroom.

her head?” Jeeves filled the kettle with a restrained dignity. “No doubt because of Mr. Todd’s letters, sir,” he said. “It was my suggestion, sir, if you remember, that they should be addressed from this apartment in order that Mr. Todd should appear to possess a good central residence in the city.” I remembered. We had thought it a brainy scheme at the time. “Well, it’s bally awkward, you know, Jeeves. She looks on me as an intruder. By Jove! I suppose she thinks I’m someone who hangs about here, touching Mr. Todd for free meals and borrowing his shirts.” “Yes, sir.” “It’s pretty rotten, you know.” “Most disturbing, sir.” “And there’s another thing: What are we to do about Mr. Todd? We’ve got to get him up here as soon as ever we can. When you have brought the tea you had better go out and send him a telegram, telling him to come up by the next train.” “I have already done so, sir.

the conversation up again. “What is a surprise?” “Your coming here, don’t you know, and so on.” She raised her eyebrows and drank me in a bit more through her glasses. “Why is it surprising that I should visit my only nephew?” she said. Put like that, of course, it did seem reasonable. “Oh, rather,” I said. “Of course! Certainly. What I mean is——” Jeeves projected himself into the room with the tea. I was jolly glad to see him. There’s nothing like having a bit of business arranged for one when one isn’t certain of one’s lines. With the teapot to fool about with I felt happier. “Tea, tea, tea—what? What?” I said. It wasn’t what I had meant to say. My idea had been to be a good deal more formal, and so on. Still, it covered the situation.

of them lets it go a word at a time. “Are you comfortable at your hotel?” I said. “At which hotel?” “The hotel you’re staying at.” “I am not staying at an hotel.” “Stopping with friends—what?” “I am naturally stopping with my nephew.” I didn’t get it for the moment; then it hit me. “What! Here?” I gurgled. “Certainly! Where else should I go?” The full horror of the situation rolled over me like a wave. I couldn’t see what on earth I was to do. I couldn’t explain that this wasn’t Rocky’s flat without giving the poor old chap away hopelessly, because she would then ask me where he did live, and then he would be right in the soup. I was trying to induce the old bean to recover from the shock and produce some results when she spoke again.

bed.” He looked wounded. “It is hardly my place, sir——” “I know—I know. But do it as a personal favour to me. If you come to that, it’s hardly my place to be flung out of the flat like this and have to go to an hotel, what?” “Is it your intention to go to an hotel, sir? What will you do for clothes?” “Good Lord! I hadn’t thought of that. Can you put a few things in a bag when she isn’t looking, and sneak them down to me at the St. Aurea?” “I will endeavour to do so, sir.” “Well, I don’t think there’s anything more, is there? Tell Mr. Todd where I am when he gets here.” “Very good, sir.” I looked round the place. The moment of parting had come. I felt sad. The whole thing reminded me of one of those melodramas where they drive chappies out of the old homestead into the snow.

come to think of it, there must be quite a lot of fellows who have to press their own clothes themselves and haven’t got anybody to bring them tea in the morning, and so on. It was rather a solemn thought, don’t you know. I mean to say, ever since then I’ve been able to appreciate the frightful privations the poor have to stick. I got dressed somehow. Jeeves hadn’t forgotten a thing in his packing. Everything was there, down to the final stud. I’m not sure this didn’t make me feel worse. It kind of deepened the pathos. It was like what somebody or other wrote about the touch of a vanished hand. I had a bit of dinner somewhere and went to a show of some kind; but nothing seemed to make any difference. I simply hadn’t the heart to go on to supper anywhere.

from?” “The Midnight Revels. We’ve been here an hour, and I think we’re a fixture for the night. I’ve told Aunt Isabel I’ve gone out to call up a friend to join us. She’s glued to a chair, with this-is-the-life written all over her, taking it in through the pores. She loves it, and I’m nearly crazy.” “Tell me all, old top,” I said. “A little more of this,” he said, “and I shall sneak quietly off to the river and end it all. Do you mean to say you go through this sort of thing every night, Bertie, and enjoy it? It’s simply infernal! I was just snatching a wink of sleep behind the bill of fare just now when about a million yelling girls swooped down, with toy balloons. There are two orchestras here, each trying to see if it can’t play louder than the other.

the train. It nearly gave me heart-failure; and on top of that I almost got brain fever inventing lies to tell Aunt Isabel. And then I had to cram myself into these confounded evening clothes of yours.” I gave a sharp wail of agony. It hadn’t struck me till then that Rocky was depending on my wardrobe to see him through. “You’ll ruin them!” “I hope so,” said Rocky, in the most unpleasant way. His troubles seemed to have had the worst effect on his character. “I should like to get back at them somehow; they’ve given me a bad enough time. They’re about three sizes too small, and something’s apt to give at any moment. I wish to goodness it would, and give me a chance to breathe. I haven’t breathed since half-past seven. Thank Heaven, Jeeves managed to get out and buy me a collar that fitted, or I should be a strangled corpse by now!

ankle. She keeps asking me when Cohan and Stone are going to turn up; and it’s simply a question of time before she discovers that Stone is sitting two tables away. Something’s got to be done, Bertie! You’ve got to think up some way of getting me out of this mess. It was you who got me into it.” “Me! What do you mean?” “Well, Jeeves, then. It’s all the same. It was you who suggested leaving it to Jeeves. It was those letters I wrote from his notes that did the mischief. I made them too good! My aunt’s just been telling me about it. She says she had resigned herself to ending her life where she was, and then my letters began to arrive, describing the joys of New York; and they stimulated her to such an extent that she pulled herself together and made the trip.

of it. I tell you, Bertie, I’ve examined the darned cloud with a microscope, and if it’s got a silver lining it’s some little dissembler!” “But, Rocky, old top, it’s too bally awful! You’ve no notion of what I’m going through in this beastly hotel, without Jeeves. I must get back to the flat.” “Don’t come near the flat.” “But it’s my own flat.” “I can’t help that. Aunt Isabel doesn’t like you. She asked me what you did for a living. And when I told her you didn’t do anything she said she thought as much, and that you were a typical specimen of a useless and decaying aristocracy. So if you think you have made a hit, forget it. Now I must be going back, or she’ll be coming out here after me. Good-bye.” Next morning Jeeves came round.

first long drawer, sir.” “You don’t mean to say you can’t think of anything, Jeeves?” “For the moment, sir, no. You will find a dozen handkerchiefs and the tan socks in the upper drawer on the left.” He strapped the suit-case and put it on a chair. “A curious lady, Miss Rockmetteller, sir.” “You understate it, Jeeves.” He gazed meditatively out of the window. “In many ways, sir, Miss Rockmetteller reminds me of an aunt of mine who resides in the south-east portion of London. Their temperaments are much alike. My aunt has the same taste for the pleasures of the great city. It is a passion with her to ride in hansom cabs, sir. Whenever the family take their eyes off her she escapes from the house and spends the day riding about in cabs. On several occasions she has broken into the children’s savings bank to secure the means to enable her to gratify this desire.” “I love to have these little chats with you about your female relatives, Jeeves,” I said coldly, for I felt that the man had let me down, and I was fed up with him.

up with him. “But I don’t see what all this has got to do with my trouble.” “I beg your pardon, sir. I am leaving a small assortment of neckties on the mantelpiece, sir, for you to select according to your preference. I should recommend the blue with the red domino pattern, sir.” Then he streamed imperceptibly toward the door and flowed silently out. I’ve often heard that chappies, after some great shock or loss, have a habit, after they’ve been on the floor for a while wondering what hit them, of picking themselves up and piecing themselves together, and sort of taking a whirl at beginning a new life. Time, the great healer, and Nature, adjusting itself, and so on and so forth. There’s a lot in it. I know, because in my own case, after a day or two of what you might call prostration, I began to recover.

to look as if he had struck the ideal life, it wasn’t difficult for me, knowing the circumstances, to see that beneath the mask the poor chap was suffering. My heart bled for the fellow. At least, what there was of it that wasn’t bleeding for myself bled for him. He had the air of one who was about to crack under the strain. It seemed to me that the aunt was looking slightly upset also. I took it that she was beginning to wonder when the celebrities were going to surge round, and what had suddenly become of all those wild, careless spirits Rocky used to mix with in his letters. I didn’t blame her. I had only read a couple of his letters, but they certainly gave the impression that poor old Rocky was by way of being the hub of New York night life, and that, if by any chance he failed to show up at a cabaret, the management said: “What’s the use?” and put up the shutters.

be complained to about. “Bertie, old scout,” said Rocky, in a quiet, sort of crushed voice, “we’ve always been pals, haven’t we? I mean, you know I’d do you a good turn if you asked me?” “My dear old lad,” I said. The man had moved me. “Then, for Heaven’s sake, come over and sit at our table for the rest of the evening.” Well, you know, there are limits to the sacred claims of friendship. “My dear chap,” I said, “you know I’d do anything in reason; but——” “You must come, Bertie. You’ve got to. Something’s got to be done to divert her mind. She’s brooding about something. She’s been like that for the last two days. I think she’s beginning to suspect. She can’t understand why we never seem to meet anyone I know at these joints. A few nights ago I happened to run into two newspaper men I used to know fairly well.

had started out to explore Broadway. She looked as if she had been thinking a good deal about rather unpleasant things. “You’ve met Bertie Wooster, Aunt Isabel?” said Rocky. “I have.” There was something in her eye that seemed to say: “Out of a city of six million people, why did you pick on me?” “Take a seat, Bertie. What’ll you have?” said Rocky. And so the merry party began. It was one of those jolly, happy, bread-crumbling parties where you cough twice before you speak, and then decide not to say it after all. After we had had an hour of this wild dissipation, Aunt Isabel said she wanted to go home. In the light of what Rocky had been telling me, this struck me as sinister. I had gathered that at the beginning of her visit she had had to be dragged home with ropes.

Bertie.” “Stop!” barked the aunt, and he dropped it. I caught Rocky’s eye as he stooped to pick up the ruins. It was the eye of one who sees it coming. “Leave it there, Rockmetteller!” said Aunt Isabel; and Rocky left it there. “The time has come to speak,” she said. “I cannot stand idly by and see a young man going to perdition!” Poor old Rocky gave a sort of gurgle, a kind of sound rather like the whisky had made running out of the decanter on to my carpet. “Eh?” he said, blinking. The aunt proceeded. “The fault,” she said, “was mine. I had not then seen the light. But now my eyes are open. I see the hideous mistake I have made. I shudder at the thought of the wrong I did you, Rockmetteller, by urging you into contact with this wicked city.” I saw Rocky grope feebly for the table.

or less what had happened. I’d seen it happen before. I remember, back in England, the man I had before Jeeves sneaked off to a meeting on his evening out and came back and denounced me in front of a crowd of chappies I was giving a bit of supper to as a moral leper. The aunt gave me a withering up and down. “Yes; Jimmy Mundy!” she said. “I am surprised at a man of your stamp having heard of him. There is no music, there are no drunken, dancing men, no shameless, flaunting women at his meetings; so for you they would have no attraction. But for others, less dead in sin, he has his message. He has come to save New York from itself; to force it—in his picturesque phrase—to hit the trail. It was three days ago, Rockmetteller, that I first heard him.

people. He leaped about in a frenzy of inspiration till I feared he would do himself an injury. Sometimes he expressed himself in a somewhat odd manner, but every word carried conviction. He showed me New York in its true colours. He showed me the vanity and wickedness of sitting in gilded haunts of vice, eating lobster when decent people should be in bed. “He said that the tango and the fox-trot were devices of the devil to drag people down into the Bottomless Pit. He said that there was more sin in ten minutes with a negro banjo orchestra than in all the ancient revels of Nineveh and Babylon. And when he stood on one leg and pointed right at where I was sitting and shouted, ‘This means you!’ I could have sunk through the floor. I came away a changed woman.

brought home to him the realisation that a miracle had come off and saved him from being cut out of Aunt Isabel’s. At any rate, as she said it he perked up, let go of the table, and faced her with gleaming eyes. “Do you want me to go back to the country, Aunt Isabel?” “Yes.” “Not to live in the country?” “Yes, Rockmetteller.” “Stay in the country all the time, do you mean? Never come to New York?” “Yes, Rockmetteller; I mean just that. It is the only way. Only there can you be safe from temptation. Will you do it, Rockmetteller? Will you—for my sake?” Rocky grabbed the table again. He seemed to draw a lot of encouragement from that table. “I will!” he said. “Jeeves,” I said. It was next day, and I was back in the old flat, lying in the old arm-chair, with my feet upon the good old table.

whenever we observed one of her attacks coming on, we used to send for the clergyman of the parish. We always found that if he talked to her a while of higher things it diverted her mind from hansom cabs. It occurred to me that the same treatment might prove efficacious in the case of Miss Rockmetteller.” I was stunned by the man’s resource. “It’s brain,” I said; “pure brain! What do you do to get like that, Jeeves? I believe you must eat a lot of fish, or something. Do you eat a lot of fish, Jeeves?” “No, sir.” “Oh, well, then, it’s just a gift, I take it; and if you aren’t born that way there’s no use worrying.” “Precisely, sir,” said Jeeves. “If I might make the suggestion, sir, I should not continue to wear your present tie.
