The forest stood as a thousand grey arms, its million fingers silvered by frost. Above, a sky of dark green-blue slate held stars bleak and brilliant, like splintered ice. The countryside, thick with wood and thin with life, was stiff with a bitter, brittle cold. The black hollows between the tree trunks resembled bottomless caverns of a Scandinavian hell, a place of incalculable chill. Even the square stone tower of the church appeared northern to the point of heathenry, a barbaric sentinel among the sea rocks of Iceland. It was a strange night for anyone to wander a churchyard, yet perhaps it was worth the exploration.

The church rose abruptly from the ashen wastes of the forest, a hump of grey-green turf. Most graves lay on a slant, and the path to the church climbed as steeply as a staircase. At the summit, in the one flat, prominent spot, stood the monument for which the place was famous. It contrasted sharply with the featureless graves surrounding it, crafted by one of modern Europe's greatest sculptors, yet his fame was eclipsed by the man he immortalized. Starlight traced the massive metal figure of a soldier lying down, his strong hands sealed in eternal worship, his great head pillowed upon a gun. The venerable face was whiskered in the old, heavy style of Colonel Newcome, while the uniform suggested the simplicity of modern war. Beside his right hip lay a sword, its tip snapped off; to his left rested a Bible. On glowing summer afternoons, wagonettes filled with Americans and cultured suburbans would visit this sepulchre, yet even then, the vast forest land with its dumpy dome felt oddly dumb and neglected. In this freezing mid-winter darkness, one might feel abandoned to the stars alone. Yet, in the stillness of the stiff woods, a wooden gate creaked, and two dim figures dressed in black climbed the path to the tomb.

The frigid starlight was so faint that nothing could be traced of them except that both wore black; one was enormously big, the other, by contrast, startlingly small. They approached the great graven tomb of the historic warrior and stood for minutes staring at it. There was no living thing within a wide circle, and a morbid fancy might wonder if they were human themselves. After a silence, the small man spoke: "Where does a wise man hide a pebble?"

"On the beach," the tall man answered in a low voice.

The small man nodded. "Where does a wise man hide a leaf?"

"In the forest," came the reply.

Another stillness followed, then the tall man resumed: "Do you mean that when a wise man must hide a real diamond, he hides it among sham ones?"

"No, no," said the little man with a laugh. "Let bygones be bygones."

He stamped his cold feet briefly. "I'm not thinking of that, but of something peculiar. Strike a match, will you?"

The big man fumbled in his pocket, and a scratch and flare painted gold the flat side of the monument. Cut in black letters were the familiar words revered by many Americans: "Sacred to the Memory of General Sir Arthur St. Clare, Hero and Martyr, who Always Vanquished his Enemies and Always Spared Them, and Was Treacherously Slain by Them At Last. May God in Whom he Trusted both Reward and Revenge him."

The match burned the big man's fingers, blackened, and dropped. He reached for another, but his small companion stopped him. "That's all right, Flambeau, old man; I saw what I wanted. Or, rather, I didn't see what I didn't want. Now we must walk a mile and a half to the next inn, and I will try to tell you all about it. For Heaven knows a man should have fire and ale when he dares tell such a story."

They descended the precipitous path, relatched the rusty gate, and set off at a stamping, ringing walk down the frozen forest road. A quarter of a mile in, the smaller man spoke again. "Yes; the wise man hides a pebble on the beach. But what does he do if there is no beach? Do you know anything of that great St. Clare trouble?"

"I know nothing about English generals, Father Brown," answered the large man, laughing. "Though a little about English policemen. I only know that you have dragged me a precious long dance to all the shrines of this fellow, whoever he is. One would think he got buried in six different places. I've seen a memorial to General St. Clare in Westminster Abbey, a ramping equestrian statue on the Embankment, a medallion in the street he was born in, and another where he lived. Now you drag me after dark to his coffin in a village churchyard. I am beginning to tire of his magnificent personality, especially as I don't know who he was. What are you hunting for in all these crypts and effigies?"

"I am only looking for one word," said Father Brown. "A word that isn't there."

"Well," asked Flambeau, "are you going to tell me anything about it?"

"I must divide it into two parts," remarked the priest. "First, what everybody knows; then, what I know. What everybody knows is short, plain, and entirely wrong."

"Right you are," said Flambeau cheerfully. "Let's begin at the wrong end. Let's begin with what everybody knows, which isn't true."

"If not wholly untrue, it is at least very inadequate," continued Brown. "All the public knows is this: Arthur St. Clare was a great and successful English general. After splendid campaigns in India and Africa, he commanded against Brazil when the patriot Olivier issued his ultimatum. On that occasion, St. Clare, with a very small force, attacked Olivier's large army and was captured after heroic resistance. After his capture, to the abhorrence of the civilized world, St. Clare was hanged on the nearest tree. He was found swinging there after the Brazilians retired, with his broken sword hung round his neck."

"And that popular story is untrue?" suggested Flambeau.

"No," said his friend quietly. "That story is quite true, so far as it goes."

"Well, I think it goes far enough!" said Flambeau. "But if the popular story is true, what is the mystery?"

Hundreds of grey, ghostly trees passed before the little priest answered. He bit his finger reflectively. "The mystery is one of psychology. Or rather, two psychologies. In that Brazilian business, two of the most famous men of modern history acted flat against their characters. Mind you, Olivier and St. Clare were both heroes—the old thing, no mistake; it was like the fight between Hector and Achilles. Now, what would you say to an affair in which Achilles was timid and Hector was treacherous?"

"Go on," said the large man impatiently as the other bit his finger again.

"Sir Arthur St. Clare was a soldier of the old religious type—the type that saved us during the Mutiny. He was always more for duty than for dash; with all his personal courage, he was a prudent commander, particularly indignant at needless waste of soldiers. Yet in this last battle, he attempted something a baby could see was absurd. One need not be a strategist to see it was as wild as wind; just as one need not be a strategist to keep out of the way of a motor-bus. Well, that is the first mystery: what had become of the English general's head? The second riddle is, what had become of the Brazilian general's heart? President Olivier might be called a visionary or a nuisance, but even his enemies admitted he was magnanimous to the point of knight-errantry. Almost every prisoner he had captured had been set free or loaded with benefits. Men who had wronged him came away touched by his simplicity. Why should he diabolically revenge himself only once in his life, and that for the one particular blow that could not have hurt him? Well, there you have it. One of the wisest men in the world acted like an idiot for no reason. One of the best men in the world acted like a fiend for no reason. That's the long and the short of it; and I leave it to you, my boy."

"No, you don't," said the other with a snort. "I leave it to you; and you jolly well tell me all about it."

"It's not fair to say the public impression is just what I've said without adding that two things have happened since. They threw a new kind of darkness. First, the family physician of the St. Clares quarrelled with the family and published violent articles claiming the late general was a religious maniac. The story fizzled out; everyone knew St. Clare had eccentricities of puritan piety. The second incident was more arresting. In the regiment that made that rash attempt at the Black River was Captain Keith, engaged to St. Clare's daughter and later her husband. He was captured by Olivier, treated bounteously, and promptly set free. Twenty years later, as Lieutenant-Colonel Keith, he published an autobiography called 'A British Officer in Burmah and Brazil.' Where the reader looks for the mystery of St. Clare's disaster, he finds these words: 'Everywhere else in this book I have narrated things exactly as they occurred... The exception I shall make is in this matter of the defeat by the Black River; and my reasons, though private, are honourable and compelling. I will, however, add this in justice to the memories of two distinguished men. General St. Clare has been accused of incapacity on this occasion; I can at least testify that this action, properly understood, was one of the most brilliant and sagacious of his life. President Olivier by similar report is charged with savage injustice. I think it due to the honour of an enemy to say that he acted on this occasion with even more than his characteristic good feeling. To put the matter popularly, I can assure my countrymen that St. Clare was by no means such a fool nor Olivier such a brute as he looked. This is all I have to say; nor shall any earthly consideration induce me to add a word to it.'"

A large frozen moon like a lustrous snowball began to show through the twigs. As the narrator folded a scrap of printed paper, Flambeau threw up his hand with a French gesture. "Wait a bit! I believe I can guess it at the first go."

He strode on, breathing hard, his black head and bull neck forward like a man winning a walking race. The little priest, amused and interested, had trouble trotting beside him. Just before them, the trees fell back, and the road swept downwards across a clear, moonlit valley, diving like a rabbit into the wall of another wood. The entrance to the farther forest looked small and round, like the black hole of a remote railway tunnel. But it was within some hundred yards, gaping like a cavern before Flambeau spoke again.

"I've got it," he cried, slapping his thigh. "Four minutes' thinking, and I can tell your whole story myself."

"All right," assented his friend. "You tell it."

Flambeau lifted his head but lowered his voice. "General Sir Arthur St. Clare came of a family in which madness was hereditary; and his whole aim was to keep this from his daughter, and even, if possible, from his future son-in-law. Rightly or wrongly, he thought the final collapse was close, and resolved on suicide. Yet ordinary suicide would blazon the very idea he dreaded. As the campaign approached, the clouds came thicker on his brain; and at last, in a mad moment, he sacrificed his public duty to his private. He rushed rashly into battle, hoping to fall by the first shot. When he found that he had only attained capture and discredit, the sealed bomb in his brain burst, and he broke his own sword and hanged himself."

He stared firmly at the grey façade of the forest, with the one black gap into which their path plunged. Perhaps something menacing in the road reinforced his vivid vision of the tragedy, for he shuddered.

"A horrid story," he said.

"A horrid story," repeated the priest with bent head. "But not the real story."

Then he threw back his head with a sort of despair and cried: "Oh, I wish it had been."

The tall Flambeau faced round and stared at him.

"Yours is a clean story," cried Father Brown, deeply moved. "A sweet, pure, honest story, as open and white as that moon. Madness and despair are innocent enough. There are worse things, Flambeau."

Flambeau looked up wildly at the moon, and from where he stood, one black tree-bough curved across it exactly like a devil's horn.

"Father—father," cried Flambeau, stepping more rapidly forward, "do you mean it was worse than that?"

"Worse than that," said Paul like a grave echo. And they plunged into the black cloister of the woodland, which ran by them in a dim tapestry of trunks, like one of the dark corridors in a dream.

Soon in the most secret entrails of the wood, surrounded by foliage they could not see, the priest said again: "Where does a wise man hide a leaf? In the forest. But what does he do if there is no forest?"

"Well, well," cried Flambeau irritably. "What does he do?"

"He grows a forest to hide it in," said the priest in an obscure voice. "A fearful sin."

"Look here," cried his friend impatiently, the dark wood and dark saying getting on his nerves. "Will you tell me this story or not? What other evidence is there to go on?"

"There are three more bits of evidence," said the other, "that I have dug up in holes and corners; and I will give them in logical rather than chronological order. First, of course, our authority for the issue and event of the battle is in Olivier's own dispatches, which are lucid enough. He was entrenched with two or three regiments on the heights that swept down to the Black River, on the other side of which was lower, marshy ground. Beyond this was gently rising country, on which was the first English outpost, supported by others considerably in its
