The Three Tools of Death

Father Brown possessed a peculiar wisdom, born of both vocation and experience, that every man stands dignified in death. Yet, even he felt a jarring dissonance when roused at dawn to learn that Sir Aaron Armstrong had been murdered. There was something absurd, almost grotesque, about secret violence inflicted upon a figure so thoroughly entertaining and popular that he bordered on the legendary. Sir Aaron was a man of such boundless mirth that his demise felt like hearing of Sunny Jim hanging himself or Mr. Pickwick dying in Hanwell. Though a philanthropist who tackled society's darker corners, Sir Aaron approached them with a style so bright it was nearly blinding. His speeches were cascades of anecdotes and raucous laughter; his health was robust to the point of bursting; his ethics were pure optimism; and his approach to the Drink Problem—his favorite topic—was marked by that immortal, monotonous gaiety typical of the prosperous total abstainer.

The story of his conversion was well-known on puritan platforms: how, as a boy, he had drifted from Scotch theology to Scotch whisky, only to rise above both and become, as he modestly claimed, what he was. Yet, seeing his wide white beard, cherubic face, and sparkling spectacles at countless dinners, it was difficult to believe he had ever been as morbid as a dram-drinker or a Calvinist. He was, one felt, the most seriously merry of mankind.

He resided on the rural fringe of Hampstead in a handsome, modern tower, narrow and high, whose steepest side overhung a railway embankment, shaken daily by passing trains. Sir Aaron boasted he had no nerves. But that morning, the tables had turned; it was the house that delivered a shock to the train.

The engine slowed and halted just beyond the angle where the house impinged upon the sharp turf slope. The arrest of mechanical things is usually slow, but the living cause here had been instantaneous. A man dressed entirely in black, down to the dreadful detail of black gloves, appeared on the ridge above the engine, waving his gloved hands like a sable windmill. This alone might not have stopped a lingering train, but from him came a cry described later as utterly unnatural. It was a shout so distinct in its horror that one could hear the terror even without catching the words. The word was "Murder!"

The engine driver swore he would have stopped regardless, but the sound confirmed the halt. Once arrested, the tragedy revealed itself to the casual observer. On the green bank stood Magnus, Sir Aaron's manservant, clad in black. The baronet had often laughed at the gloomy attendant's gloves, but no one laughed now. Below, rolled nearly to the bottom of the slope, lay the body of an old man in a yellow dressing gown with a vivid scarlet lining. A scrap of rope was caught around his leg, presumably from a struggle. There was a smear of blood, little of it, but the body was bent into a posture impossible for any living creature. It was Sir Aaron Armstrong.

Moments later, a large, fair-bearded man emerged, identified by travelers as the dead man's secretary, Patrick Royce, once famous in Bohemian circles. He echoed the agony of the servant with a vague but convincing intensity. Then came the third figure, Alice Armstrong, the daughter, tottering and waving into the garden as the engine-driver finally released the brakes, panting on to summon help from the next station.

Father Brown was summoned rapidly at the request of Patrick Royce, an Irishman of the casual Catholic variety who only remembers his faith when in deep trouble. The promptness of Father Brown's arrival was aided by the fact that one of the official detectives, Merton, was a friend and admirer of the unofficial "Flambeau," and one cannot be a friend of Flambeau without hearing endless tales of the priest. Thus, as Merton led the little priest across the fields, their conversation was more confidential than expected between strangers.

"As far as I can see," Merton said candidly, "there is no sense to be made of it. Nobody can be suspected. Magnus is a solemn old fool, far too foolish to be an assassin. Royce has been the baronet's best friend for years, and his daughter undoubtedly adored him. Besides, it's all too absurd. Who would kill such a cheery old chap? Who could dip their hands in the gore of an after-dinner speaker? It would be like killing Father Christmas."

"Yes, it was a cheery house," Father Brown agreed. "It was a cheery house while he was alive. Do you think it will be cheery now he is dead?"

Merton started, regarding his companion with an enlivened eye. "Now he is dead?" he repeated.

"Yes," the priest said stolidly. "He was cheerful. But did he communicate his cheerfulness? Frankly, was anyone else in the house cheerful but he?"

A window in Merton's mind opened to a strange light of surprise. He had often visited the Armstrongs on police business, and now, recalling it, he saw the house as it truly was: depressing. The rooms were high and cold, the decoration mean and provincial, the draughty corridors lit by electricity bleaker than moonlight. Though the old man's scarlet face and silver beard had blazed like a bonfire in each room, he left no warmth behind. His vitality was so exuberant he needed no stoves; he carried his own heat. But the other inmates were shadows of their lord. Magnus, with his monstrous black gloves, was almost a nightmare. Royce, the secretary, was a big bull of a man in tweeds, yet his straw-colored beard was startlingly salted with grey, and his broad forehead barred with premature wrinkles. He was good-natured, but it was a sad, heart-broken sort of nature, the air of a man who had failed in life. As for the daughter, it was almost incredible she was his child; she was so pallid and sensitive, graceful yet quivering like an aspen leaf. Merton had often wondered if she learned to tremble at the crash of the passing trains.

"You see," Father Brown said, blinking modestly, "I'm not sure that Armstrong cheerfulness is so very cheerful for others. You say nobody could kill such a happy old man, but I'm not sure; *ne nos inducas in tentationem*. If ever I murdered somebody," he added simply, "I dare say it might be an Optimist."

"Why?" cried Merton, amused. "Do you think people dislike cheerfulness?"

"People like frequent laughter," answered Father Brown, "but I don't think they like a permanent smile. Cheerfulness without humor is a very trying thing."

They walked in silence along the windy grassy bank until they came under the shadow of the tall Armstrong house. Father Brown said suddenly, as if discarding a troublesome thought: "Of course, drink is neither good nor bad in itself. But I can't help feeling that men like Armstrong want an occasional glass of wine to sadden them."

Their superior, Detective Gilder, stood on the bank waiting for the coroner, talking to Patrick Royce, whose towering shoulders and bristly beard dominated the smaller man. Royce walked with a powerful stoop, performing his clerical duties like a buffalo drawing a go-cart. He raised his head with unusual pleasure at the sight of the priest and took him aside. Meanwhile, Merton addressed Gilder with respectful but boyish impatience.

"Well, Mr. Gilder, have you got much farther with the mystery?"

"There is no mystery," Gilder replied, looking under dreamy eyelids at the rooks.

"Well, there is for me, at any rate," said Merton, smiling.

"It is simple enough, my boy," observed the senior investigator, stroking his grey, pointed beard. "Three minutes after you went for Mr. Royce's parson, the whole thing came out. You know that pasty-faced servant in the black gloves who stopped the train?"

"I should know him anywhere. Somehow he rather gave me the creeps."

"Rather a cool criminal, don't you think, to escape by the very train that went off for the police?" Gilder drawled.

"You're pretty sure he really did kill his master?"

"Yes, my son, I'm pretty sure," Gilder replied dryly, "for the trifling reason that he has gone off with twenty thousand pounds in papers from his master's desk. The only difficulty is how he killed him. The skull seems broken by some big weapon, but there is no weapon lying about. The murderer would have found it awkward to carry it away unless it was too small to be noticed."

"Perhaps the weapon was too big to be noticed," the priest said with an odd little giggle.

Gilder looked round sternly. "What do you mean?"

"Silly way of putting it," Father Brown apologized. "Sounds like a fairy tale. But poor Armstrong was killed with a giant's club, a great green club, too big to be seen, which we call the earth. He was broken against this green bank we are standing on."

"How do you mean?" the detective asked quickly.

Father Brown turned his moon face up to the narrow façade of the house. "Don't you see," he explained, pointing awkwardly like a child, "he was thrown down from there?"

Gilder frowned, scrutinizing the window at the top of the blind back quarter. "Well, it is certainly possible. But I don't see why you are so sure."

"Why," Brown said, opening his grey eyes wide, "there's a bit of rope round the dead man's leg. Don't you see that other bit of rope up there caught at the corner of the window?"

At that height, it looked like a faint particle of dust, but the shrewd investigator was satisfied. "You're quite right, sir," Gilder admitted. "That is certainly one to you."

Almost as he spoke, a special train took the curve on their left, disgorging another group of policemen, among whom was the hangdog visage of Magnus, the absconded servant.

"By Jove! they've got him," cried Gilder, stepping forward with new alertness. "Have you got the money!" he cried to the first policeman.

The man looked him in the face with a curious expression. "No. Then he added, 'At least, not here.'"

"Which is the inspector, please?" asked the man called Magnus.

When he spoke, everyone instantly understood how that voice had stopped a train. He was a dull-looking man with flat black hair, a colorless face, and a faint suggestion of the East in the level slits of his eyes and mouth. His blood and name had remained dubious since Sir Aaron had "rescued" him from a waitership in a London restaurant. But his voice was as vivid as his face was dead. Whether through exactitude in a foreign language or deference to his master, Magnus's tones had a peculiarly ringing quality, making the whole group jump.

"I always knew this would happen," he said aloud with brazen blandness. "My poor old master made game of me for wearing black; but I always said I should be ready for his funeral." He made a momentary movement with his two dark-gloved hands.

"Sergeant," Inspector Gilder said, eyeing the black hands with wrath, "aren't you putting the bracelets on this fellow; he looks pretty dangerous."

"Well, sir," the sergeant said with the same odd look of wonder, "I don't know that we can."

"What do you mean?" asked the other sharply. "Haven't you arrested him?"

A faint scorn widened the slit-like mouth, and the whistle of an approaching train seemed to echo the mockery. "We arrested him," the sergeant replied gravely, "just as he was coming out of the police station at Highgate, where he had deposited all his master's money in the care of Inspector Robinson."

Gilder looked at the manservant in utter amazement. "Why on earth did you do that?" he asked Magnus.

"To keep it safe from the criminal, of course," the servant replied placidly.

"Surely," said Gilder, "Sir Aaron's money might have been safely left with Sir Aaron's family."

The tail of his sentence was drowned in the roar of the train, but through the hell of noises to which that unhappy house was periodically subject, they heard the syllables of Magnus's answer in all their bell-like distinctness: "I have no reason to feel confidence in Sir Aaron's family."

All the motionless men had the ghostly sensation of a new person's presence. Merton was scarcely surprised when he looked up and saw the pale face of Armstrong's daughter over Father Brown's shoulder. She was still young and beautiful in a silvery style, but her hair was of such dusty, hueless brown that in some shadows it seemed totally grey.

"Be careful what you say," Royce grunted, "you'll frighten Miss Armstrong."

"I hope so," said the man with the clear voice.

As the woman winced and everyone else wondered, he went on: "I am somewhat used to Miss Armstrong's tremors. I have seen her trembling off and on for years. Some said she was shaking with cold, some with fear, but I know she was shaking with hate and wicked anger—fiends that have had their feast this morning. She would have been away by now with her lover and all the money but for me. Ever since my poor old master prevented her from marrying that tipsy blackguard—"

"Stop," said Gilder very sternly. "We have nothing to do with your family fancies or suspicions. Unless you have some practical evidence, your mere opinions—"

"Oh! I'll give you practical evidence," cut in Magnus in his hacking accent. "You'll have to subpoena me, Mr. Inspector, and I shall have to tell the truth. And the truth is this: An instant after the old man was pitched bleeding out of the window, I ran into the attic and found his daughter swooning on the floor with a red dagger still in her hand. Allow me to hand that also to the proper authorities." He took from his tail-pocket a long horn-hilted knife with a red smear on it and handed it politely to the sergeant. Then he stood back
