London, once again, beat a frantic rhythm in my chest, a drumline of ambition that echoed louder than the flags waving in my fevered brain. I departed, a soldier marching to a war I hadn't fully realized I was fighting. More than a year later, however, the parade had turned into a rout. Returning on a fog-laden, wet December evening, I crept back not as a conqueror, but as a defeated, disgraced ghost. To me, the city was no longer a stage for glory; it was a fortress, a hiding place where I could dissolve into the anonymous throng, wasting away unnoticed until I could summon the sheer, terrifying resolve to kill the "dead life" I had inherited.

I had begun as a boy dreaming of greatness, desperate to carve a name and a position for myself. Yet, dwelling now in the bitter aftermath of my failure, I write of those ambitions in the past tense. Perhaps I was wrong to claim no higher aim than fame, for that would be an injustice to my blood—to the lineage of the great-souled gentleman who dedicated his existence to honor, and to the girl of simple faith who taught me no prayer other than the childish cry, "God help me to be good!" I had wished to be a great man, yes, but I had meant a *great* good man. The world was to admire me, but above all, respect me. I was to be the knight without fear, and rarer still, without reproach—Galahad, not Launcelot. Instead, I had learned to be a spineless fighter, shattered by the first serious assault of evil, a creature of petty terrors, a slave to every crack of the devil's whip, feeding like a swine.

The architect of my ruin was Urban Vane, a man I had naively discovered to be a common swindler. The play we toured, *Drama*, had been stolen from the desk of a well-known dramatist whom Vane had befriended in Deleglise's kitchen. That man had fallen ill, and Vane had been constant in his visits. Partially recovered, the man fled to Italy. Had he died there, as many feared, the theft might have remained buried forever. Instead, news arrived in a small northern town that he had recovered and was returning to England. It was then, over a bottle of wine and a cloud of cigar smoke, that Vane revealed the bald truth, adorning it with flashes of wit. "Chickens come home to roost," he had said calmly. "I adapted from him. What is the difference?"

If that recital had struck me sooner, I might have acted differently. Six months of companionship with Urban Vane had not merely withered the roots of whatever manhood I possessed; they had scorched the earth entirely. He was clever, though not clever enough to realize from the start that honesty is the best policy—even for men with brains. Where he once scraped hundreds from shady dealings, he now, presumably, amassed thousands in the broad daylight of legitimate enterprise. One imagines that chicanery in the blood requires a slow, grinding digestion before it can be excreted as virtue. Urban Vanes pop up everywhere; they begin as scamps and, years later, to everyone's astonishment, become ornaments to their professions.

At first, I stormed. Vane sat back, an amused smile playing on his lips, listening to my futile tirade.

"My language, my dear Kelver," he replied, his vocabulary seemingly endless despite my exhaustion, "might wound me were I able to accept you as an authority upon this vexed question of morals. With the rest of the world, you preach one thing and practice another. I have noticed it so often. It is perhaps sad, but the preaching has ceased to interest me. You profess to be very indignant with me for making use of another man's ideas. It is done every day. You yourself were quite ready to take credit not due to you. For months we have been traveling with this play: *'Drama, in five acts, by Mr. Horace Moncrieff.'* Not more than two hundred lines of it are your own—excellent lines, I admit—but they do not constitute the play."

This aspect of the affair had completely escaped me. "But you asked me to put my name to it," I stammered, my voice cracking. "You said you did not want your own to appear—for private reasons. You made a point of it."

He waved away the smoke from his cigar with a casual flick. "The man you are posing as would never have put his name to work that was not his own. You never hesitated; on the contrary, you jumped at the chance of so easy an opening to your career as a playwright. My need, as you imagined it, was your opportunity."

"But you said it was from the French," I argued, clinging to a shred of logic. "You had merely translated it; I adapted it. I don't defend the custom, but it is the custom: the man who adapts a play calls himself the author. They all do it."

"I know," he answered, his tone light. "It has always amused me. Our sick friend himself, whom I am sure we are both delighted to welcome back to life, has done it more than once, and made a very fair profit on the transaction. Indeed, from internal evidence, I am strongly of opinion that this present play is a case in point. Well, chickens come home to roost: I adapt from him. What is the difference?"

"Simply this," he continued, pouring himself another glass of wine, "that whereas, owing to the anomalous state of the copyright laws, stealing from a foreign author is legal and commendable, against stealing from a living English author there is a certain prejudice."

"And the consequences, I am afraid, you will find somewhat unpleasant," I suggested, trying to inject a note of warning.

He laughed, a sound devoid of frivolity. "You mean, my dear Kelver, that *you* will."

"Don't look so dumbfounded," he went on. "You cannot be so stupid as you are pretending to be. The original manuscript at the Lord Chamberlain's office is in your handwriting. You knew our friend as well as I did, and you visited him. Why, the whole tour has been under your management. You have arranged everything—most excellently; I have been quite surprised."

My anger did not arrive until later. For the moment, a sudden, blinding light of fear obscured everything else.

"But you told me," I cried, the words tumbling out, "it was only a matter of form, that you wanted to keep your name out of it because—"

He was looking at me with an expression of genuine astonishment. My words began to appear humorous even to myself. I found it difficult to believe I had been the fool I was now seeing myself to have been.

"I am sorry," he said, "I am really sorry. I took you for a man of the world. I thought you merely did not wish to know anything."

Still, to my shame, fear was the thing uppermost in my heart. "You are not going to put it all on to me?" I pleaded.

He had risen. He laid his hand upon my shoulder. Instead of flinging it off, I was glad of its kindly pressure. He was the only man to whom I could look for help.

"Don't take it so seriously," he said. "He will merely think the manuscript has been lost. As likely as not, he will be unable to remember whether he wrote it or merely thought of writing it. No one in the company will say anything: it isn't their business. We must set to work. I had altered it a good deal before you saw it, and changed all the names of the characters. We will retain the third act: it is the only thing of real value in the play. The situation is not original; you have as much right to dish it up as he had. In a fortnight we will have the whole thing so different that if he saw it himself he would only imagine we had got hold of the idea and had forestalled him."

There were moments during the next few weeks when I listened to the voice of my good angel, when I saw clearly that even from the lowest point of view he was giving me sound advice. I would go to the man, tell him frankly the whole truth.

But Vane never left my elbow. Suspecting, I suppose, he gave me clearly to understand that if I did so, I must expect no mercy from him. My story, denounced by him as an outrageous lie, would be regarded as the funk-inspired subterfuge of a young rogue. At the best, I should handicap myself with suspicion that would last me throughout my career. On the other hand, what harm had we done? Presented in some twenty or so small towns, where it would soon be forgotten, a play something like. Most plays were something like. Our friend would produce his version and reap a rich harvest; ours would disappear. If by any unlikely chance discussion should arise, the advertisement would be to his advantage. So soon as possible, we would replace it by a new piece altogether. A young man of my genius could surely write something better than hotch-potch such as this; experience was all that I had lacked. As regards one's own conscience, was not the world's honesty a mere question of convention? Had he been a young man, and had we doddled him out of his play for a ten-pound note, we should have been applauded as sharp
