It irritated Oleron slightly that his friend, Miss Bengough, should dismiss with a mere glance the locale he himself had found so singularly captivating. Indeed, she scarcely lifted her eyes to it. Yet, such indifference was characteristic of her nature; she was a woman perpetually detached from the ornamental graces of existence, careless of appearances, and seemingly more vibrant when consuming biscuits from a paper bag than when dining with strict adherence to social convention. She was an unmarried journalist of thirty-four, possessing a large, showy frame, fair as butter and pink as a dog-rose, resembling a florist's most prized specimen bloom. Her movements were sudden and ample, her utterances moist and explosive. She "pulled a better living out of the pool"—as she phrased it—than Oleron did, and through cunningly disguised advertisements for drapers and haberdashers, she secured the greater portion of her remarkably varied wardrobe. When she moved, she left behind small whirlwinds of air in which her veils and scarves fluttered and spun. Oleron had heard the rustle of her skirts on his staircase and her single, loud knock at his door during the first month of his residence in this new abode. Her garments carried the raw outer air with them, and she would fling a bundle of women's journals down onto a chair.

"Don't knock off for me," she declared across a mouthful of large-headed hatpins as she removed her hat and veil. "I didn't know whether you were straight yet, so I've brought some sandwiches for lunch. You've got coffee, I suppose? No, don't get up—I'll find the kitchen—"

"Oh, that's perfectly all right; I'll clear these things away. To tell the truth, I'm rather glad to be interrupted," Oleron replied. He gathered his scattered work and stowed it away. She was already in the kitchen; he heard the rush of water filling the kettle. He joined her, and ten minutes later followed her back to the sitting-room carrying the coffee and sandwiches on a silver tray. They seated themselves, placing the tray on a small table between them.

"Well, what do you think of the new place?" Oleron asked as she poured the coffee.

"Hm!... Anybody'd think you were going to get married, Paul."

He laughed. "Oh no. But it's an improvement on some of them, isn't it?"

"Is it? I suppose it is; I don't know. I liked the last place, in spite of the black ceiling and no tap."

"How's *Romilly*?"

Oleron thumbed his chin meditatively. "Hm! I'm rather ashamed to tell you. The fact is, I've not got on very well with it. But it will be all right on the night, as you used to say."

"Stuck?"

"Rather stuck."

"Got any of it you care to read to me?"

Oleron had long been in the habit of reading portions of his work to Miss Bengough. Her comments were invariably quick and practical, sometimes directly useful, sometimes indirectly suggestive. In return for his confidence, she kept all mention of her own work sedulously from him. His, she insisted, was "real work"; hers merely filled space, not always even grammatically.

"I'm afraid there isn't," Oleron replied, continuing to shave his chin with a dry, thoughtful expression. Then, with a sudden burst of candor, he added, "The fact is, Elsie, I've not written—not actually written—very much more of it. Not *any* more of it, in fact. But, of course, that doesn't mean I haven't progressed. I've progressed, in one sense, rather alarmingly. I'm now thinking of reconstructing the whole thing."

Miss Bengough gave a sharp gasp. "Reconstructing!"

"Making *Romilly* herself a different type of woman. Somehow, I've begun to feel that I'm not getting the most out of her. As she stands, I've certainly lost interest in her to some extent."

"But—but—" Miss Bengough protested, "you had her so real, so *living*, Paul!"

Oleron smiled faintly. He had been quite prepared for Miss Bengough's disapproval. He wasn't surprised that she liked *Romilly* as she currently existed; she would. Whether she realized it or not, there was much of herself in his fictitious creation. Naturally, *Romilly* would seem "real," "living," to her.

"But are you really serious, Paul?" Miss Bengough asked presently, with a round-eyed stare.

"Quite serious."

"You're really going to scrap those fifteen chapters?"

"I didn't exactly say that."

"That fine, rich love-scene?"

"I should only do it reluctantly, and for the sake of something I thought better."

"And that beautiful, *beautiful* description of *Romilly* on the shore?"

"It wouldn't necessarily be wasted," he said a little uneasily.

But Miss Bengough made a large, windy gesture and then let him have it. "Really, you are *too* trying!" she broke out. "I do wish sometimes you'd remember you're human, and live in a world! You know I'd be the *last* to wish you to lower your standard one inch, but it wouldn't be lowering it to bring it within human comprehension. Oh, you're sometimes altogether too godlike!... Why, it would be a wicked, criminal waste of your powers to destroy those fifteen chapters! Look at it reasonably, now. You've been working for nearly twenty years; you've now got what you've been working for almost within your grasp; your affairs are at a most critical stage (oh, don't tell me; I know you're about at the end of your money); and here you are, deliberately proposing to withdraw a thing that will probably make your name, and to substitute for it something that ten to one nobody on earth will ever want to read—and small blame to them! Really, you try my patience!"

Oleron had shaken his head slowly as she spoke. It was an old story between them. The noisy, able, practical journalist was an admirable friend—up to a certain point; beyond that... well, each of us knows that point beyond which we stand alone. Elsie Bengough sometimes remarked that had she possessed one-tenth part of Oleron's genius, there were few things she could not have accomplished—thus rendering that genius a quantitatively divisible commodity, an ingredient to be added to or subtracted from in the admixture of his work. That it was a qualitative essence, essential and indivisible, informing the soul of the art, passed her comprehension. Their spirits parted company at that juncture. Oleron knew it. She did not appear to know it.

"Yes, yes, yes," he said a little wearily by and by, "practically you're quite right, entirely right, and I haven't a word to say. If I could only turn *Romilly* over to you, you'd make an enormous success of her. But that can't be, and I, for my part, am seriously doubting whether she's worth my while. You know what that means."

"What does it mean?" she demanded bluntly.

"Well," he said, smiling wanly, "what *does* it mean when you're convinced a thing isn't worth doing? You simply don't do it."

Miss Bengough's eyes swept the ceiling for assistance against this impossible man. "What utter rubbish!" she broke out at last. "Why, when I saw you last you were simply oozing *Romilly*; you were turning her off at the rate of four chapters a week; if you hadn't moved you'd have had her three-parts done by now. What on earth possessed you to move right in the middle of your most important work?"

Oleron attempted to dissuade her with a recital of inconveniences, but she would not have it. Perhaps in her heart she partly suspected the reason. He was simply mortally weary of the narrow circumstances of his life. He had endured twenty years of it—twenty years of garrets, roof-chambers, and dingy flats and shabby lodgings, and he was tired of dinginess and shabbiness. The reward was as far off as ever—or if it was not, he no longer cared as once he would have cared to stretch out his hand and seize it. It is all very well to tell a man who is at the point of exhaustion that only another effort is required of him; if he cannot make it, he is as far off as ever.

"Anyway," Oleron summed up, "I'm happier here than I've been for a long time. That's some sort of a justification."

"And doing no work," said Miss Bengough pointedly.

At that, a trifling petulance that had been gathering within Oleron came to a head. "And why should I do nothing but work?" he demanded. "How much happier am I for it? I don't say I don't love my work—when it's done; but I hate doing it. Sometimes it's an intolerable burden that I simply long to be rid of. Once in many weeks it has a moment, one moment, of glow and thrill for me; I remember the days when it was all glow and thrill; and now I'm forty-four, and it's becoming drudgery. Nobody wants it; I'm ceasing to want it myself; and if any ordinary sensible man were to ask me whether
