As the seasons bled into one another, the rhythm of Oleron's life fractured along the single axis of his staircase. Few ascended Oleron's stairs save for the postman, and even his tread grew sparse, a ghostly percussion heard no more than once or twice weekly. Letters piled up, unanswered, until the correspondence from his publishers—a query regarding the manuscript of his new book—dissolved into dust in his mind. A second missive arrived, met with the same silent oblivion. By the time a third might have come, the silence had already swallowed it whole.

Outside, the world bloomed with a deceptive vitality. The weather turned bright and warm, coaxing the privet bushes among the chopper-like notice boards into violent, fragrant bloom. In the streets where Oleron once wandered, baskets of flowers lined the curbs, spilling color onto the pavement. Oleron bought flowers daily; his room screamed for them, demanding fresh petals to be continuously renewed, and he stinted neither his coin nor his effort in satisfying this hunger. Yet, the necessity of venturing forth to procure them gnawed at him, a physical irritation that grew with each excursion. It was with a profound, expanding relief that he retreated indoors.

His scale of sensation had undergone a subtle, irreversible metamorphosis. It was not a restoration to his former capacity, but an enlargement that now encompassed terror in a form previously unknown. *Lux orco, tenebrae Jovi.* The name of this dread was agoraphobia. Oleron began to dread the air, the expanse of space, and the invisible horror that might pounce upon an unguarded back. Soon, he engineered a solution: his food and flowers were delivered directly to his threshold. He rubbed his hands together, a gesture of triumph. Better! Now he could dictate the terms of his movement—or lack thereof.

Quickly, he cemented this choice. Immurement became his pleasure. Yet, he was not happy. If he was, his happiness twisted into something grotesque. He fretted with a discontent that bordered on hysteria, occasionally weeping for sheer weakness and misery. Still, he possessed a dim, stubborn consciousness that he would not trade this sadness for the noisy mirth of the world outside. Speaking of noise: noise, much noise, now inflicted upon him the acutest torture. It was barely more bearable than that newborn fear that compelled him, on the increasingly rare occasions he ventured out, to sidle close to walls, fingers tracing friendly railings for reassurance.

He moved from room to room softly, clad in slippers, pausing frequently to close doors with such gentleness that not a whisper disturbed the stillness—a stillness that was, in itself, a delight. Sunday became an intolerable day. Since the arrival of the fine weather, members of the sect to which the long-nosed Barrett adhered had assembled in the square beneath his windows each morning. They arrived with great drums and large, brass-bellied instruments. Men and women lifted anguished voices, struggling with their God; and Barrett himself, face upraised, eyes closed, brows furrowed in ecstasy, prayed that the sound of his voice might penetrate the ears of all unbelievers—as it certainly did Oleron's.

One day, mid-rhapsody, Oleron sprang to his blind and pulled it down, hearing his own name become the subject of a fresh torrent of vocal outpouring. Sometimes, though never expecting a reply, Oleron stood still and called softly. Once or twice he cried "Romilly!" and waited; more often, his whispers took no specific shape. There was one spot in his abode he haunted with increasing persistence: just within the opening of his bedroom door. He had discovered that by opening every door in his dwelling—save the outer one, which he approached with reluctance—and positioning himself there, he could survey each of his five rooms to varying degrees without shifting his stance. He could command a view of his entire sitting room, most of his bedroom, and glimpses of his kitchen, bathroom, and rarely used study. He lingered here often, breathless, finger pressed to his lips.

One day, standing in this vantage point, he wondered if the deceased Madley had ever grasped the strategic importance of the bedroom entry. Light, moreover, now caused him greater disquiet than darkness. Direct sunlight, which now visited each room as the sun circled the house, burned like a flame in his brain; even diffused light was a dull, numbing ache. He began, at successive hours, to lower his crimson blinds. He made short, daring excursions to perform this task, always leaving his retreat open in case of sudden need. Soon, lowering the blinds became a daily, methodical exercise. His rooms, when he completed his rounds, glowed with the blood-red half-light of a photographer's darkroom.

One day, as he drew down the blind of his small study and backed orderly out of the room, he burst into a soft laugh. "That bilks Mr. Barrett!" he declared. The baffling of Barrett continued to afford him mirth for an hour. But on another day, shortly thereafter, he suffered a fright that left him trembling for an equal duration. He had seized the cord to darken the window above the seat where he had found the harp bag, standing with his back protected in the embrasure, when he thought he saw the tail of a black-and-white checkered skirt disappear around the corner of the house. He could not be certain—had he run to the window of the other wall, which was blinded, the skirt must have already passed—but he was *almost* sure it was Elsie. He listened in an agony of suspense for her tread on the stairs. None came. After three or four minutes, he drew a long breath of relief. "By Jove, but that would have compromised me horribly!" he muttered. He continued to mutter from time to time, "Horribly compromising... *no* woman would stand that... not *any* kind of woman... oh, compromising in the extreme!"

Yet he was not happy. He could not assign the cause of the fits of quiet weeping that took him sometimes; they came and went like the fitful illumination of clouds traveling over the square. Perhaps, after all, if he was not happy, he was not unhappy either. Before unhappiness could claim him, something must have been withdrawn, and nothing had yet been taken from him, for nothing had been granted. He waited for that granting, in that flower-laden, frightfully enticing apartment, with pith-white walls tinged and subdued by crimson blinds to a blood-like gloom. He paid no heed to the fact that his stock of money ran perilously low, nor that he had ceased to work. Ceased to work? He had not ceased to work! Those who supposed otherwise knew very little. He was in truth only now beginning to work. He was preparing such a work... such a work... such a Mistress was being made in the gestation of his Art. Let him but endure this period of probation and poignant waiting, and men should see.

How *should* men know her, this Fair One of Oleron's, until Oleron himself knew her? Lovely, radiant creations are not thrown off like casual greetings. The men to whom it is committed to father them must weep wretched tears, as Oleron did; must swell with vain, presumptuous hopes, as Oleron did; must pursue, as Oleron pursued, the capricious, fair, mocking, slippery, eager Spirit that, ever eluding, ensures the chase never slackens. Let Oleron but hunt this Huntress a little longer... he would have her sparkling and panting in his arms yet. Oh no: they were very far from the truth who supposed Oleron had ceased to work! And if all else fell away from Oleron, gladly he let it go. So do we all when our Fair Ones beckon. At quite the beginning, we wink, promising ourselves we will put Her Ladyship through her paces, neglect her for a day, turn her own jealous wiles against her, flout and ignore her when she comes wheedling; perhaps there lurks within us all the time a heartless sprite who is never fooled; but in the end, all falls away. She beckons, beckons, and all goes.

So Oleron kept his strategic post within the frame of his bedroom door, watching, waiting, smiling, with his finger on his lips. It was his duteous service, his worship, his troth-plighting—all that he had ever known of Love. And when he found himself, as he now and then did, hating the dead man Madley and wishing he had never lived, he felt that too was an acceptable service. But as he thus prepared himself, as it were, for a marriage, and moped and chafed more and more that the Bride made no sign, he made a discovery he ought to have made weeks prior. It was through a thought of the dead Madley that he realized it. Since that night when, in his greenness, he had thought a little studied neglect would bring the lovely Beckoner to her knees, using her own jealousy to banish her, he had not set eyes on those fifteen discarded chapters of *Romilly*. He had thrown them back into the window seat, forgotten their very existence. But his own jealousy of Madley put him in mind of hers regarding her jilted rival of flesh and blood, and he remembered them.

Fool that he had been! Had he, then, expected his Desire to manifest itself while there still existed the evidence of his divided
