The morning sun broke over the island with a warmth that seemed to ignite the spirits of the children. Before the dew had even dried from the grass, they were scrambling up the great tree, chattering and bounding like young monkeys.

"What shall we begin to do, Father?" they cried in unison. "What do you want us to do today?"

"Rest, my boys," I replied gently. "Rest."

"Rest?" they repeated, bewildered. "Why should we rest?"

I quoted the scripture we had memorized: "Six days shalt thou labour and do all that thou hast to do, but on the seventh, thou shalt do no manner of work." This is the seventh day," I explained. "Therefore, let us rest."

"But, Father," Jack protested, "that isn't resting. That's just standing still. I'll take my bow and arrow and shoot birds, and we'll climb the tree and have fun all day!"

"That is not resting," I said firmly. "That is not how you are to spend the Lord's Day."

"No!" Franz argued. "But there is no church here, no clergyman, and no organ."

"The leafy shade of this great tree is far more beautiful than any church," I assured them. "Here we will worship our Creator. Come, boys, down with you. Turn our dining hall into a breakfast room."

One by one, the children slid down the ladder. My wife, Elizabeth, and I sat with them in the pleasant shade on the fresh, soft grass. After singing hymns and offering heartfelt prayers to the Almighty Giver of all good, I told the children I would relate a parable rather than preach a sermon.

"Oh, that would be delightful!" Franz exclaimed. "I like the parables in the Bible better than anything. When can we hear you read from the Bible again, Father?"

"Ah, my little boy," I returned, feeling a pang of guilt. "Your words reproach me. While I was eagerly striving to procure food from the wreck to feed our bodies, I blush to think I neglected the Bread of Life, the Word of God. I shall search for a Bible on my next return to the ship; although our own books were nearly all destroyed, I am sure to find one."

At these words, my wife arose. She fetched her magic bag and drew from it a copy of the Holy Scriptures, which I thankfully received. After reading aloud from its sacred pages, I spoke as follows:

"A Great King, ruling in power and splendor over a vast realm of light and love, possessed within its boundaries a desolate and unfruitful island. He made this spot the object of his special care; lavishing on it all the varied resources of his might and goodness, it bloomed in beauty and became the happy residence of a band of colonists. Each was bound not only to cultivate the soil but to cherish in his soul the spirit of love and true allegiance to his Sovereign.

"While this faithful union was maintained, the colony flourished, and the noblest virtues exalted the existence of every member. Yet, a discontented and rebellious spirit infected these fortunate subjects. Disobedience and pride brought misery and punishment; the fair prospects of the colony were blighted, and total separation from the parent kingdom seemed inevitable.

"Nevertheless, a message of pardon—of free forgiveness—was accorded to these rebels. To all who, humbly accepting it, molded their future lives to the will of the Great King, was held out the promise of removal from the ruins caused by the great rebellion to the glory and undimmed splendor of the realm of Light and Blessedness."

Having interested the children, I pressed home the truths I sought to teach, leaving allegory for a moment to speak simply and earnestly to each young heart. With a short prayer for a blessing on my words, the service closed.

After a thoughtful pause, we separated, each employing himself as he felt disposed. I took some arrows and endeavored to point them with porcupine quills. Franz begged me to make a little bow for him, while Fritz asked advice regarding the tiger-cat skin and the cases he was to contrive from it. Jack assisted with the arrow-making, inserting a sharp spine at one end of each reed and fastening it with pack-thread.

"Oh, Jack!" cried Franz. "Mamma's soup is as sticky as anything! Shall I run and ask for a cake of it?"

"No, no, little goose! Better look for some real glue in the tool-box."

"There he will find glue, to be sure," I said. "And the soup would scarcely have answered your purpose. But Jack, my boy, I do not like to hear you ridicule your little brother's idea. Some of the most valuable discoveries have been the result of thoughts which originally appeared no wiser than his."

While thus directing my sons, we were startled by a shot just overhead. At the same moment, two small birds fell dead at our feet. Looking up, we beheld Ernest among the branches, bending his face joyfully toward us.

"Well hit! Well hit! A good shot, wasn't it?" he cried.

Slipping down the ladder, he picked up the birds and brought them to me. One was a thrush, the other a small dove called the ortolan, esteemed a great delicacy for its exquisite flavor. Since the figs on which these birds fed were only just beginning to ripen, we reasoned that they would soon flock in numbers to our trees. By waiting until we could procure them in large quantities, we might preserve them for the rainy season, placing them in casks with melted lard or butter.

By this time, Jack had pointed a good supply of arrows and industriously practiced archery. I finished the bow and arrows for Franz, expecting to be left in peace; but the youngest demanded a quiver, and I had to invent one also, stripping a piece of bark from a small tree, fitting a flat side and a bottom to it, and attaching a string. Attaching it to his shoulders, the youthful hunter filled it with arrows and went off, looking, as my mother said, like an innocent little Cupid bent on conquest.

Not long after, we were summoned to dinner and all willingly obeyed. During the meal, I proposed to decide on suitable names for the different spots we had visited on this coast.

"For," I said, "it will become more and more troublesome to explain what we mean unless we do so. Besides, we shall feel much more at home if we can talk as people do in inhabited countries. Instead of saying, 'the little island at the mouth of our bay where we found the dead shark,' or 'that wood where we caught the monkey,' let us begin by naming the bay in which we landed. What shall we call it?"

"Oyster Bay," said Fritz.

"No, no—Lobster Bay!" cried Jack, "in memory of the old fellow who took a fancy to my leg!"

"I think," observed my mother, "that, in token of gratitude for our escape, we should call it Safety Bay."

This name met with general approbation and was forthwith fixed upon. Other names were quickly chosen: our first place of abode became Tentholm; the islet in the bay, Shark's Island; and the reedy swamp, Flamingo Marsh. It took some time to decide on a name for our leafy castle, but finally it was entitled Falconhurst. We then rapidly named the remaining points: Prospect Hill, the eminence we first ascended; Cape Disappointment, from whose rocky heights we had strained our eyes in vain search for our ship's company; and Jackal River, for the large stream at our landing place.

In the afternoon, the boys continued their various employments. Fritz finished his cases, and Jack asked my assistance in carrying out his plan of making a cuirass for Turk, the dog, out of the porcupine skin. After thoroughly cleansing the inside, we cut and fitted it round the body of the patient dog. When strings were sewn on and it became tolerably dry, he was armed with this ingenious coat of mail, cutting a most singular figure. Juno strongly objected to his friendly approaches and got out of his way as fast as she could; it was clear that he would easily put to flight the fiercest animal he might encounter, protected by armor at once defensive and offensive. I determined to make also a helmet for Jack out of the remainder of the skin, which to his infinite delight I speedily did.

Amid these interesting occupations, the evening drew on. After a pleasant walk among the sweet glades near our abode, we closed our Sabbath day with prayer and a glad hymn of praise, retiring to rest with peaceful hearts.

The next morning, I proposed an expedition to Tentholm, wishing to make my way thither by a different route. We left the tree well armed: I and my three elder sons each carrying a gun and game-bag, while little Franz was equipped with his bow and quiver full of arrows. A most curious party we formed: Fritz adorned with his belt of margay skin, and Jack, with his extraordinary headdress, looked like a couple of young savages. Their mother and I walked together; she, of the whole party, being the only one unarmed, carried a jar in which to get butter from Tentholm. We were preceded by the dogs: Turk, armed most effectively with his cuirass of porcupine skin, and Juno keeping at a respectful distance from so formidable a companion.

Master Knips fully intended to mount his charger as usual, but when he saw him arrayed apparently in a new skin, he approached him carefully. Touching him with one paw, he discovered that such a hide would make anything but an agreeable seat. The grimace he made was most comical, and chattering vociferously, he bounded towards Juno, skipped on her back, seated himself, and soon appeared perfectly reconciled to the change of steed.

The flamingo saw us starting and, having been much petted during the last day or two, considered himself entitled to accompany us. For some time he kept beside the children, following first one and then another as they explored the wood on either side; their irregular course, however, at length disgusted him, and, abandoning them, he walked sedately by my side.

We strolled on in the cool evening air, following the course of the stream. The boys roamed ahead of me, intent on exploration. Presently, I heard a joyful shout and saw Ernest running at full speed towards me, followed by his brothers. In his hand he held a plant, panting for breath and with sparkling eyes, he held it up to me.

"Potatoes! Potatoes, Father!" he gasped out.

"Yes," said Jack, "acres and acres of potatoes!"

"My dear Ernest," I said, for there was no mistaking the flower and leaf, and the light clear-green bulbous roots, "you have indeed made a discovery; with the potato we shall never starve."

"But come and look at them," said Jack. "Come and feast your eyes on thousands of potatoes."

We hurried to the spot: there, spread out before us, was a great tract of ground covered with the precious plant.

"It would have been rather difficult," remarked Jack, "not to have discovered such a great field."

"Very likely," replied Ernest, smiling. "But I doubt if you would have discovered that it was a potato field."

"Perhaps not," said Jack. "You are quite welcome, at all events, to the honor of the discovery; I'll have the honor of being the first to get a supply of them." So saying, he dug up, with hands and knife, a number of plants and filled his game-bag with the roots. The monkey followed his example, scratching away with his paws most cleverly, soon having a heap beside him. So delighted were we with the discovery, and so eager were we to possess a large supply of the roots, that we stopped not digging until every bag, pouch, and pocket was filled.

Some wished to return at once to Falconhurst to cook and taste our new acquisition, but I overruled them, and we continued our march, heavily laden but delighted.

"How," I said, "can we thank the Giver of all these blessings sufficiently?"

"Oh," said Franz, "we can say, 'We thank thee, O Lord, for all thy goodness and mercy; and bless us for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.'"

"That would not be sufficient," said Fritz. "Do you think it would be enough just to say to father and mother, 'Thank you for all you do,' and not to show that we were really thankful by loving them and doing what we can to please them?"

"You are quite right, Fritz," I said. "Franz did not say all that was necessary; he should have added, 'Give me grace to do Thy will, and to obey Thee in all things.'"

As we thus talked, we reached the head of our streamlet, where it fell from the rocks above in a beautiful, sparkling, splashing cascade. We crossed and entered the tall grass on the other side. We forced our way through with difficulty, so thick and tangled were the reeds. Beyond this, the landscape was most lovely. Rich tropical vegetation flourished on every side: the tall stately palms, surrounded by luxuriant ferns; brilliant flowers and graceful creepers; the prickly cactus, shooting up amidst them; aloe, jasmine, and sweet-scented vanilla; the Indian pea, and, above all, the regal pineapple, loaded the breath of the evening breeze with their rich perfume. The boys were delighted with the pineapple, and so eagerly did they fall to that my wife had to caution them that there were no doctors on our territory, and that if they became ill, they would have to cure themselves as best they might.

This advice, however, seemed to have small effect on my sons. Showing Knips what they wanted, they sent him after the ripest and best fruit. While they were thus employed, I examined the other shrubs and bushes. Among these I presently noticed one which I knew well from description to be the karatas.

"Come here, boys," I said. "Here is something of far more value than your pineapples. Do you see that plant with long pointed leaves and beautiful red flower? That is the karatas. The filaments of the leaves make capital
