The next morning, the boys and I set out with the cart, heavily laden with bundles of bamboo, to tend the avenue of fruit trees. We left the buffalo behind; his services were no longer needed, and I wished the wound in his nostrils to heal completely before subjecting him to labor again.

We arrived just in time. Many of the young trees, which had previously threatened to topple, had now succumbed to their own weight and lay prostrate on the ground. Others were bent double, while only a few remained standing. We lifted the fallen trees, dug deep at their roots, and drove stout bamboo props into the earth, lashing them firmly to the trunks with strong broad fibers.

"Papa," Franz said, handing me a fiber as I needed it, "are these wild or tame trees?"

"Oh, these are wild trees, the most ferocious of them," Jack laughed. "We are tying them up lest they run away. Soon we will untie them, and they will trot after us wherever we go, giving us fruit. Oh, we will tame them! They shall have a ring through their noses just like the buffalo!"

"That is not true," Franz replied gravely. "But there are wild and tame trees. The wild ones grow in the woods like crab-apples, and the tame ones in the garden like the pears and peaches at home. Which are these, Papa?"

"They are not wild," I answered. "They are grafted, or cultivated, or as you call them, tame trees. No European tree bears good fruit until it is grafted!" Seeing a puzzled look cross the little boy's face, I hastened to explain.

"Grafting," I continued, "is the process of inserting a slip or twig of a tree into what is called an eye—that is, a knot or hole in the branch of another tree. This twig then grows and produces not the fruit the original stock would have borne, but the fruit of the tree from which the slip was taken. Thus, if we have a sour crab tree and an apple tree bearing fine Ribston Pippins, we take a slip of the latter, insert it into an eye of the former, and in a year or two, that branch will be laden with excellent apples."

"But," asked Ernest, "where did the slips of good fruit come from, if none grow without grafting?"

"From foreign countries," I replied. "It is only in the cold climate of our part of the world that they require this grafting. In many parts of the world, in southern latitudes, the most luscious fruit trees are indigenous to the soil, flourishing and bearing sweet, wholesome fruit without the slightest care. In England, Germany, and even France, these same trees require the utmost exertion of horticultural skill to produce any fruit at all."

"Thus, when the Romans invaded England, they found nothing but crab-apples, nut bushes, and brambles. But by grafting upon these, fine apples, filberts, and raspberries were produced. It was the same in our dear Switzerland—all our fruit trees were imported."

"Were cherries, Father? May we not even call cherries Swiss? I always thought they grew nowhere else."

"I am afraid we cannot even claim cherries as our own, not even the name. They are called cherries from *Cerasus*, a state of Pontus in Asia, whence they were brought to Europe by Lucullus, a Roman general, about seventy years before Christ."

"Hazelnuts also come from Pontus; walnuts originally from Persia. As for grapes, they are of the greatest antiquity. You remember Noah cultivating vines; they have been transported from place to place until they are now found in most parts of the civilized world."

"Do you think all these trees will grow?" Fritz asked as we crossed Jackal River and entered our plantation at Tentholm. "Here are lemons, pomegranates, pistachio nuts, and mulberries."

"I have little doubt of it," I replied. "We are evidently within the tropics, where such trees are sure to flourish."

"These pines come from France, Spain, and Italy; the olives from Armenia and Palestine; the figs originally from the island of Chios; the peaches and apricots from Persia; plums from Damascus in Syria, and the pears of all sorts from Greece."

"However, if our countries have not been blessed in the same way with fruit, we have been given wisdom and skill, which has enabled us to import and cultivate the trees of other lands."

We talked and worked until every tree requiring treatment was secured with a stout bamboo prop. Then, with appetites a gourmand might envy, we returned to Falconhurst.

My good wife was almost alarmed at the way we fell upon the corned beef and palm-cabbage she had set before us, but eventually, these good things produced the desired effect, and one by one we declared ourselves satisfied. As we reclined after our labor, digesting our dinner, we discussed our various projects.

"I wish," said my wife, "that you would invent some other plan for climbing to the nest above us. I think the nest itself is perfect; I really wish for nothing better, but I should like to be able to get to it without scaling that dreadful ladder every time. Could you not make a flight of steps to reach it?"

I carefully considered the project, turning over every plan for its accomplishment.

"It would be impossible, I am afraid, to make stairs outside, but within the trunk it might be done. More than once I have thought that this trunk might be hollow or partly so. If such be the case, our task would be comparatively easy. Did you not tell me the other day that you noticed bees coming from a hole in the tree?"

"Oh, yes," said little Franz. "I went to look at them, and one flew right against my face and stung me. I almost cried, but I didn't."

"Brave little boy," I said. "Well, now, if the trunk is sufficiently hollow to contain a swarm of bees, it may be hollow for the greater part of its length. Like the willow in our own country, it might draw all its nourishment through the bark and, in spite of its real unsoundness, retain a flourishing appearance."

Master Jack, practical as usual, instantly sprang to his feet to put my conjecture to the proof. The rest followed his example, and they were soon climbing about like squirrels, peeping into the hole and tapping the wood to discover by sound how far down the cavity extended.

They forgot, in their eagerness, who were the tenants of this interesting trunk. They were soon reminded of it, however, for the bees, disturbed by this unusual noise, burst out with an angry buzz and instantly attacked the cause of the annoyance. They swarmed round them, stinging hands, faces, and necks, settling in their hair, and pursuing them as they ran to me for assistance.

It was with difficulty that we got rid of the angry insects and attended to the boys. Jack, who had been the first to reach the hole, fared the worst and was soon a most pitiable sight, his face swollen to an extraordinary degree. Only by the constant application of cold earth was the pain alleviated. They were all eager to commence an organized attack upon the bees at once, but for an hour or more, by reason of their pain, they were unable to render me much assistance.

In the meanwhile, I made my arrangements. I first took a large calabash gourd, intending to make a beehive so that, when we had driven the insects from their present abode, we might not lose them entirely. I flattened the lower half of the gourd, cut an arched opening in the front for a doorway, made a straw roof for protection from rain and heat, and the little house was complete.

Nothing more could then be done, for the irritated bees were still angrily buzzing round the tree. I waited till dark, and then, when all the bees had returned to their trunk, with Fritz's assistance, I carefully stopped up every hole in the tree with wet clay, ensuring the bees would not issue forth next morning before we could begin operations.

Very early we were up and at work. I first took a hollow cane and inserted one end through the clay into the tree. Down this tube, with pipe and tobacco, I smoked most furiously. The humming and buzzing within was tremendous; the bees evidently could not understand what was happening. I finished my first pipeful, put my thumb over the end of the cane, and gave the pipe to Fritz to refill. He did so, and I smoked again. The buzzing became less noisy, subsiding into a mere murmur. By the time I had finished the second pipe, all was still; the bees were stupefied.

"Now then, Fritz," I said, "quick with a hammer and chisel, and stand here beside me."

He was up in a moment. Together, we cut a small door by the side of the hole. We did not take this door out, but left it attached by one corner so it might be removed at a moment's notice. Giving the bees a final dose of tobacco smoke, we opened it.

Carefully but rapidly, we removed the insects as they clung in clusters to the sides of the tree and placed them in the hive prepared for their reception. As rapidly, I took every atom of wax and honey from their storehouse and put it in a cask I had made ready.

The bees were now safely removed from the trunk, but I could not tell whether, when they revived from their temporary stupor, they might refuse to occupy the house I had presented them and insist on returning to their old quarters. To prevent this possibility, I took a quantity of tobacco, placed it upon a board nailed horizontally within the trunk, lit it, and allowed it to burn slowly so the fumes might fill the cavity.

It was well I did so. As the bees returned to consciousness, they left their pretty hive and buzzed away to the trunk of the tree. They seemed astonished at finding this uninhabitable, and an immense amount of noisy humming ensued. Round and round they flew, backwards and forwards between the gourd and the tree, settling here and there, until, at length, after due consideration, they took possession of the hive and abandoned their former habitation to us, the invaders of their territory. By evening they were quite quiet, and we ventured to open the cask in which we had stored our plunder.

We first separated the honey from the honeycomb, pouring it off into jars and pots. The rest we threw into a vessel of water placed over a slow fire. It soon boiled, and the entire mass became fluid. We placed this in a clean canvas bag and subjected it to heavy pressure. The honey was thus soon forced out, and we stored it in a cask. Though not perhaps quite equal to the former batch in quality, it was yet capital. The wax remaining in the bag I also carefully stored, knowing it would be of great use in the manufacture of candles. Then, after a hard day's work, we turned in.

The internal architecture of the tree now had to be attended to. Early the following morning we prepared for the laborious task. A door had first to be made, so at the base of the trunk we cut away the bark and formed an opening just the size of the door we had brought from the captain's cabin, which, with hinges, was ready to be hung.

The clearing of the rotten wood from the center of the trunk occupied us some time, but at length we had the satisfaction of seeing it entirely accomplished. Standing below, we could look up the trunk, which was like a great smooth funnel, and see the sky above.

It was now ready for the staircase. First, we erected in the center a stout sapling to form an axis round which to build the spiral stairs. In this we cut notches to receive the steps, and corresponding notches in the tree itself to support the outer ends. The steps themselves we formed carefully and neatly of planks from the wreck, clenching them firmly in their places with stout nails.

Upwards and upwards we built, cutting windows in the trunk as required to admit light and air, until we were flush with the top of the center pole. On this pole we erected another to reach the top of the tree, securing it firmly, and built in the same way round it until we reached the level of the floor of the nest above.

To make the ascent perfectly easy, we ran a handrail on either side—one round the center pillar and the other following the curve of the trunk.

This task occupied us a whole month. By the end of that period, so accustomed had we become to having a definite piece of work before us that we began to consider what other great alteration we should undertake.

We were, of course, not neglecting the details of our colonial establishment. There were all the animals to be attended to. The goats and sheep had both presented us with additions to our flock, and these frisky youngsters had to be seen after. To prevent them straying to any great distance, for we had no wish to lose them, we tied round their necks little bells we had found on board the wreck, which would assist us in tracking them.

Juno, too, had a fine litter of puppies. But, in spite of the entreaties of the children, I could not consent to keep more than two, and the rest disappeared in that mysterious way in which puppies and kittens are wont to leave the earth. To console the mother, as he said—but I suspect also to save himself considerable trouble—Jack placed his little jackal beside the remaining puppies. To his joy, it was readily adopted.

The other pets were also flourishing and being usefully trained. The buffalo, after giving us much trouble, had now become perfectly domesticated and was a very useful beast of burden, besides being a capital steed for the boys. They guided him by a bar thrust through the hole in his nose, which was now perfectly healed, serving the purpose just as a bit in the mouth of a horse. I began his education by securing round him a broad girth of buffalo-hide and fastening to it various articles to accustom him to carrying a burden. By degrees, he permitted this to be done without making the slightest resistance and soon carried the panniers, formerly borne by the ass, readily and willingly.

I then made Master Knips sit upon his back and
