Thomas Cadwalader did not tell his story; he suggested it, weaving a narrative of omission and implication. We dare not imitate this reticence, nor would it serve the reader's interest to relate these facts with the baldness and lack of detail that plagued the unhappy man due to the urgency of his situation. Remarkable tragedies are born of remarkable facts, and since such facts are merely the crystallization of human passions, we must delve into those passions to comprehend either the facts or their appalling consequences. In this case, the first link in the chain leading to Felix Adams's violent death was forged before the birth of the woman who would eventually strike him. We must begin, then, with almost forgotten days, recounting the tale as her pleader did: from the standpoint of Felix and Thomas Cadwalader.

Thomas Cadwalader—now known as Adams—never knew his mother; she died in his early infancy. Nor could he be said to have known his father, having been raised in France by an elderly Scotch lawyer, a relative of his mother's. This guardian spoke of her occasionally but never of Thomas's father until the boy reached his fifteenth year. Then, he placed certain books into Thomas's hands with a remarkable injunction:

"Here are romances, Thomas. Read them; but remember that none of them, no matter how thrilling in matter or effect, will ever equal the story of your father's bitterly wronged and suffering life."

"My father!" Thomas cried. "Tell me about him; I have never heard."

But his guardian, satisfied with an allusion he knew would bear fruit in the extremely susceptible nature of this isolated boy, said no more that day. Thomas turned to the books, but nothing thereafter could take his mind away from his father. He had scarcely thought of him for years, but now that this father had been placed before him in the light of a wronged man, he found himself continually hunting back into the deepest recesses of his memory for some long-forgotten recollection of that father's features, calculated to restore his image to his eyes. Sometimes he succeeded, or thought he did; but this image, if image it was, was speedily lost in a sensation of something strange and awe-compelling enveloping it. He found himself more absorbed by the intangible impressions associated with this memory than by the memory itself. What were these impressions, and in what had they originated? In vain he tried to determine. They were as vague as they were persistent: a stretch of darkness, two bars of orange light always shining and always the same, black lines against these bars like the tops of distant gables, an inner thrill, a vague affright, a rush about him as of a swooping wind—all this came with his father's image, only to fade away with it, leaving him troubled, uneasy, and perplexed. Finding these impressions persistent and receiving no explanation in his own mind, he finally asked his guardian what they meant. That guardian was as ignorant as himself on this topic; satisfied with having roused the boy's imagination, he confined himself to hints dropped now and then with a judiciousness that proved the existence of a deliberate purpose: some duty awaiting him on the other side of the water, a duty that would explain his long exile from his only parent and for which Thomas must fit himself by study and the acquirement of such accomplishments as would render a young man a positive power in society, whether that society be of the Old World or the New. He showed his shrewdness in thus dealing with this pliable and deeply affectionate nature. From this time forth, Thomas felt himself leading a life of mystery and interest.

To feel himself appointed for a work whose unknown character only heightened its importance gave point to every effort now made by this young man and lent to his studies that vague touch of romance that made them a delight, rendering him an adept in many things he might otherwise have cared little about. At eighteen, he was a graduate from the Sorbonne and a musical virtuoso. He could fence, ride, and carry off prizes in games requiring physical prowess as well as mental fitness. He was, in fact, a prodigy in many ways and was so considered by his fellow-students. However, he was not perfect; he lacked social charm and, in that regard, failed of being the complete gentleman. This deficiency was made painfully clear to him in the following way:

One morning his guardian came to him with a letter from his father. Along with words of commendation for his present attainments, the father expressed a certain dissatisfaction with his general manner, noting it was too abrupt and self-satisfied with those of his own sex and much too timid and deprecatory with those of the other. Thomas felt the criticism and recognized its justice, but how had his father, proven by the letter to be no longer a myth, become acquainted with defects that Thomas instinctively felt could never have attracted the attention of his far from polished guardian?

His questions on this point elicited a response that confounded him. He was not the only son of his father; he had a brother living, older than himself by some twenty years or more, who had just been in Paris, where, in all probability, he had met Thomas, talked with him, and perhaps pressed his hand.

It was a discovery calculated to deepen the impression already made upon Thomas's mind. Only a purpose of the greatest importance could account for so much mystery. What could it be? What was he destined to do, say, or be? He was not told, but while awaiting enlightenment, he was resolved not to be a disappointment to the two anxious souls who watched his career so eagerly and exacted such perfection from him. Consequently, he moderated his manner, and during the following year acquired by constant association with the gilded youth about him that indescribable charm of the perfect gentleman which he was led to believe would alone meet with the approval of those he now felt bound to please. At the end of the year, he found himself a finished man of the world. How truly so, he began to realize when he noted the blush with which his presence was hailed by women and the respect shown him by men of his own stamp. In the midst of the satisfaction thus experienced, his guardian paid him a final visit.

"You are now ready," he said, "for your father's summons. It will come in a few weeks. Be careful, then. Form no ties you cannot readily break; for, once recalled from France, you are not likely to return here. What your father's purpose concerning you may be I do not know, but it is no ordinary one. You will have money, a well-appointed home, family affection, all that you have hitherto craved in vain, and in return you will carry solace to a heart which has awaited your healing touch for twenty years. So much I am ordered to say; the rest you will hear from your father's own lips."

Aroused, encouraged, and animated by the wildest hopes and most extravagant anticipations, Thomas awaited his father's call with feverish impatience. When it came, he hastened to respond by an immediate voyage to America. This occurred some six months prior to the tragedy in ---- Street. Upon his arrival at the wharf in New York, he was met, not by his brother as he had every reason to expect, but by a messenger in whose face evil tidings were apparent before he spoke. Thomas was soon made acquainted with them. His father, whom he now learned was called Cadwalader (he himself had always been called Adams), was ill, possibly dying. He must therefore hasten, and being provided with minute instructions as to his way, he took the train at once for a small village in northern Pennsylvania.

All that followed was a dream to him. He was hurried through the night, with the motion of the ship still in his blood, to meet—what? He dared not think. He swam in a veritable nightmare. Then came a stop, a hurrying from the train, a halt on a platform reeking with rain (for the night was stormy), a call from someone to hurry, the sight of a panting horse steaming under a lamp whose blowing flame he often woke in after nights to see, a push from a persuasive hand, then a ride over a country road the darkness of which seemed impenetrable, and finally, the startling vision of an open door, with a Meg Merrilies of a woman standing in it, holding a flaming candle in her hand. The candle went out while he looked at it, leaving only a voice to guide him—a voice which, in tones shaken by chill or feeling, he could not tell which, cried eagerly:

"Is that you, laddie? Come awa in. Come awa in. Dinna heed the rain. The maister's been crying on you a' day. I'm glad you're no ower late."

He got down, followed the voice, and, stumbling up a step or two, entered a narrow door, which was with difficulty held open behind him, and which swung to with a loud noise the minute he crossed the threshold. This, or the dreariness of the place in which he found himself, disturbed him greatly. Bare floors, stained walls, meagre doorways, and a common pine staircase, lighted only by the miserable candle which the old woman had relit—were these the appointments of the palatial home he had been led to expect? Were these the surroundings, this the abode of him who had exacted such perfection on his part, and to satisfy whose standard he had devoted years of hourly, daily effort in every department of art and science? A sickening revolt seized him, aggravated by the smiles of the old woman, who dipped and courtesied before him in senile delight. She may have divined his feelings, for, drawing him inside, she relieved him of his overcoat, crying all the while, with an extravagant welcome more repulsive than all the rest:

"O the fine laddie! Wad your puir mither could see you the noo! Bonnie and clever! No your faither's bairn ava! All mither, laddie, all mither!"

The room was no better than the hall.

"Where is my father?" he asked, authoritatively, striving to keep down his strong repugnance.

"Dinna ye hear him? He's crying on ye. Puir man, he's wearying to see ye."

Hear him? He could scarcely hear her. The driving rain, the swish of some great boughs against the house, the rattling of casements and doors, and the shrieking of wind in the chimney made all other sounds wellnigh inaudible. Yet as he listened, he seemed to catch the accents of a far-off voice calling, now wistfully, now imperatively, "Thomas! Thomas!" And, thrilled with an emotion almost superstitious in its intensity, he moved hastily toward the staircase.

But the old woman was there before him. "Na! Na!" she cried. "Come in by and eat something first."

But Thomas shook his head. It seemed to him at that moment as if he never could eat or sleep again; the disillusion was so bitter, his disappointment so keen.

"You will na? Then haste ye--haste ye. But it's a peety you wadna ha'e eaten something. Ye'll need it, laddie; ye'll need it."

"Thomas! Thomas!" wailed the voice.

He tore himself away. He forced himself to go upstairs, following the cry, which at every moment grew louder. At the top, he cast a final glance below. The old woman stood at the stair-foot, shading the candle from the draught with a hand that shook with something more than age. She was gazing after him in vague affright, and with the shadow of this fear darkening her weazen face, she formed a picture from which he was glad to escape.

Plunging on, he found himself before a window whose small panes dripped and groaned under a rain that was fast becoming a torrent. Chilled by the sight, he turned toward the door faintly outlined beside it, and in the semi-darkness seized an old-fashioned latch rattling in the wind that permeated every passageway, and softly raised it.

Instantly the door fell back, and two eyes blazing with fever and that fire of the soul of which fever is the mere physical symbol greeted him from the midst of a huge bed drawn up against the opposite wall. Then two arms rose, and the moaning cry of "Thomas! Thomas!" changed to a shout, and he knew himself to be in the presence of his father.

Falling on his knees in speechless emotion, he grasped the wasted hands held out to him. Such a face, rugged though it was and far from fulfilling the promise held out to him in his dreams, could not but move any man. As he gazed into it and pressed the hands in which the life blood only seemed to linger for this last, this only embrace, all his filial instincts were aroused, and he forgot the common surroundings, the depressing rain, his own fatigue and bitter disappointment, in his lifelong craving for love and family recognition.

But the old man on whose breast he fell showed other emotions than those by which he was himself actuated. It was not an embrace he craved, but an opportunity to satisfy an almost frenzied curiosity as to the appearance and attributes of the son who had grown to manhood under other eyes. Pushing him gently back, he bade him stand in the light of the lamp burning on a small pine table, and surveyed him, as it were, from the verge of his own fast-failing life, with moans of mingled pain and weariness, amid which Thomas thought he heard the accents of a supreme satisfaction.

Meanwhile, in Thomas himself, as he stood there, the sense of complete desolation filled his breast almost to bursting. To have come home for this! To find a father only to be weighed in the scales of that father's judgment! To be admired, instead of loved!

As he realized his position and listened to the shrieking of the wind and rain, he felt that the wail of the elements but echoed the cry of his own affections, thus strangled in their birth. Indeed, the sensations of that moment made so deep an impression upon him that he was never afterward able to hear a furious gust of wind or rain without the picture rising up before him of this great hollow room, with
