I’m not absolutely certain of my facts, but I rather fancy it’s Shakespeare—or, if not, it’s some equally brainy lad—who says that it’s always just when a chappie is feeling particularly top-hole, and more than usually braced with things in general that Fate sneaks up behind him with a bit of lead piping. There’s no doubt the man’s right. It’s absolutely that way with me. Take, for instance, the fairly rummy matter of Lady Malvern and her son Wilmot. A moment before they turned up, I was just thinking how thoroughly all right everything was.

It was one of those topping mornings, and I had just climbed out from under the cold shower, feeling like a two-year-old. As a matter of fact, I was especially bucked just then because the day before I had asserted myself with Jeeves—absolutely asserted myself, don’t you know. You see, the way things had been going on I was rapidly becoming a dashed serf. The man had jolly well oppressed me. I didn’t so much mind when he made me give up one of my new suits, because Jeeves’s judgment about suits is sound.

bathroom, wondering what there was going to be for breakfast while I massaged the good old spine with a rough towel and sang slightly, when there was a tap at the door. I stopped singing and opened the door an inch. “What ho without there!” “Lady Malvern wishes to see you, sir,” said Jeeves. “Eh?” “Lady Malvern, sir. She is waiting in the sitting-room.” “Pull yourself together, Jeeves, my man,” I said, rather severely, for I bar practical jokes before breakfast. “You know perfectly well there’s no one waiting for me in the sitting-room. How could there be when it’s barely ten o’clock yet?” “I gathered from her ladyship, sir, that she had landed from an ocean liner at an early hour this morning.” This made the thing a bit more plausible. I remembered that when I had arrived in America about a year before, the proceedings had begun at some ghastly hour like six, and that I had been shot out on to a foreign shore considerably before eight.

came back from the Durbar.” “Yes, sir? Pardon me, sir, but not that tie!” “Eh?” “Not that tie with the heather-mixture lounge, sir!” It was a shock to me. I thought I had quelled the fellow. It was rather a solemn moment. What I mean is, if I weakened now, all my good work the night before would be thrown away. I braced myself. “What’s wrong with this tie? I’ve seen you give it a nasty look before. Speak out like a man! What’s the matter with it?” “Too ornate, sir.” “Nonsense! A cheerful pink. Nothing more.” “Unsuitable, sir.” “Jeeves, this is the tie I wear!” “Very good, sir.” Dashed unpleasant. I could see that the man was wounded. But I was firm. I tied the tie, got into the coat and waistcoat, and went into the sitting-room. “Halloa! Halloa!

and meek-looking. He had the same yellow hair as his mother, but he wore it plastered down and parted in the middle. His eyes bulged, too, but they weren’t bright. They were a dull grey with pink rims. His chin gave up the struggle about half-way down, and he didn’t appear to have any eyelashes. A mild, furtive, sheepish sort of blighter, in short. “Awfully glad to see you,” I said. “So you’ve popped over, eh? Making a long stay in America?” “About a month. Your aunt gave me your address and told me to be sure and call on you.” I was glad to hear this, as it showed that Aunt Agatha was beginning to come round a bit. There had been some unpleasantness a year before, when she had sent me over to New York to disentangle my Cousin Gussie from the clutches of a girl on the music-hall stage.

rather! Absolutely!” “Thank you so much. I want you to put dear Motty up for a little while.” I didn’t get this for a moment. “Put him up? For my clubs?” “No, no! Darling Motty is essentially a home bird. Aren’t you, Motty darling?” Motty, who was sucking the knob of his stick, uncorked himself. “Yes, mother,” he said, and corked himself up again. “I should not like him to belong to clubs. I mean put him up here. Have him to live with you while I am away.” These frightful words trickled out of her like honey. The woman simply didn’t seem to understand the ghastly nature of her proposal. I gave Motty the swift east-to-west. He was sitting with his mouth nuzzling the stick, blinking at the wall. The thought of having this planted on me for an indefinite period appalled me.

but a month should be ample. I was less than a month in India, and my dear friend Sir Roger Cremorne wrote his America from Within after a stay of only two weeks. I should love to take dear Motty with me, but the poor boy gets so sick when he travels by train. I shall have to pick him up on my return.” From where I sat I could see Jeeves in the dining-room, laying the breakfast-table. I wished I could have had a minute with him alone. I felt certain that he would have been able to think of some way of putting a stop to this woman. “It will be such a relief to know that Motty is safe with you, Mr. Wooster. I know what the temptations of a great city are. Hitherto dear Motty has been sheltered from them.

be such a help. Good-bye, Mr. Wooster. I will send Motty back early in the afternoon.” They went out, and I howled for Jeeves. “Jeeves! What about it?” “Sir?” “What’s to be done? You heard it all, didn’t you? You were in the dining-room most of the time. That pill is coming to stay here.” “Pill, sir?” “The excrescence.” “I beg your pardon, sir?” I looked at Jeeves sharply. This sort of thing wasn’t like him. It was as if he were deliberately trying to give me the pip. Then I understood. The man was really upset about that tie. He was trying to get his own back. “Lord Pershore will be staying here from to-night, Jeeves,” I said coldly. “Very good, sir. Breakfast is ready, sir.” I could have sobbed into the bacon and eggs. That there wasn’t any sympathy to be got out of Jeeves was what put the lid on it.

to Aunt Agatha, and I didn’t like to think what would happen then. Sooner or later, I should be wanting to go back to England, and I didn’t want to get there and find Aunt Agatha waiting on the quay for me with a stuffed eelskin. There was absolutely nothing for it but to put the fellow up and make the best of it. About midday Motty’s luggage arrived, and soon afterward a large parcel of what I took to be nice books. I brightened up a little when I saw it. It was one of those massive parcels and looked as if it had enough in it to keep the chappie busy for a year. I felt a trifle more cheerful, and I got my Country Gentleman hat and stuck it on my head, and gave the pink tie a twist, and reeled out to take a bite of lunch with one or two of the lads at a neighbouring hostelry; and what with excellent browsing and sluicing and cheery conversation and what-not, the afternoon passed quite happily.

“His lordship came in shortly after six-thirty, and, having dressed, went out again.” At this moment there was a noise outside the front door, a sort of scrabbling noise, as if somebody were trying to paw his way through the woodwork. Then a sort of thud. “Better go and see what that is, Jeeves.” “Very good, sir.” He went out and came back again. “If you would not mind stepping this way, sir, I think we might be able to carry him in.” “Carry him in?” “His lordship is lying on the mat, sir.” I went to the front door. The man was right. There was Motty huddled up outside on the floor. He was moaning a bit. “He’s had some sort of dashed fit,” I said. I took another look. “Jeeves! Someone’s been feeding him meat!” “Sir?” “He’s a vegetarian, you know.

down a thoughtful cup of tea, I went into Motty’s room to investigate. I expected to find the fellow a wreck, but there he was, sitting up in bed, quite chirpy, reading Gingery stories. “What ho!” I said. “What ho!” said Motty. “What ho! What ho!” “What ho! What ho! What ho!” After that it seemed rather difficult to go on with the conversation. “How are you feeling this morning?” I asked. “Topping!” replied Motty, blithely and with abandon. “I say, you know, that fellow of yours—Jeeves, you know—is a corker. I had a most frightful headache when I woke up, and he brought me a sort of rummy dark drink, and it put me right again at once. Said it was his own invention. I must see more of that lad. He seems to me distinctly one of the ones!” I couldn’t believe that this was the same blighter who had sat and sucked his stick the day before.

holy exaltation, “tap me on the shoulder and say, ‘Tut! Tut!’ and I’ll apologize and remedy the defect.” “But I say, you know, what about me?” “What about you?” “Well, I’m, so to speak, as it were, kind of responsible for you. What I mean to say is, if you go doing this sort of thing I’m apt to get in the soup somewhat.” “I can’t help your troubles,” said Motty firmly. “Listen to me, old thing: this is the first time in my life that I’ve had a real chance to yield to the temptations of a great city. What’s the use of a great city having temptations if fellows don’t yield to them? Makes it so bally discouraging for a great city. Besides, mother told me to keep my eyes open and collect impressions.” I sat on the edge of the bed.

for the long winter evenings. This is my only chance to collect a past, and I’m going to do it. Now tell me, old sport, as man to man, how does one get in touch with that very decent chappie Jeeves? Does one ring a bell or shout a bit? I should like to discuss the subject of a good stiff b.-and-s. with him!” I had had a sort of vague idea, don’t you know, that if I stuck close to Motty and went about the place with him, I might act as a bit of a damper on the gaiety. What I mean is, I thought that if, when he was being the life and soul of the party, he were to catch my reproving eye he might ease up a trifle on the revelry. So the next night I took him along to supper with me.

with Motty. The only time I met him late at night after that was once when I passed the door of a fairly low-down sort of restaurant and had to step aside to dodge him as he sailed through the air en route for the opposite pavement, with a muscular sort of looking chappie peering out after him with a kind of gloomy satisfaction. In a way, I couldn’t help sympathizing with the fellow. He had about four weeks to have the good time that ought to have been spread over about ten years, and I didn’t wonder at his wanting to be pretty busy. I should have been just the same in his place. Still, there was no denying that it was a bit thick. If it hadn’t been for the thought of Lady Malvern and Aunt Agatha in the background, I should have regarded Motty’s rapid work with an indulgent smile.

to have chucked all the principles of a well-spent boyhood. He has got it up his nose!” “Yes, sir.” “Well, I shall get blamed, don’t you know. You know what my Aunt Agatha is!” “Yes, sir.” “Very well, then.” I waited a moment, but he wouldn’t unbend. “Jeeves,” I said, “haven’t you any scheme up your sleeve for coping with this blighter?” “No, sir.” And he shimmered off to his lair. Obstinate devil! So dashed absurd, don’t you know. It wasn’t as if there was anything wrong with that Country Gentleman hat. It was a remarkably priceless effort, and much admired by the lads. But, just because he preferred the Longacre, he left me flat. It was shortly after this that young Motty got the idea of bringing pals back in the small hours to continue the gay revels in the home.

Street the atmosphere wasn’t right, and when Motty turned up at three in the morning with a collection of hearty lads, who only stopped singing their college song when they started singing “The Old Oaken Bucket,” there was a marked peevishness among the old settlers in the flats. The management was extremely terse over the telephone at breakfast-time, and took a lot of soothing. The next night I came home early, after a lonely dinner at a place which I’d chosen because there didn’t seem any chance of meeting Motty there. The sitting-room was quite dark, and I was just moving to switch on the light, when there was a sort of explosion and something collared hold of my trouser-leg. Living with Motty had reduced me to such an extent that I was simply unable to cope with this thing.

down as if he had had a bromide, and rolled over on his back with all his paws in the air. If Jeeves had been his rich uncle he couldn’t have been more chummy. Yet directly he caught sight of me again, he got all worked up and seemed to have only one idea in life—to start chewing me where he had left off. “Rollo is not used to you yet, sir,” said Jeeves, regarding the bally quadruped in an admiring sort of way. “He is an excellent watchdog.” “I don’t want a watchdog to keep me out of my rooms.” “No, sir.” “Well, what am I to do?” “No doubt in time the animal will learn to discriminate, sir. He will learn to distinguish your peculiar scent.” “What do you mean—my peculiar scent? Correct the impression that I intend to hang about in the hall while life slips by, in the hope that one of these days that dashed animal will decide that I smell all right.” I thought for a bit.

“Jeeves!” “Sir?” “I’m going away—to-morrow morning by the first train. I shall go and stop with Mr. Todd in the country.” “Do you wish me to accompany you, sir?” “No.” “Very good, sir.” “I don’t know when I shall be back. Forward my letters.” “Yes, sir.” As a matter of fact, I was back within the week. Rocky Todd, the pal I went to stay with, is a rummy sort of a chap who lives all alone in the wilds of Long Island, and likes it; but a little of that sort of thing goes a long way with me. Dear old Rocky is one of the best, but after a few days in his cottage in the woods, miles away from anywhere, New York, even with Motty on the premises, began to look pretty good to me.

he had a lot of intelligence in him. “Ripping!” I said. “Is Lord Pershore in, Jeeves?” “No, sir.” “Do you expect him back to dinner?” “No, sir.” “Where is he?” “In prison, sir.” Have you ever trodden on a rake and had the handle jump up and hit you? That’s how I felt then. “In prison!” “Yes, sir.” “You don’t mean—in prison?” “Yes, sir.” I lowered myself into a chair. “Why?” I said. “He assaulted a constable, sir.” “Lord Pershore assaulted a constable!” “Yes, sir.” I digested this. “But, Jeeves, I say! This is frightful!” “Sir?” “What will Lady Malvern say when she finds out?” “I do not fancy that her ladyship will find out, sir.” “But she’ll come back and want to know where he is.” “I rather fancy, sir, that his lordship’s bit of time will have run out by then.” “But supposing it hasn’t?” “In that event, sir, it may be judicious to prevaricate a little.” “How?” “If I might make the suggestion, sir, I should inform her ladyship that his lordship has left for a short visit to Boston.” “Why Boston?” “Very interesting and respectable centre, sir.” “Jeeves, I believe you’ve hit it.” “I fancy so, sir.” “Why, this is really the best thing that could have happened.

If this hadn’t turned up to prevent him, young Motty would have been in a sanatorium by the time Lady Malvern got back.” “Exactly, sir.” The more I looked at it in that way, the sounder this prison wheeze seemed to me. There was no doubt in the world that prison was just what the doctor ordered for Motty. It was the only thing that could have pulled him up. I was sorry for the poor blighter, but, after all, I reflected, a chappie who had lived all his life with Lady Malvern, in a small village in the interior of Shropshire, wouldn’t have much to kick at in a prison.

the announcement that he had just loosed her into the sitting-room. I draped a few garments round me and went in. There she was, sitting in the same arm-chair, looking as massive as ever. The only difference was that she didn’t uncover the teeth, as she had done the first time. “Good morning,” I said. “So you’ve got back, what?” “I have got back.” There was something sort of bleak about her tone, rather as if she had swallowed an east wind. This I took to be due to the fact that she probably hadn’t breakfasted. It’s only after a bit of breakfast that I’m able to regard the world with that sunny cheeriness which makes a fellow the universal favourite. I’m never much of a lad till I’ve engulfed an egg or two and a beaker of coffee. “I suppose you haven’t breakfasted?” “I have not yet breakfasted.” “Won’t you have an egg or something?

morning, and have a bit of lunch at some good vegetarian place, and then toddle along to a sacred concert in the afternoon, and home to an early dinner. We usually played dominoes after dinner. And then the early bed and the refreshing sleep. We had a great time. I was awfully sorry when he went away to Boston.” “Oh! Wilmot is in Boston?” “Yes. I ought to have let you know, but of course we didn’t know where you were. You were dodging all over the place like a snipe—I mean, don’t you know, dodging all over the place, and we couldn’t get at you. Yes, Motty went off to Boston.” “You’re sure he went to Boston?” “Oh, absolutely.” I called out to Jeeves, who was now messing about in the next room with forks and so forth: “Jeeves, Lord Pershore didn’t change his mind about going to Boston, did he?” “No, sir.” “I thought I was right.

how you have looked after my poor, dear boy, Mr. Wooster! So this is how you have abused my trust! I left him in your charge, thinking that I could rely on you to shield him from evil. He came to you innocent, unversed in the ways of the world, confiding, unused to the temptations of a large city, and you led him astray!” I hadn’t any remarks to make. All I could think of was the picture of Aunt Agatha drinking all this in and reaching out to sharpen the hatchet against my return. “You deliberately——” Far away in the misty distance a soft voice spoke: “If I might explain, your ladyship.” Jeeves had projected himself in from the dining-room and materialized on the rug. Lady Malvern tried to freeze him with a look, but you can’t do that sort of thing to Jeeves.

I took the liberty of telling him that his lordship had gone away for a visit. It might have been hard for Mr. Wooster to believe that his lordship had gone to prison voluntarily and from the best motives, but your ladyship, knowing him better, will readily understand.” “What!” Lady Malvern goggled at him. “Did you say that Lord Pershore went to prison voluntarily?” “If I might explain, your ladyship. I think that your ladyship’s parting words made a deep impression on his lordship. I have frequently heard him speak to Mr. Wooster of his desire to do something to follow your ladyship’s instructions and collect material for your ladyship’s book on America. Mr. Wooster will bear me out when I say that his lordship was frequently extremely depressed at the thought that he was doing so little to help.” “Absolutely, by Jove!

I hadn’t lured that blighter into riotous living.” “I fancy you are right, sir.” I champed my egg for a bit. I was most awfully moved, don’t you know, by the way Jeeves had rallied round. Something seemed to tell me that this was an occasion that called for rich rewards. For a moment I hesitated. Then I made up my mind. “Jeeves!” “Sir?” “That pink tie!” “Yes, sir?” “Burn it!” “Thank you, sir.” “And, Jeeves!” “Yes, sir?” “Take a taxi and get me that Longacre hat, as worn by John Drew!” “Thank you very much, sir.” I felt most awfully braced. I felt as if the clouds had rolled away and all was as it used to be. I felt like one of those chappies in the novels who calls off the fight with his wife in the last chapter and decides to forget and forgive.
