Sometimes of a morning, as I’ve sat in bed sucking down the early cup of tea and watched my man Jeeves flitting about the room and putting out the raiment for the day, I’ve wondered what the deuce I should do if the fellow ever took it into his head to leave me. It’s not so bad now I’m in New York, but in London the anxiety was frightful. There used to be all sorts of attempts on the part of low blighters to sneak him away from me. Young Reggie Foljambe to my certain knowledge offered him double what I was giving him, and Alistair Bingham-Reeves, who’s got a valet who had been known to press his trousers sideways, used to look at him, when he came to see me, with a kind of glittering hungry eye which disturbed me deucedly.

the hard-boiled egg. It happened after I had been in America for a few months. I got back to the flat latish one night, and when Jeeves brought me the final drink he said: “Mr. Bickersteth called to see you this evening, sir, while you were out.” “Oh?” I said. “Twice, sir. He appeared a trifle agitated.” “What, pipped?” “He gave that impression, sir.” I sipped the whisky. I was sorry if Bicky was in trouble, but, as a matter of fact, I was rather glad to have something I could discuss freely with Jeeves just then, because things had been a bit strained between us for some time, and it had been rather difficult to hit on anything to talk about that wasn’t apt to take a personal turn. You see, I had decided—rightly or wrongly—to grow a moustache and this had cut Jeeves to the quick.

bulldog pluck and defy the blighter. “He said that he would call again later, sir.” “Something must be up, Jeeves.” “Yes, sir.” I gave the moustache a thoughtful twirl. It seemed to hurt Jeeves a good deal, so I chucked it. “I see by the paper, sir, that Mr. Bickersteth’s uncle is arriving on the Carmantic .” “Yes?” “His Grace the Duke of Chiswick, sir.” This was news to me, that Bicky’s uncle was a duke. Rum, how little one knows about one’s pals! I had met Bicky for the first time at a species of beano or jamboree down in Washington Square, not long after my arrival in New York. I suppose I was a bit homesick at the time, and I rather took to Bicky when I found that he was an Englishman and had, in fact, been up at Oxford with me.

time to time by sending him monthly remittances. “If the Duke of Chiswick is his uncle,” I said, “why hasn’t he a title? Why isn’t he Lord What-Not?” “Mr. Bickersteth is the son of his grace’s late sister, sir, who married Captain Rollo Bickersteth of the Coldstream Guards.” Jeeves knows everything. “Is Mr. Bickersteth’s father dead, too?” “Yes, sir.” “Leave any money?” “No, sir.” I began to understand why poor old Bicky was always more or less on the rocks. To the casual and irreflective observer, if you know what I mean, it may sound a pretty good wheeze having a duke for an uncle, but the trouble about old Chiswick was that, though an extremely wealthy old buster, owning half London and about five counties up north, he was notoriously the most prudent spender in England. He was what American chappies would call a hard-boiled egg.

was thinking just now myself.” “Well, I wish,” said Bicky gloomily, “that he knew a way to get me out of the hole I’m in.” Jeeves shimmered in with the glass, and stuck it competently on the table. “Mr. Bickersteth is in a bit of a hole, Jeeves,” I said, “and wants you to rally round.” “Very good, sir.” Bicky looked a bit doubtful. “Well, of course, you know, Bertie, this thing is by way of being a bit private and all that.” “I shouldn’t worry about that, old top. I bet Jeeves knows all about it already. Don’t you, Jeeves?” “Yes, sir.” “Eh!” said Bicky, rattled. “I am open to correction, sir, but is not your dilemma due to the fact that you are at a loss to explain to his grace why you are in New York instead of in Colorado?” Bicky rocked like a jelly in a high wind.

call it, at some bally ranch or farm or whatever it’s called. I didn’t fancy the idea a bit. I should have had to ride horses and pursue cows, and so forth. I hate horses. They bite at you. I was all against the scheme. At the same time, don’t you know, I had to have that remittance.” “I get you absolutely, dear boy.” “Well, when I got to New York it looked a decent sort of place to me, so I thought it would be a pretty sound notion to stop here. So I cabled to my uncle telling him that I had dropped into a good business wheeze in the city and wanted to chuck the ranch idea. He wrote back that it was all right, and here I’ve been ever since. He thinks I’m doing well at something or other over here.

I can for you, of course, Bicky, old man.” “Then, if I might make the suggestion, sir, you might lend Mr. Bickersteth——” “No, by Jove!” said Bicky firmly. “I never have touched you, Bertie, and I’m not going to start now. I may be a chump, but it’s my boast that I don’t owe a penny to a single soul—not counting tradesmen, of course.” “I was about to suggest, sir, that you might lend Mr. Bickersteth this flat. Mr. Bickersteth could give his grace the impression that he was the owner of it. With your permission I could convey the notion that I was in Mr. Bickersteth’s employment, and not in yours. You would be residing here temporarily as Mr. Bickersteth’s guest. His grace would occupy the second spare bedroom. I fancy that you would find this answer satisfactorily, sir.” Bicky had stopped rocking himself and was staring at Jeeves in an awed sort of way.

that meet the situation, sir?” “Absolutely.” “Thank you, sir.” Bicky followed him with his eye till the door closed. “How does he do it, Bertie?” he said. “I’ll tell you what I think it is. I believe it’s something to do with the shape of his head. Have you ever noticed his head, Bertie, old man? It sort of sticks out at the back!” I hopped out of bed early next morning, so as to be among those present when the old boy should arrive. I knew from experience that these ocean liners fetch up at the dock at a deucedly ungodly hour. It wasn’t much after nine by the time I’d dressed and had my morning tea and was leaning out of the window, watching the street for Bicky and his uncle. It was one of those jolly, peaceful mornings that make a chappie wish he’d got a soul or something, and I was just brooding on life in general when I became aware of the dickens of a spate in progress down below.

you do, sir?” I said, bustling up and being the ray of sunshine. “Your nephew went down to the dock to meet you, but you must have missed him. My name’s Wooster, don’t you know. Great pal of Bicky’s, and all that sort of thing. I’m staying with him, you know. Would you like a cup of tea? Jeeves, bring a cup of tea.” Old Chiswick had sunk into an arm-chair and was looking about the room. “Does this luxurious flat belong to my nephew Francis?” “Absolutely.” “It must be terribly expensive.” “Pretty well, of course. Everything costs a lot over here, you know.” He moaned. Jeeves filtered in with the tea. Old Chiswick took a stab at it to restore his tissues, and nodded. “A terrible country, Mr. Wooster! A terrible country! Nearly eight shillings for a short cab-drive!

of. It sort of develops them. Something in the air, don’t you know. I imagine that Bicky in the past, when you knew him, may have been something of a chump, but it’s quite different now. Devilish efficient sort of chappie, and looked on in commercial circles as quite the nib!” “I am amazed! What is the nature of my nephew’s business, Mr. Wooster?” “Oh, just business, don’t you know. The same sort of thing Carnegie and Rockefeller and all these coves do, you know.” I slid for the door. “Awfully sorry to leave you, but I’ve got to meet some of the lads elsewhere.” Coming out of the lift I met Bicky bustling in from the street. “Halloa, Bertie! I missed him. Has he turned up?” “He’s upstairs now, having some tea.” “What does he think of it all?” “He’s absolutely rattled.” “Ripping!

Mr. Bickersteth is doing well in business, and all that sort of thing?” “Exactly, sir. With the result that he has decided to cancel Mr. Bickersteth’s monthly allowance, on the ground that, as Mr. Bickersteth is doing so well on his own account, he no longer requires pecuniary assistance.” “Great Scot, Jeeves! This is awful.” “Somewhat disturbing, sir.” “I never expected anything like this!” “I confess I scarcely anticipated the contingency myself, sir.” “I suppose it bowled the poor blighter over absolutely?” “Mr. Bickersteth appeared somewhat taken aback, sir.” My heart bled for Bicky. “We must do something, Jeeves.” “Yes, sir.” “Can you think of anything?” “Not at the moment, sir.” “There must be something we can do.” “Well, have a stab at it, Jeeves!” “I will spare no pains, sir.” I went and dressed sadly. It will show you pretty well how pipped I was when I tell you that I near as a toucher put on a white tie with a dinner-jacket.

the aspect of one who had been soaked with what the newspaper chappies call “some blunt instrument.” “This is a bit thick, old thing—what!” I said. He picked up his glass and drained it feverishly, overlooking the fact that it hadn’t anything in it. “I’m done, Bertie!” he said. He had another go at the glass. It didn’t seem to do him any good. “If only this had happened a week later, Bertie! My next month’s money was due to roll in on Saturday. I could have worked a wheeze I’ve been reading about in the magazine advertisements. It seems that you can make a dashed amount of money if you can only collect a few dollars and start a chicken-farm. Jolly sound scheme, Bertie! Say you buy a hen—call it one hen for the sake of argument. It lays an egg every day of the week.

He had begun to get quite worked up at the thought of it, but he slopped back in his chair at this juncture with a good deal of gloom. “But, of course, it’s no good,” he said, “because I haven’t the cash.” “You’ve only to say the word, you know, Bicky, old top.” “Thanks awfully, Bertie, but I’m not going to sponge on you.” That’s always the way in this world. The chappies you’d like to lend money to won’t let you, whereas the chappies you don’t want to lend it to will do everything except actually stand you on your head and lift the specie out of your pockets. As a lad who has always rolled tolerably free in the right stuff, I’ve had lots of experience of the second class. Many’s the time, back in London, I’ve hurried along Piccadilly and felt the hot breath of the toucher on the back of my neck and heard his sharp, excited yapping as he closed in on me.

thing startled poor old Bicky considerably. He rose from his seat like a rocketing pheasant. I’m used to Jeeves now, but often in the days when he first came to me I’ve bitten my tongue freely on finding him unexpectedly in my midst. “Did you call, sir?” “Oh, there you are, Jeeves!” “Precisely, sir.” “Jeeves, Mr. Bickersteth is still up the pole. Any ideas?” “Why, yes, sir. Since we had our recent conversation I fancy I have found what may prove a solution. I do not wish to appear to be taking a liberty, sir, but I think that we have overlooked his grace’s potentialities as a source of revenue.” Bicky laughed, what I have sometimes seen described as a hollow, mocking laugh, a sort of bitter cackle from the back of the throat, rather like a gargle. “I do not allude, sir,” explained Jeeves, “to the possibility of inducing his grace to part with money.

uncle?” “I have an aunt, sir, who paid five shillings to a young fellow for bringing a moving-picture actor to tea at her house one Sunday. It gave her social standing among the neighbours.” Bicky wavered. “If you think it could be done——” “I feel convinced of it, sir.” “What do you think, Bertie?” “I’m for it, old boy, absolutely. A very brainy wheeze.” “Thank you, sir. Will there be anything further? Good night, sir.” And he floated out, leaving us to discuss details. Until we started this business of floating old Chiswick as a money-making proposition I had never realized what a perfectly foul time those Stock Exchange chappies must have when the public isn’t biting freely. Nowadays I read that bit they put in the financial reports about “The market opened quietly” with a sympathetic eye, for, by Jove, it certainly opened quietly for us!

have been off if it hadn’t been for Jeeves. There is no doubt that Jeeves is in a class of his own. In the matter of brain and resource I don’t think I have ever met a chappie so supremely like mother made. He trickled into my room one morning with a good old cup of tea, and intimated that there was something doing. “Might I speak to you with regard to that matter of his grace, sir?” “It’s all off. We’ve decided to chuck it.” “Sir?” “It won’t work. We can’t get anybody to come.” “I fancy I can arrange that aspect of the matter, sir.” “Do you mean to say you’ve managed to get anybody?” “Yes, sir. Eighty-seven gentlemen from Birdsburg, sir.” I sat up in bed and spilt the tea. “Birdsburg?” “Birdsburg, Missouri, sir.” “How did you get them?” “I happened last night, sir, as you had intimated that you would be absent from home, to attend a theatrical performance, and entered into conversation between the acts with the occupant of the adjoining seat.

been introduced to and had shaken hands with a well-known prizefighter, that it occurred to me to broach the subject of his grace. To make a long story short, sir, I have arranged, subject to your approval, that the entire convention shall be presented to his grace to-morrow afternoon.” I was amazed. This chappie was a Napoleon. “Eighty-seven, Jeeves. At how much a head?” “I was obliged to agree to a reduction for quantity, sir. The terms finally arrived at were one hundred and fifty dollars for the party.” I thought a bit. “Payable in advance?” “No, sir. I endeavoured to obtain payment in advance, but was not successful.” “Well, any way, when we get it I’ll make it up to five hundred. Bicky’ll never know. Do you suspect Mr. Bickersteth would suspect anything, Jeeves, if I made it up to five hundred?” “I fancy not, sir.

boat was approaching the dock. I will not be subjected to this persecution again.” “That’ll be absolutely all right, uncle. There won’t be a newspaper-man in the place.” “In that case I shall be glad to make the acquaintance of your friends.” “You’ll shake hands with them and so forth?” “I shall naturally order my behaviour according to the accepted rules of civilized intercourse.” Bicky thanked him heartily and came off to lunch with me at the club, where he babbled freely of hens, incubators, and other rotten things. After mature consideration we had decided to unleash the Birdsburg contingent on the old boy ten at a time. Jeeves brought his theatre pal round to see us, and we arranged the whole thing with him. A very decent chappie, but rather inclined to collar the conversation and turn it in the direction of his home-town’s new water-supply system.

chatty. “What message have you for Birdsburg, Duke?” asked our pal. The old boy seemed a bit rattled. “I have never been to Birdsburg.” The chappie seemed pained. “You should pay it a visit,” he said. “The most rapidly-growing city in the country. Boost for Birdsburg!” “Boost for Birdsburg!” said the other chappies reverently. The chappie who had been brooding suddenly gave tongue. “Say!” He was a stout sort of well-fed cove with one of those determined chins and a cold eye. The assemblage looked at him. “As a matter of business,” said the chappie—“mind you, I’m not questioning anybody’s good faith, but, as a matter of strict business—I think this gentleman here ought to put himself on record before witnesses as stating that he really is a duke.” “What do you mean, sir?” cried the old boy, getting purple.

guarantees of good faith. We are paying Mr. Bickersteth here a hundred and fifty dollars for this reception, and we naturally want to know——” Old Chiswick gave Bicky a searching look; then he turned to the water-supply chappie. He was frightfully calm. “I can assure you that I know nothing of this,” he said, quite politely. “I should be grateful if you would explain.” “Well, we arranged with Mr. Bickersteth that eighty-seven citizens of Birdsburg should have the privilege of meeting and shaking hands with you for a financial consideration mutually arranged, and what my friend Simms here means—and I’m with him—is that we have only Mr. Bickersteth’s word for it—and he is a stranger to us—that you are the Duke of Chiswick at all.” Old Chiswick gulped. “Allow me to assure you, sir,” he said, in a rummy kind of voice, “that I am the Duke of Chiswick.” “Then that’s all right,” said the chappie heartily.

Then old Chiswick turned to Bicky: “Well?” Bicky didn’t seem to have anything to say. “Was it true what that man said?” “Yes, uncle.” “What do you mean by playing this trick?” Bicky seemed pretty well knocked out, so I put in a word. “I think you’d better explain the whole thing, Bicky, old top.” Bicky’s Adam’s-apple jumped about a bit; then he started: “You see, you had cut off my allowance, uncle, and I wanted a bit of money to start a chicken farm. I mean to say it’s an absolute cert if you once get a bit of capital. You buy a hen, and it lays an egg every day of the week, and you sell the eggs, say, seven for twenty-five cents. “Keep of hens cost nothing. Profit practically——” “What is all this nonsense about hens? You led me to suppose you were a substantial business man.” “Old Bicky rather exaggerated, sir,” I said, helping the chappie out.

wants is a bit of capital. Don’t you think it would be rather a wheeze if you were to——” “After what has happened? After this—this deceit and foolery? Not a penny!” “But——” “Not a penny!” There was a respectful cough in the background. “If I might make a suggestion, sir?” Jeeves was standing on the horizon, looking devilish brainy. “Go ahead, Jeeves!” I said. “I would merely suggest, sir, that if Mr. Bickersteth is in need of a little ready money, and is at a loss to obtain it elsewhere, he might secure the sum he requires by describing the occurrences of this afternoon for the Sunday issue of one of the more spirited and enterprising newspapers.” “By Jove!” I said. “By George!” said Bicky. “Great heavens!” said old Chiswick. “Very good, sir,” said Jeeves. Bicky turned to old Chiswick with a gleaming eye.

is a recognized figure——” “The only figure I’ll recognize,” said Bicky firmly, “is five hundred quid a year, paid quarterly.” “My dear boy!” “Absolutely!” “But your recompense, my dear Francis, would consist in the unrivalled opportunities you would have, as my secretary, to gain experience, to accustom yourself to the intricacies of political life, to—in fact, you would be in an exceedingly advantageous position.” “Five hundred a year!” said Bicky, rolling it round his tongue. “Why, that would be nothing to what I could make if I started a chicken farm. It stands to reason. Suppose you have a dozen hens. Each of the hens has a dozen chickens. After a bit the chickens grow up and have a dozen chickens each themselves, and then they all start laying eggs! There’s a fortune in it. You can get anything you like for eggs in America.
