I think one of the rummiest affairs I was ever mixed up with, in the course of a lifetime devoted to butting into other people’s business, was that affair of George Lattaker at Monte Carlo. I wouldn’t bore you, don’t you know, for the world, but I think you ought to hear about it. We had come to Monte Carlo on the yacht Circe , belonging to an old sportsman of the name of Marshall. Among those present were myself, my man Voules, a Mrs. Vanderley, her daughter Stella, Mrs. Vanderley’s maid Pilbeam and George. George was a dear old pal of mine. In fact, it was I who had worked him into the party. You see, George was due to meet his Uncle Augustus, who was scheduled, George having just reached his twenty-fifth birthday, to hand over to him a legacy left by one of George’s aunts, for which he had been trustee.

struck me that a far better plan was for George to go to his uncle at Monte Carlo instead. Kill two birds with one stone, don’t you know. Fix up his affairs and have a pleasant holiday simultaneously. So George had tagged along, and at the time when the trouble started we were anchored in Monaco Harbour, and Uncle Augustus was due next day. Looking back, I may say that, so far as I was mixed up in it, the thing began at seven o’clock in the morning, when I was aroused from a dreamless sleep by the dickens of a scrap in progress outside my state-room door. The chief ingredients were a female voice that sobbed and said: “Oh, Harold!” and a male voice “raised in anger,” as they say, which after considerable difficulty, I identified as Voules’s. I hardly recognized it.

roof. Who was that with you?” “Miss Pilbeam, sir; Mrs. Vanderley’s maid.” “What was all the trouble about?” “I was breaking our engagement, sir.” I couldn’t help gaping. Somehow one didn’t associate Voules with engagements. Then it struck me that I’d no right to butt in on his secret sorrows, so I switched the conversation. “I think I’ll get up,” I said. “Yes, sir.” “I can’t wait to breakfast with the rest. Can you get me some right away?” “Yes, sir.” So I had a solitary breakfast and went up on deck to smoke. It was a lovely morning. Blue sea, gleaming Casino, cloudless sky, and all the rest of the hippodrome. Presently the others began to trickle up. Stella Vanderley was one of the first. I thought she looked a bit pale and tired. She said she hadn’t slept well.

Lattaker,” she said. I didn’t pursue the subject. George’s stock was apparently low that a.m. The next item in the day’s programme occurred a few minutes later when the morning papers arrived. Mrs. Vanderley opened hers and gave a scream. “The poor, dear Prince!” she said. “What a shocking thing!” said old Marshall. “I knew him in Vienna,” said Mrs. Vanderley. “He waltzed divinely.” Then I got at mine and saw what they were talking about. The paper was full of it. It seemed that late the night before His Serene Highness the Prince of Saxburg-Leignitz (I always wonder why they call these chaps “Serene”) had been murderously assaulted in a dark street on his way back from the Casino to his yacht. Apparently he had developed the habit of going about without an escort, and some rough-neck, taking advantage of this, had laid for him and slugged him with considerable vim.

looked round the group, and fixed on old Marshall as the probable owner of the yacht. “Good morning,” he said. “I believe you have a Mr. Lattaker on board—Mr. George Lattaker?” “Yes,” said Marshall. “He’s down below. Want to see him? Whom shall I say?” “He would not know my name. I should like to see him for a moment on somewhat urgent business.” “Take a seat. He’ll be up in a moment. Reggie, my boy, go and hurry him up.” I went down to George’s state-room. “George, old man!” I shouted. No answer. I opened the door and went in. The room was empty. What’s more, the bunk hadn’t been slept in. I don’t know when I’ve been more surprised. I went on deck. “He isn’t there,” I said. “Not there!” said old Marshall. “Where is he, then? Perhaps he’s gone for a stroll ashore.

the sense of it? How do you suppose you can ever make yourself popular if you go about touching people on the shoulder? My nerves are sticking a yard out of my body this morning, Reggie!” “Yes, old boy?” “I did a murder last night.” “What?” “It’s the sort of thing that might happen to anybody. Directly Stella Vanderley broke off our engagement I——” “Broke off your engagement? How long were you engaged?” “About two minutes. It may have been less. I hadn’t a stop-watch. I proposed to her at ten last night in the saloon. She accepted me. I was just going to kiss her when we heard someone coming. I went out. Coming along the corridor was that infernal what’s-her-name—Mrs. Vanderley’s maid—Pilbeam. Have you ever been accepted by the girl you love, Reggie?” “Never. I’ve been refused dozens——” “Then you won’t understand how I felt.

worth. I woke up this morning in the Casino gardens. I’ve lost my hat.” I dived for the paper. “Read,” I said. “It’s all there.” He read. “Good heavens!” he said. “You didn’t do a thing to His Serene Nibs, did you?” “Reggie, this is awful.” “Cheer up. They say he’ll recover.” “That doesn’t matter.” “It does to him.” He read the paper again. “It says they’ve a clue.” “They always say that.” “But—My hat!” “Eh?” “My hat. I must have dropped it during the scrap. This man, Denman Sturgis, must have found it. It had my name in it!” “George,” I said, “you mustn’t waste time. Oh!” He jumped a foot in the air. “Don’t do it!” he said, irritably. “Don’t bark like that. What’s the matter?” “The man!” “What man?” “A tall, thin man with an eye like a gimlet.

Voules came up the companion-way, carrying a letter on a tray. “What’s the matter!” I said. “What do you want?” “I beg your pardon, sir. I thought I heard Mr. Lattaker’s voice. A letter has arrived for him.” “He isn’t here.” “No, sir. Shall I remove the letter?” “No; give it to me. I’ll give it to him when he comes.” “Very good, sir.” “Oh, Voules! Are they all still at breakfast? The gentleman who came to see Mr. Lattaker? Still hard at it?” “He is at present occupied with a kippered herring, sir.” “Ah! That’s all, Voules.” “Thank you, sir.” He retired. I called to George, and he came out. “Who was it?” “Only Voules. He brought a letter for you. They’re all at breakfast still. The sleuth’s eating kippers.” “That’ll hold him for a bit. Full of bones.” He began to read his letter.

He gave a kind of grunt of surprise at the first paragraph. “Well, I’m hanged!” he said, as he finished. “Reggie, this is a queer thing.” “What’s that?” He handed me the letter, and directly I started in on it I saw why he had grunted. This is how it ran: “My dear George—I shall be seeing you to-morrow, I hope; but I think it is better, before we meet, to prepare you for a curious situation that has arisen in connection with the legacy which your father inherited from your Aunt Emily, and which you are expecting me, as trustee, to hand over to you, now that you have reached your twenty-fifth birthday. You have doubtless heard your father speak of your twin-brother Alfred, who was lost or kidnapped—which, was never ascertained—when you were both babies.

some time. But I will go fully into the matter with you when we meet.—Your affectionate uncle, “AUGUSTUS ARBUTT.” I read it through twice, and the second time I had one of those ideas I do sometimes get, though admittedly a chump of the premier class. I have seldom had such a thoroughly corking brain-wave. “Why, old top,” I said, “this lets you out.” “Lets me out of half the darned money, if that’s what you mean. If this chap’s not an imposter—and there’s no earthly reason to suppose he is, though I’ve never heard my father say a word about him—we shall have to split the money. Aunt Emily’s will left the money to my father, or, failing him, his ‘offspring.’ I thought that meant me, but apparently there are a crowd of us. I call it rotten work, springing unexpected offspring on a fellow at the eleventh hour like this.” “Why, you chump,” I said, “it’s going to save you.

to sink into him. His face brightened. “Why, I really do believe it would work,” he said. “Of course it would work. If they want proof, show them your mole. I’ll swear George hadn’t one.” “And as Alfred I should get a chance of talking to Stella and making things all right for George. Reggie, old top, you’re a genius.” “No, no.” “You are .” “Well, it’s only sometimes. I can’t keep it up.” And just then there was a gentle cough behind us. We spun round. “What the devil are you doing here, Voules,” I said. “I beg your pardon, sir. I have heard all.” I looked at George. George looked at me. “Voules is all right,” I said. “Decent Voules! Voules wouldn’t give us away, would you, Voules?” “Yes, sir.” “You would?” “Yes, sir.” “But, Voules, old man,” I said, “be sensible.

promise of another hundred when we had got safely away, before he was satisfied. But we fixed it up at last, and poor old George got down to his state-room and changed his clothes. He’d hardly gone when the breakfast-party came on deck. “Did you meet him?” I asked. “Meet whom?” said old Marshall. “George’s twin-brother Alfred.” “I didn’t know George had a brother.” “Nor did he till yesterday. It’s a long story. He was kidnapped in infancy, and everyone thought he was dead. George had a letter from his uncle about him yesterday. I shouldn’t wonder if that’s where George has gone, to see his uncle and find out about it. In the meantime, Alfred has arrived. He’s down in George’s state-room now, having a brush-up. It’ll amaze you, the likeness between them. You’ll think it is George at first.

mole. His collar hid it at ordinary times. I had seen it often when we were bathing together. “Has George a mole like that?” he asked. “No,” I said. “Oh, no.” “You would have noticed it if he had?” “Yes,” I said. “Oh, yes.” “I’m glad of that,” said George. “It would be a nuisance not to be able to prove one’s own identity.” That seemed to satisfy them all. They couldn’t get away from it. It seemed to me that from now on the thing was a walk-over. And I think George felt the same, for, when old Marshall asked him if he had had breakfast, he said he had not, went below, and pitched in as if he hadn’t a care in the world. Everything went right till lunch-time. George sat in the shade on the foredeck talking to Stella most of the time.

intend to stay here? He seems to have taken root.” “I fancy he thinks that you’re bound to come back sooner or later, and is waiting for you.” “He’s an absolute nuisance,” said George. We were moving towards the companion way, to go below for lunch, when a boat hailed us. We went to the side and looked over. “It’s my uncle,” said George. A stout man came up the gangway. “Halloa, George!” he said. “Get my letter?” “I think you are mistaking me for my brother,” said George. “My name is Alfred Lattaker.” “What’s that?” “I am George’s brother Alfred. Are you my Uncle Augustus?” The stout man stared at him. “You’re very like George,” he said. “So everyone tells me.” “And you’re really Alfred?” “I am.” “I’d like to talk business with you for a moment.” He cocked his eye at me.

have given him the afternoon off.” She broke down—absolutely collapsed. Devilish unpleasant it was. I’m hopeless in a situation like this. After I’d said, “There, there!” which didn’t seem to help much, I hadn’t any remarks to make. “He s-said he was going to the tables to gamble away all his savings and then shoot himself, because he had nothing left to live for.” I suddenly remembered the scrap in the small hours outside my state-room door. I hate mysteries. I meant to get to the bottom of this. I couldn’t have a really first-class valet like Voules going about the place shooting himself up. Evidently the girl Pilbeam was at the bottom of the thing. I questioned her. She sobbed. I questioned her more. I was firm. And eventually she yielded up the facts. Voules had seen George kiss her the night before; that was the trouble.

the last remnant of the stuff. He had to find a way of holding me for a while and postponing the squaring of accounts while he got away, and he invented this twin-brother business. He knew I should find out sooner or later, but meanwhile he would be able to get off to South America, which he has done. He’s on his way now.” “You let him go?” “What could I do? I can’t afford to make a fuss with that man Sturgis around. I can’t prove there’s no Alfred when my only chance of avoiding prison is to be Alfred.” “Well, you’ve made things right for yourself with Stella Vanderley, anyway,” I said, to cheer him up. “What’s the good of that now? I’ve hardly any money and no prospects. How can I marry her?” I pondered. “It looks to me, old top,” I said at last, “as if things were in a bit of a mess.” “You’ve guessed it,” said poor old George.

up. We had been talking of George, and old Marshall was suggesting the advisability of sending out search-parties. He was worried. So was Stella Vanderley. So, for that matter, were George and I, only not for the same reason. We were just arguing the thing out when the visitor appeared. He was a well-built, stiff sort of fellow. He spoke with a German accent. “Mr. Marshall?” he said. “I am Count Fritz von Cöslin, equerry to His Serene Highness”—he clicked his heels together and saluted—“the Prince of Saxburg-Leignitz.” Mrs. Vanderley jumped up. “Why, Count,” she said, “what ages since we met in Vienna! You remember?” “Could I ever forget? And the charming Miss Stella, she is well, I suppose not?” “Stella, you remember Count Fritz?” Stella shook hands with him. “And how is the poor, dear Prince?” asked Mrs. Vanderley.

said. “I am Alfred. You can tell me by my mole.” He exhibited the mole. He was taking no risks. The Count clicked his tongue regretfully. “I am sorry,” he said. George didn’t offer to console him, “Don’t worry,” said Sturgis. “He won’t escape me. I shall find him.” “Do, Mr. Sturgis, do. And quickly. Find swiftly that noble young man.” “What?” shouted George. “That noble young man, George Lattaker, who, at the risk of his life, saved my high-born master from the assassin.” George sat down suddenly. “I don’t understand,” he said feebly. “We were wrong, Mr. Sturgis,” went on the Count. “We leaped to the conclusion—was it not so?—that the owner of the hat you found was also the assailant of my high-born master. We were wrong. I have heard the story from His Serene Highness’s own lips.

land; you must scour the sea to find George Lattaker.” “He needn’t take all that trouble,” said a voice from the gangway. It was Voules. His face was flushed, his hat was on the back of his head, and he was smoking a fat cigar. “I’ll tell you where to find George Lattaker!” he shouted. He glared at George, who was staring at him. “Yes, look at me,” he yelled. “Look at me. You won’t be the first this afternoon who’s stared at the mysterious stranger who won for two hours without a break. I’ll be even with you now, Mr. Blooming Lattaker. I’ll learn you to break a poor man’s heart. Mr. Marshall and gents, this morning I was on deck, and I over’eard ’im plotting to put up a game on you. They’d spotted that gent there as a detective, and they arranged that blooming Lattaker was to pass himself off as his own twin-brother.

chair, and flung herself into the arms of Voules. “Oh, Harold!” she cried. “I thought you were dead. I thought you’d shot yourself.” He sort of braced himself together to fling her off, and then he seemed to think better of it and fell into the clinch. It was all dashed romantic, don’t you know, but there are limits. “Voules, you’re sacked,” I said. “Who cares?” he said. “Think I was going to stop on now I’m a gentleman of property? Come along, Emma, my dear. Give a month’s notice and get your ’at, and I’ll take you to dinner at Ciro’s.” “And you, Mr. Lattaker,” said the Count, “may I conduct you to the presence of my high-born master? He wishes to show his gratitude to his preserver.” “You may,” said George. “May I have my hat, Mr. Sturgis?” There’s just one bit more.
