Now that it’s all over, I may as well admit that there was a time during the rather funny affair of Rockmetteller Todd when I thought that Jeeves was going to let me down. The man had the appearance of being baffled. Jeeves is my man, you know. Officially he pulls in his weekly wages for pressing my clothes and all that sort of thing; but actually he’s more like what the poet Johnnie called some bird of his acquaintance who was apt to rally round him in times of need—a guide, don’t you know; philosopher, if I remember rightly, and—I rather fancy—friend. I rely on him at every turn. So naturally, when Rocky Todd told me about his aunt, I didn’t hesitate. Jeeves was in on the thing from the start. The affair of Rocky Todd broke loose early one morning of spring.

I was in bed, restoring the good old tissues with about nine hours of the dreamless, when the door flew open and somebody prodded me in the lower ribs and began to shake the bedclothes. After blinking a bit and generally pulling myself together, I located Rocky, and my first impression was that it was some horrid dream. Rocky, you see, lived down on Long Island somewhere, miles away from New York; and not only that, but he had told me himself more than once that he never got up before twelve, and seldom earlier than one. Constitutionally the laziest young devil in America, he had hit on a walk in life which enabled him to go the limit in that direction. He was a poet. At least, he wrote poems when he did anything; but most of his time, as far as I could make out, he spent in a sort of trance.

your red blood! Be! It was printed opposite the frontispiece of a magazine with a sort of scroll round it, and a picture in the middle of a fairly-nude chappie, with bulging muscles, giving the rising sun the glad eye. Rocky said they gave him a hundred dollars for it, and he stayed in bed till four in the afternoon for over a month. As regarded the future he was pretty solid, owing to the fact that he had a moneyed aunt tucked away somewhere in Illinois; and, as he had been named Rockmetteller after her, and was her only nephew, his position was pretty sound. He told me that when he did come into the money he meant to do no work at all, except perhaps an occasional poem recommending the young man with life opening out before him, with all its splendid possibilities, to light a pipe and shove his feet upon the mantelpiece.

to hear him saying: “So what on earth am I to do?” Jeeves trickled in with the tray, like some silent stream meandering over its mossy bed; and I saw daylight. “Read it again, Rocky, old top,” I said. “I want Jeeves to hear it. Mr. Todd’s aunt has written him a rather rummy letter, Jeeves, and we want your advice.” “Very good, sir.” He stood in the middle of the room, registering devotion to the cause, and Rocky started again: “MY DEAR ROCKMETTELLER.—I have been thinking things over for a long while, and I have come to the conclusion that I have been very thoughtless to wait so long before doing what I have made up my mind to do now.” “What do you make of that, Jeeves?” “It seems a little obscure at present, sir, but no doubt it becomes cleared at a later point in the communication.” “It becomes as clear as mud!” said Rocky.

has to agree with her. She’s got a fixed idea that the trip to New York would kill her; so, though it’s been her ambition all her life to come here, she stays where she is.” “Rather like the chappie whose heart was ‘in the Highlands a-chasing of the deer,’ Jeeves?” “The cases are in some respects parallel, sir.” “Carry on, Rocky, dear boy.” “So I have decided that, if I cannot enjoy all the marvels of the city myself, I can at least enjoy them through you. I suddenly thought of this yesterday after reading a beautiful poem in the Sunday paper about a young man who had longed all his life for a certain thing and won it in the end only when he was too old to enjoy it. It was very sad, and it touched me.” “A thing,” interpolated Rocky bitterly, “that I’ve not been able to do in ten years.” “As you know, you will have my money when I am gone; but until now I have never been able to see my way to giving you an allowance.

and all that is going on in the city, so that I may enjoy at second-hand what my wretched health prevents my enjoying for myself. Remember that I shall expect full details, and that no detail is too trivial to interest.—Your affectionate Aunt, “ISABEL ROCKMETTELLER.” “What about it?” said Rocky. “What about it?” I said. “Yes. What on earth am I going to do?” It was only then that I really got on to the extremely rummy attitude of the chappie, in view of the fact that a quite unexpected mess of the right stuff had suddenly descended on him from a blue sky. To my mind it was an occasion for the beaming smile and the joyous whoop; yet here the man was, looking and talking as if Fate had swung on his solar plexus. It amazed me. “Aren’t you bucked?” I said.

a hit-the-trail campaign, and I had popped in at the Garden a couple of days before, for half an hour or so, to hear him. He had certainly told New York some pretty straight things about itself, having apparently taken a dislike to the place, but, by Jove, you know, dear old Rocky made him look like a publicity agent for the old metrop! “Pretty soft!” he cried. “To have to come and live in New York! To have to leave my little cottage and take a stuffy, smelly, over-heated hole of an apartment in this Heaven-forsaken, festering Gehenna. To have to mix night after night with a mob who think that life is a sort of St. Vitus’s dance, and imagine that they’re having a good time because they’re making enough noise for six and drinking too much for ten.

“Jeeves,” I said coldly. The man was still standing like a statue by the door. “How many suits of evening clothes have I?” “We have three suits full of evening dress, sir; two dinner jackets——” “Three.” “For practical purposes two only, sir. If you remember we cannot wear the third. We have also seven white waistcoats.” “And shirts?” “Four dozen, sir.” “And white ties?” “The first two shallow shelves in the chest of drawers are completely filled with our white ties, sir.” I turned to Rocky. “You see?” The chappie writhed like an electric fan. “I won’t do it! I can’t do it! I’ll be hanged if I’ll do it! How on earth can I dress up like that? Do you realize that most days I don’t get out of my pyjamas till five in the afternoon, and then I just put on an old sweater?” I saw Jeeves wince, poor chap!

him in the shape of a careful report, on which it would be possible for him, with the aid of his imagination, to base the suggested correspondence.” Having got which off the old diaphragm, Jeeves was silent. Rocky looked at me in a helpless sort of way. He hasn’t been brought up on Jeeves as I have, and he isn’t on to his curves. “Could he put it a little clearer, Bertie?” he said. “I thought at the start it was going to make sense, but it kind of flickered. What’s the idea?” “My dear old man, perfectly simple. I knew we could stand on Jeeves. All you’ve got to do is to get somebody to go round the town for you and take a few notes, and then you work the notes up into letters. That’s it, isn’t it, Jeeves?” “Precisely, sir.” The light of hope gleamed in Rocky’s eyes.

She wants an earful of cabaret stuff. The place you ought to go to first, Jeeves, is Reigelheimer’s. It’s on Forty-second Street. Anybody will show you the way.” Jeeves shook his head. “Pardon me, sir. People are no longer going to Reigelheimer’s. The place at the moment is Frolics on the Roof.” “You see?” I said to Rocky. “Leave it to Jeeves. He knows.” It isn’t often that you find an entire group of your fellow-humans happy in this world; but our little circle was certainly an example of the fact that it can be done. We were all full of beans. Everything went absolutely right from the start. Jeeves was happy, partly because he loves to exercise his giant brain, and partly because he was having a corking time among the bright lights. I saw him one night at the Midnight Revels.

mention of it gave Rocky a tired feeling; yet here is a letter I wrote to a pal of mine in London: “DEAR FREDDIE,—Well, here I am in New York. It’s not a bad place. I’m not having a bad time. Everything’s pretty all right. The cabarets aren’t bad. Don’t know when I shall be back. How’s everybody? Cheer-o!—Yours, “BERTIE. “PS.—Seen old Ted lately?” Not that I cared about Ted; but if I hadn’t dragged him in I couldn’t have got the confounded thing on to the second page. Now here’s old Rocky on exactly the same subject: “DEAREST AUNT ISABEL,—How can I ever thank you enough for giving me the opportunity to live in this astounding city! New York seems more wonderful every day. “Fifth Avenue is at its best, of course, just now. The dresses are magnificent!” Wads of stuff about the dresses.

into a letter than it is for a chappie like me. Anyway, there’s no doubt that Rocky’s correspondence was hot stuff. I called Jeeves in and congratulated him. “Jeeves, you’re a wonder!” “Thank you, sir.” “How you notice everything at these places beats me. I couldn’t tell you a thing about them, except that I’ve had a good time.” “It’s just a knack, sir.” “Well, Mr. Todd’s letters ought to brace Miss Rockmetteller all right, what?” “Undoubtedly, sir,” agreed Jeeves. And, by Jove, they did! They certainly did, by George! What I mean to say is, I was sitting in the apartment one afternoon, about a month after the thing had started, smoking a cigarette and resting the old bean, when the door opened and the voice of Jeeves burst the silence like a bomb. It wasn’t that he spoke loudly.

dangerous if put upon; and something seemed to tell me that she would certainly regard herself as put upon if she ever found out the game which poor old Rocky had been pulling on her. “Good afternoon,” I managed to say. “How do you do?” she said. “Mr. Cohan?” “Er—no.” “Mr. Fred Stone?” “Not absolutely. As a matter of fact, my name’s Wooster—Bertie Wooster.” She seemed disappointed. The fine old name of Wooster appeared to mean nothing in her life. “Isn’t Rockmetteller home?” she said. “Where is he?” She had me with the first shot. I couldn’t think of anything to say. I couldn’t tell her that Rocky was down in the country, watching worms. There was the faintest flutter of sound in the background. It was the respectful cough with which Jeeves announces that he is about to speak without having been spoken to.

in exactly the same way many a time, and it never fails to make my spine curl. “You seem very much at home here, young man. Are you a great friend of Rockmetteller’s?” “Oh, yes, rather!” She frowned as if she had expected better things of old Rocky. “Well, you need to be,” she said, “the way you treat his flat as your own!” I give you my word, this quite unforeseen slam simply robbed me of the power of speech. I’d been looking on myself in the light of the dashing host, and suddenly to be treated as an intruder jarred me. It wasn’t, mark you, as if she had spoken in a way to suggest that she considered my presence in the place as an ordinary social call. She obviously looked on me as a cross between a burglar and the plumber’s man come to fix the leak in the bathroom.

her head?” Jeeves filled the kettle with a restrained dignity. “No doubt because of Mr. Todd’s letters, sir,” he said. “It was my suggestion, sir, if you remember, that they should be addressed from this apartment in order that Mr. Todd should appear to possess a good central residence in the city.” I remembered. We had thought it a brainy scheme at the time. “Well, it’s bally awkward, you know, Jeeves. She looks on me as an intruder. By Jove! I suppose she thinks I’m someone who hangs about here, touching Mr. Todd for free meals and borrowing his shirts.” “Yes, sir.” “It’s pretty rotten, you know.” “Most disturbing, sir.” “And there’s another thing: What are we to do about Mr. Todd? We’ve got to get him up here as soon as ever we can. When you have brought the tea you had better go out and send him a telegram, telling him to come up by the next train.” “I have already done so, sir.

the conversation up again. “What is a surprise?” “Your coming here, don’t you know, and so on.” She raised her eyebrows and drank me in a bit more through her glasses. “Why is it surprising that I should visit my only nephew?” she said. Put like that, of course, it did seem reasonable. “Oh, rather,” I said. “Of course! Certainly. What I mean is——” Jeeves projected himself into the room with the tea. I was jolly glad to see him. There’s nothing like having a bit of business arranged for one when one isn’t certain of one’s lines. With the teapot to fool about with I felt happier. “Tea, tea, tea—what? What?” I said. It wasn’t what I had meant to say. My idea had been to be a good deal more formal, and so on. Still, it covered the situation.

of them lets it go a word at a time. “Are you comfortable at your hotel?” I said. “At which hotel?” “The hotel you’re staying at.” “I am not staying at an hotel.” “Stopping with friends—what?” “I am naturally stopping with my nephew.” I didn’t get it for the moment; then it hit me. “What! Here?” I gurgled. “Certainly! Where else should I go?” The full horror of the situation rolled over me like a wave. I couldn’t see what on earth I was to do. I couldn’t explain that this wasn’t Rocky’s flat without giving the poor old chap away hopelessly, because she would then ask me where he did live, and then he would be right in the soup. I was trying to induce the old bean to recover from the shock and produce some results when she spoke again.

bed.” He looked wounded. “It is hardly my place, sir——” “I know—I know. But do it as a personal favour to me. If you come to that, it’s hardly my place to be flung out of the flat like this and have to go to an hotel, what?” “Is it your intention to go to an hotel, sir? What will you do for clothes?” “Good Lord! I hadn’t thought of that. Can you put a few things in a bag when she isn’t looking, and sneak them down to me at the St. Aurea?” “I will endeavour to do so, sir.” “Well, I don’t think there’s anything more, is there? Tell Mr. Todd where I am when he gets here.” “Very good, sir.” I looked round the place. The moment of parting had come. I felt sad. The whole thing reminded me of one of those melodramas where they drive chappies out of the old homestead into the snow.

come to think of it, there must be quite a lot of fellows who have to press their own clothes themselves and haven’t got anybody to bring them tea in the morning, and so on. It was rather a solemn thought, don’t you know. I mean to say, ever since then I’ve been able to appreciate the frightful privations the poor have to stick. I got dressed somehow. Jeeves hadn’t forgotten a thing in his packing. Everything was there, down to the final stud. I’m not sure this didn’t make me feel worse. It kind of deepened the pathos. It was like what somebody or other wrote about the touch of a vanished hand. I had a bit of dinner somewhere and went to a show of some kind; but nothing seemed to make any difference. I simply hadn’t the heart to go on to supper anywhere.

from?” “The Midnight Revels. We’ve been here an hour, and I think we’re a fixture for the night. I’ve told Aunt Isabel I’ve gone out to call up a friend to join us. She’s glued to a chair, with this-is-the-life written all over her, taking it in through the pores. She loves it, and I’m nearly crazy.” “Tell me all, old top,” I said. “A little more of this,” he said, “and I shall sneak quietly off to the river and end it all. Do you mean to say you go through this sort of thing every night, Bertie, and enjoy it? It’s simply infernal! I was just snatching a wink of sleep behind the bill of fare just now when about a million yelling girls swooped down, with toy balloons. There are two orchestras here, each trying to see if it can’t play louder than the other.

the train. It nearly gave me heart-failure; and on top of that I almost got brain fever inventing lies to tell Aunt Isabel. And then I had to cram myself into these confounded evening clothes of yours.” I gave a sharp wail of agony. It hadn’t struck me till then that Rocky was depending on my wardrobe to see him through. “You’ll ruin them!” “I hope so,” said Rocky, in the most unpleasant way. His troubles seemed to have had the worst effect on his character. “I should like to get back at them somehow; they’ve given me a bad enough time. They’re about three sizes too small, and something’s apt to give at any moment. I wish to goodness it would, and give me a chance to breathe. I haven’t breathed since half-past seven. Thank Heaven, Jeeves managed to get out and buy me a collar that fitted, or I should be a strangled corpse by now!

ankle. She keeps asking me when Cohan and Stone are going to turn up; and it’s simply a question of time before she discovers that Stone is sitting two tables away. Something’s got to be done, Bertie! You’ve got to think up some way of getting me out of this mess. It was you who got me into it.” “Me! What do you mean?” “Well, Jeeves, then. It’s all the same. It was you who suggested leaving it to Jeeves. It was those letters I wrote from his notes that did the mischief. I made them too good! My aunt’s just been telling me about it. She says she had resigned herself to ending her life where she was, and then my letters began to arrive, describing the joys of New York; and they stimulated her to such an extent that she pulled herself together and made the trip.

of it. I tell you, Bertie, I’ve examined the darned cloud with a microscope, and if it’s got a silver lining it’s some little dissembler!” “But, Rocky, old top, it’s too bally awful! You’ve no notion of what I’m going through in this beastly hotel, without Jeeves. I must get back to the flat.” “Don’t come near the flat.” “But it’s my own flat.” “I can’t help that. Aunt Isabel doesn’t like you. She asked me what you did for a living. And when I told her you didn’t do anything she said she thought as much, and that you were a typical specimen of a useless and decaying aristocracy. So if you think you have made a hit, forget it. Now I must be going back, or she’ll be coming out here after me. Good-bye.” Next morning Jeeves came round.

first long drawer, sir.” “You don’t mean to say you can’t think of anything, Jeeves?” “For the moment, sir, no. You will find a dozen handkerchiefs and the tan socks in the upper drawer on the left.” He strapped the suit-case and put it on a chair. “A curious lady, Miss Rockmetteller, sir.” “You understate it, Jeeves.” He gazed meditatively out of the window. “In many ways, sir, Miss Rockmetteller reminds me of an aunt of mine who resides in the south-east portion of London. Their temperaments are much alike. My aunt has the same taste for the pleasures of the great city. It is a passion with her to ride in hansom cabs, sir. Whenever the family take their eyes off her she escapes from the house and spends the day riding about in cabs. On several occasions she has broken into the children’s savings bank to secure the means to enable her to gratify this desire.” “I love to have these little chats with you about your female relatives, Jeeves,” I said coldly, for I felt that the man had let me down, and I was fed up with him.

up with him. “But I don’t see what all this has got to do with my trouble.” “I beg your pardon, sir. I am leaving a small assortment of neckties on the mantelpiece, sir, for you to select according to your preference. I should recommend the blue with the red domino pattern, sir.” Then he streamed imperceptibly toward the door and flowed silently out. I’ve often heard that chappies, after some great shock or loss, have a habit, after they’ve been on the floor for a while wondering what hit them, of picking themselves up and piecing themselves together, and sort of taking a whirl at beginning a new life. Time, the great healer, and Nature, adjusting itself, and so on and so forth. There’s a lot in it. I know, because in my own case, after a day or two of what you might call prostration, I began to recover.

to look as if he had struck the ideal life, it wasn’t difficult for me, knowing the circumstances, to see that beneath the mask the poor chap was suffering. My heart bled for the fellow. At least, what there was of it that wasn’t bleeding for myself bled for him. He had the air of one who was about to crack under the strain. It seemed to me that the aunt was looking slightly upset also. I took it that she was beginning to wonder when the celebrities were going to surge round, and what had suddenly become of all those wild, careless spirits Rocky used to mix with in his letters. I didn’t blame her. I had only read a couple of his letters, but they certainly gave the impression that poor old Rocky was by way of being the hub of New York night life, and that, if by any chance he failed to show up at a cabaret, the management said: “What’s the use?” and put up the shutters.

be complained to about. “Bertie, old scout,” said Rocky, in a quiet, sort of crushed voice, “we’ve always been pals, haven’t we? I mean, you know I’d do you a good turn if you asked me?” “My dear old lad,” I said. The man had moved me. “Then, for Heaven’s sake, come over and sit at our table for the rest of the evening.” Well, you know, there are limits to the sacred claims of friendship. “My dear chap,” I said, “you know I’d do anything in reason; but——” “You must come, Bertie. You’ve got to. Something’s got to be done to divert her mind. She’s brooding about something. She’s been like that for the last two days. I think she’s beginning to suspect. She can’t understand why we never seem to meet anyone I know at these joints. A few nights ago I happened to run into two newspaper men I used to know fairly well.

had started out to explore Broadway. She looked as if she had been thinking a good deal about rather unpleasant things. “You’ve met Bertie Wooster, Aunt Isabel?” said Rocky. “I have.” There was something in her eye that seemed to say: “Out of a city of six million people, why did you pick on me?” “Take a seat, Bertie. What’ll you have?” said Rocky. And so the merry party began. It was one of those jolly, happy, bread-crumbling parties where you cough twice before you speak, and then decide not to say it after all. After we had had an hour of this wild dissipation, Aunt Isabel said she wanted to go home. In the light of what Rocky had been telling me, this struck me as sinister. I had gathered that at the beginning of her visit she had had to be dragged home with ropes.

Bertie.” “Stop!” barked the aunt, and he dropped it. I caught Rocky’s eye as he stooped to pick up the ruins. It was the eye of one who sees it coming. “Leave it there, Rockmetteller!” said Aunt Isabel; and Rocky left it there. “The time has come to speak,” she said. “I cannot stand idly by and see a young man going to perdition!” Poor old Rocky gave a sort of gurgle, a kind of sound rather like the whisky had made running out of the decanter on to my carpet. “Eh?” he said, blinking. The aunt proceeded. “The fault,” she said, “was mine. I had not then seen the light. But now my eyes are open. I see the hideous mistake I have made. I shudder at the thought of the wrong I did you, Rockmetteller, by urging you into contact with this wicked city.” I saw Rocky grope feebly for the table.

or less what had happened. I’d seen it happen before. I remember, back in England, the man I had before Jeeves sneaked off to a meeting on his evening out and came back and denounced me in front of a crowd of chappies I was giving a bit of supper to as a moral leper. The aunt gave me a withering up and down. “Yes; Jimmy Mundy!” she said. “I am surprised at a man of your stamp having heard of him. There is no music, there are no drunken, dancing men, no shameless, flaunting women at his meetings; so for you they would have no attraction. But for others, less dead in sin, he has his message. He has come to save New York from itself; to force it—in his picturesque phrase—to hit the trail. It was three days ago, Rockmetteller, that I first heard him.

people. He leaped about in a frenzy of inspiration till I feared he would do himself an injury. Sometimes he expressed himself in a somewhat odd manner, but every word carried conviction. He showed me New York in its true colours. He showed me the vanity and wickedness of sitting in gilded haunts of vice, eating lobster when decent people should be in bed. “He said that the tango and the fox-trot were devices of the devil to drag people down into the Bottomless Pit. He said that there was more sin in ten minutes with a negro banjo orchestra than in all the ancient revels of Nineveh and Babylon. And when he stood on one leg and pointed right at where I was sitting and shouted, ‘This means you!’ I could have sunk through the floor. I came away a changed woman.

brought home to him the realisation that a miracle had come off and saved him from being cut out of Aunt Isabel’s. At any rate, as she said it he perked up, let go of the table, and faced her with gleaming eyes. “Do you want me to go back to the country, Aunt Isabel?” “Yes.” “Not to live in the country?” “Yes, Rockmetteller.” “Stay in the country all the time, do you mean? Never come to New York?” “Yes, Rockmetteller; I mean just that. It is the only way. Only there can you be safe from temptation. Will you do it, Rockmetteller? Will you—for my sake?” Rocky grabbed the table again. He seemed to draw a lot of encouragement from that table. “I will!” he said. “Jeeves,” I said. It was next day, and I was back in the old flat, lying in the old arm-chair, with my feet upon the good old table.

whenever we observed one of her attacks coming on, we used to send for the clergyman of the parish. We always found that if he talked to her a while of higher things it diverted her mind from hansom cabs. It occurred to me that the same treatment might prove efficacious in the case of Miss Rockmetteller.” I was stunned by the man’s resource. “It’s brain,” I said; “pure brain! What do you do to get like that, Jeeves? I believe you must eat a lot of fish, or something. Do you eat a lot of fish, Jeeves?” “No, sir.” “Oh, well, then, it’s just a gift, I take it; and if you aren’t born that way there’s no use worrying.” “Precisely, sir,” said Jeeves. “If I might make the suggestion, sir, I should not continue to wear your present tie.
