Some two weeks later, Newland Archer sat in a state of abstracted idleness within the private compartment of Letterblair, Lamson and Low, attorneys at law. The silence of the office, usually filled with the soft rustle of leather-bound ledgers, was broken by the summons of the head of the firm.

Old Mr. Letterblair, the accredited legal adviser of three generations of New York gentility, rose from behind his massive mahogany desk. He appeared trapped in a puzzle of profound perplexity, stroking his close-clipped white whiskers and running a hand through the rumpled grey locks atop his jutting brows. To Archer's respectful, albeit internally critical, eye, the senior partner resembled nothing so much as the Family Physician annoyed with a patient whose symptoms refused to yield to classification.

"My dear sir—" he always addressed Archer with a formal, distant "sir"—"I have sent for you regarding a little matter. For the moment, I prefer not to mention it either to Mr. Skipworth or Mr. Redwood." The gentlemen he referred to were the other senior partners of the firm. In the ancient legal associations of New York, where all partners named on the office letterhead were long since dead, Mr. Letterblair was, professionally speaking, his own grandson.

Leaning back in his chair with a furrowed brow, the elder gentleman continued, "For family reasons..."

Archer looked up, sensing a shift in the air.

"The Mingott family," Mr. Letterblair said, offering an explanatory smile that barely reached his eyes. "Mrs. Manson Mingott sent for me yesterday. Her granddaughter, the Countess Olenska, wishes to sue her husband for divorce. Certain papers have been placed in my hands." He paused, tapping a finger rhythmically upon the wood of his desk. "In view of your prospective alliance with the family, I should like to consult you—to consider the case with you—before taking any further steps."

A sudden heat rushed to Archer's temples. He had seen the Countess Olenska only once since his previous encounter with her, and that brief meeting at the Opera in the Mingott box. During this intervening period, she had receded from his foreground, becoming a less vivid and importunate image as May Welland resumed her rightful, radiant place in his life. He had not heard the Countess's divorce spoken of seriously since Janey's first random allusion to it; he had dismissed the tale as unfounded gossip. Theoretically, the idea of divorce was almost as distasteful to him as it was to his mother. Yet, he was annoyed that Mr. Letterblair, presumably prompted by Old Catherine Mingott, should be so evidently planning to draw him into the affair. After all, there were plenty of Mingott men capable of handling such delicate business, and as yet, he was not even a Mingott by marriage.

He waited silently for the senior partner to continue. Mr. Letterblair unlocked a drawer and drew out a heavy packet of documents. "If you will run your eye over these papers..."

Archer frowned, feeling a defensive edge sharpen within him. "I beg your pardon, sir; but just because of the prospective relationship, I should prefer your consulting Mr. Skipworth or Mr. Redwood."

Mr. Letterblair looked surprised, then slightly offended. It was highly unusual for a junior partner to reject such an opening.

He bowed. "I respect your scruple, sir; but in this case, I believe true delicacy requires you to do as I ask. Indeed, the suggestion is not mine, but that of Mrs. Manson Mingott and her son. I have seen Lovell Mingott, and also Mr. Welland. They all named you."

Archer felt his temper rising. He had been drifting somewhat languidly with events for the last fortnight, allowing May's fair looks and radiant nature to obliterate the importunate pressure of the Mingott claims. But this specific behest from Old Mrs. Mingott roused him to a sudden, sharp awareness of what the clan thought they had the right to exact from a prospective son-in-law, and he chafed violently at the role.

"Her uncles ought to deal with this," he said firmly.

"They have," Mr. Letterblair replied smoothly. "The matter has been gone into by the family. They are opposed to the Countess's idea; but she is firm, and she insists on a legal opinion."

The young man fell silent, refusing to open the packet in his hand. "Does she want to marry again?"

"I believe it is suggested; but she denies it."

"Then—"

"Will you oblige me, Mr. Archer, by first looking through these papers? Afterward, when we have talked the case over, I will give you my opinion."

Reluctantly, Archer withdrew with the unwelcome documents. Since their last meeting, he had half-unconsciously collaborated with events in ridding himself of the burden of Madame Olenska. That solitary hour by the firelight had drawn them into a momentary intimacy, shattered only by the Duke of St. Austrey's intrusion with Mrs. Lemuel Struthers, and the Countess's subsequent, joyous greeting of them. Two days later, Archer had assisted at the comedy of her reinstatement in the favor of the van der Luydens, telling himself with a touch of tartness that a lady who knew how to thank all-powerful elderly gentlemen so effectively for a bunch of flowers did not need either the private consolations or the public championship of a young man of his small compass. To view the matter in this light simplified his own case and surprisingly furbished up all the dim domestic virtues. He could not picture May Welland, in whatever conceivable emergency, hawking about her private difficulties or lavishing her confidences on strange men. She had never seemed to him finer or fairer than in the week that followed. He had even yielded to her wish for a long engagement, since she had found the one disarming answer to his plea for haste.

"You know, when it comes to the point, your parents have always let you have your way ever since you were a little girl," he had argued, and she had answered with her clearest look: "Yes; and that's what makes it so hard to refuse the very last thing they'll ever ask of me as a little girl."

That was the old New York note; that was the kind of answer he would always like to be sure of hearing from his wife. If one had habitually breathed the New York air, there were times when anything less crystalline seemed stifling.

The papers he had retired to read did not tell him much in fact, but they plunged him into an atmosphere in which he choked and spluttered. They consisted mainly of an exchange of letters between Count Olenski's solicitors and a French legal firm to whom the Countess had applied for the settlement of her financial situation. There was also a short letter from the Count to his wife. After reading it, Newland Archer rose, jammed the papers back into their envelope, and hurried back into Mr. Letterblair's office.

"Here are the letters, sir. If you wish, I'll see Madame Olenska," he said in a constrained voice.

"Thank you—thank you, Mr. Archer. Come and dine with me tonight if you're free, and we'll go into the matter afterward: in case you wish to call on our client tomorrow."

Newland Archer walked straight home again that afternoon. It was a winter evening of transparent clearness, with an innocent young moon hovering above the rooftops. He felt a desperate need to fill his soul's lungs with the pure radiance of the night, wishing not to exchange a single word with anyone until he and Mr. Letterblair were closeted together after dinner. It was impossible to decide otherwise than he had done: he must see Madame Olenska himself rather than let her secrets be bared to other eyes. A great wave of compassion had swept away his indifference and impatience; she stood before him as an exposed and pitiful figure, to be saved at all costs from further wounding herself in her mad plunges against fate.

He remembered what she had told him of Mrs. Welland's request to be spared whatever was "unpleasant" in her history, and he winced at the thought that it was perhaps this attitude of mind which kept the New York air so pure. "Are we only Pharisees after all?" he wondered, puzzled by the effort to reconcile his instinctive disgust at human vileness with his equally instinctive pity for human frailty.

For the first time, he perceived how elementary his own principles had always been. He passed for a young man who had not been afraid of risks, knowing that his secret love-affair with poor, silly Mrs. Thorley Rushworth had not been too secret to invest him with a becoming air of adventure. But Mrs. Rushworth was "that kind of woman"; foolish, vain, clandestine by nature, and far more attracted by the secrecy and peril of the affair than by such charms and qualities as he possessed. When the fact had finally dawned on him, it had nearly broken his heart, but now it seemed the redeeming feature of the case. The affair, in short, had been of the kind that most young men of his age had been through, emerging from it with calm consciences and an undisturbed belief in the abysmal distinction between the women one loved and respected and those one merely enjoyed—and pitied.

In this view, they were sedulously abetted by their mothers, aunts, and other elderly female relatives, who all shared Mrs. Archer's belief that when "
