"Your cousin the Countess called on Mother while you were away," Janey Archer announced to her brother on the evening of his return.

The young man, sitting alone at dinner with his mother and sister, glanced up in surprise. He found Mrs. Archer's gaze demurely bent upon her plate, her expression carefully neutral. Newland quickly realized that her silence was not born of disinterest, but of suppressed irritation; she did not view her seclusion from the world as a license to ignore it, and she was clearly annoyed that he should appear shocked by Madame Olenska's visit.

"She wore a black velvet polonaise with jet buttons, and a tiny green monkey muff," Janey continued, her voice animated. "I never saw her so stylishly dressed. She came alone, early on Sunday afternoon. Luckily, the fire was already lit in the drawing-room. She had one of those new card-cases. She said she wanted to know us because you'd been so good to her."

Newland laughed, a sound that seemed to ease the tension in the room. "Madame Olenska always takes that tone about her friends. She is very happy, I think, to be among her own people again."

"Yes, so she told us," said Mrs. Archer, finally lifting her eyes. "I must say, however, she seems quite thankful to be here."

"I hope you liked her, Mother."

Mrs. Archer drew her lips together in a thin line. "She certainly lays herself out to please, even when calling on an old lady."

"Mother doesn't think her simple," Janey interjected, her eyes narrowing as she scrutinized her brother's face.

"It is just my old-fashioned feeling," Mrs. Archer explained gently. "Dearest May is my ideal."

"Ah," said her son, "then they are not alike."

***

Earlier, Archer had left St. Augustine charged with many urgent messages for Old Mrs. Mingott. A day or two after returning to town, he called upon her.

The old lady received him with unusual warmth. She was deeply grateful for his success in persuading the Countess Olenska to abandon the idea of a divorce. When Archer confessed that he had deserted his office without permission and rushed down to Florida solely to see May, Old Mrs. Mingott gave an adipose chuckle and patted his knee with her soft, puff-ball hand.

"Ah, ah—so you kicked over the traces, did you? And I suppose Augusta and Welland pulled long faces, behaving as if the end of the world had come? But little May... she knew better, I'll be bound?"

"I hoped she did," Archer admitted, "but after all, she wouldn't agree to what I had gone down to ask for."

"Wouldn't she indeed? And what was that?"

"I wanted to get her to promise that we should be married in April. What is the use of wasting another year?"

Mrs. Manson Mingott screwed up her little mouth into a grimace of mimic prudery and twinkled at him through malicious lids. "'Ask Mamma,' I suppose—the usual story. Ah, these Mingotts—all alike! Born in a rut, and you cannot root them out of it. When I built this house, you would have thought I was moving to California! Nobody ever *had* built above Fortieth Street, nor above the Battery either, before Christopher Columbus discovered America. No, no; not one of them wants to be different; they are as scared of it as the smallpox." She leaned forward, her voice dropping to a conspiratorial whisper. "Ah, my dear Mr. Archer, I thank my stars I am nothing but a vulgar Spicer. But there is not one of my own children that takes after me but my little Ellen."

She broke off, still twinkling, and asked with the casual irrelevance of age: "Now, why in the world didn't you marry my little Ellen?"

Archer laughed. "For one thing, she wasn't there to be married."

"No—to be sure; more's the pity. And now it's too late; her life is finished." She spoke with the cold-blooded complacency of the aged throwing earth into the grave of young hopes. The young man's heart grew chill, and he said hurriedly, "Can't I persuade you to use your influence with the Wellands, Mrs. Mingott? I wasn't made for long engagements."

Old Catherine beamed on him approvingly. "No; I can see that. You've got a quick eye. When you were a little boy, I have no doubt you liked to be helped first." She threw back her head with a laugh that made her chins ripple like little waves. "Ah, here is my Ellen now!" she exclaimed as the portières parted behind her.

Madame Olenska came forward with a bright smile. Her face looked vivid and happy, and she held out her hand gaily to Archer while stooping to receive her grandmother's kiss.

"I was just saying to him, my dear," Mrs. Mingott chimed in, "'Why didn't you marry my little Ellen?' Now, what did he answer?"

Madame Olenska looked at Archer, still smiling. "And what did he answer?"

"Oh, my darling, I leave you to find that out! He has been down to Florida to see his sweetheart."

"Yes, I know." She still looked at him intently. "I went to see your mother to ask where you had gone. I sent a note that you never answered, and I was afraid you were ill."

He muttered something about leaving unexpectedly in a great hurry, intending to write to her from St. Augustine.

"And of course, once you were there, you never thought of me again!" She continued to beam on him with a gaiety that might have been a studied assumption of indifference.

If she still needed him, she was determined not to let him see it, he thought, stinging beneath her manner. He wanted to thank her for visiting his mother, but under the ancestress's malicious eye, he felt tongue-tied and constrained.

"Look at him—in such hot haste to get married that he took French leave and rushed down to implore the silly girl on his knees!" Mrs. Mingott cried, her voice rising. "That's something like a lover—that's the way handsome Bob Spicer carried off my poor mother! And then he got tired of her before I was weaned, though they only had to wait eight months for me! But there—you are not a Spicer, young man; luckily for you and for May. It is only my poor Ellen that has kept any of their wicked blood; the rest of them are all model Mingotts!" she concluded scornfully.

Archer was acutely aware that Madame Olenska, who had seated herself beside her grandmother, was still thoughtfully scrutinizing him. The gaiety had faded from her eyes. With great gentleness, she said, "Surely, Granny, we can persuade them between us to do as he wishes."

Archer rose to go. As his hand met Madame Olenska's, he felt that she was waiting for him to make some allusion to her unanswered letter.

"When can I see you?" he asked, following her to the door.

"Whenever you like; but it must be soon if you want to see the little house again. I am moving next week."

A pang shot through him at the memory of his lamplit hours in the low-studded drawing-room. Though few in number, they were thick with memories.

"Tomorrow evening?"

She nodded. "Tomorrow; yes—but early. I am going out."

The next day was a Sunday. If she were "going out" on a Sunday evening, it could, of course, be only to Mrs. Lemuel Struthers'. He felt a slight movement of annoyance—not so much at her going there (for he rather liked her going where she pleased, despite the Vanderlynths)—but because it was the sort of house where she was certain to meet Beaufort. She must have known beforehand that she would encounter him there, and she was probably going specifically for that purpose.

"Very well; tomorrow evening," he repeated, inwardly resolving that he would not go early. By reaching her door late, he hoped to either prevent her from going to Mrs. Struthers' or arrive after she had departed—which, all things considered, seemed the simplest solution.

***

It was only half-past eight, after all, when he rang the bell beneath the wisteria. Not as late as he had intended by half an hour—a singular restlessness had driven him to her door. He reflected, however, that Mrs. Struthers' Sunday evenings were not like balls, and that her guests, as if to minimize their delinquency, usually arrived early.

The one thing he had not counted on, upon entering Madame Olenska's hall, was to find hats and overcoats there. Why had she bidden him to come early if she was hosting a dinner? On closer inspection of the garments besides which Nastasia was laying his own, his resentment gave way to curiosity. The overcoats were, in fact, the strangest he had ever seen under a polite roof. Neither belonged to Julius Beaufort. One was a shaggy yellow ulster of "reach-me-down" cut; the other, a very old and rusty cloak with a cape—something like what the French called a "Macfarlane." This garment, which appeared to be made for a person of prodigious size, had evidently seen long and hard wear. Its greenish-black folds gave out a moist, sawdusty smell
