THE END In the early summer of next year two old men sat reading their newspapers after breakfast upon the terrace of Broad Place. The elder of the two turned over a sheet. "I see Osman Digna's back at Suakin," said he. "There's likely to be some fighting." "Oh," said the other, "he will not do much harm." And he laid down his paper. The quiet English country-side vanished from before his eyes. He saw only the white city by the Red Sea shimmering in the heat, the brown plains about it with their tangle of halfa grass, and in the distance the hills towards Khor Gwob. "A stuffy place Suakin, eh, Sutch?" said General Feversham. "Appallingly stuffy. I heard of an officer who went down on parade at six o'clock of the morning there, sunstruck in the temples right through a regulation helmet.

a footman brought to each a small pile of letters. General Feversham ran over his envelopes with a quick eye, selected one letter, and gave a grunt of satisfaction. He took a pair of spectacles from a case and placed them upon his nose. "From Ramelton?" asked Sutch, dropping his newspaper on to the terrace. "From Ramelton," answered Feversham. "I'll light a cigar first." He laid the letter down on the garden table which stood between his companion and himself, drew a cigar-case from his pocket, and in spite of the impatience of Lieutenant Sutch, proceeded to cut and light it with the utmost deliberation. The old man had become an epicure in this respect. A letter from Ramelton was a luxury to be enjoyed with all the accessories of comfort which could be obtained. He made himself comfortable in his chair, stretched out his legs, and smoked enough of his cigar to assure himself that it was drawing well.

and again Sutch asked:-- "Anything more?" "Yes. They are coming here in a fortnight." "Good," said Sutch. "I shall stay." He took a turn along the terrace and came back. He saw Feversham sitting with the letter upon his knees and a frown of great perplexity upon his face. "You know, Sutch, I never understood," he said. "Did you?" "Yes, I think I did." Sutch did not try to explain. It was as well, he thought, that Feversham never would understand. For he could not understand without much self-reproach. "Do you ever see Durrance?" asked the general, suddenly. "Yes, I see a good deal of Durrance. He is abroad just now." Feversham turned towards his friend. "He came to Broad Place when you went to Suakin, and talked to me for half an hour. He was Harry's best man. Well, that too I never understood.

attack upon the Redan, and Harry's birthday." "Exactly," replied Feversham. "Why shouldn't we start the Crimean nights again?" Sutch jumped up from his chair. "Splendid!" he cried. "Can we muster a tableful, do you think?" "Let's see," said Feversham, and ringing a handbell upon the table, sent the servant for the Army List. Bending over that Army List the two veterans may be left. But of one other figure in this story a final word must be said. That night, when the invitations had been sent out from Broad Place, and no longer a light gleamed from any window of the house, a man leaned over the rail of a steamer anchored at Port Said and listened to the song of the Arab coolies as they tramped up and down the planks with their coal baskets between the barges and the ship's side.

in that great work, but the desert which he loved had smitten and cast him out. But at all events the boat steamed southwards into the Red Sea. Three nights more, and though he would not see it, the Southern Cross would lift slantwise into the sky. * * * * * By A. E. W. Mason THE COURTSHIP OF MAURICE BUCKLER A ROMANCE Being a record of the growth of an English Gentleman, during the years of 1685-1687, under strange and difficult circumstances, written some while afterward in his own hand, and now edited by A. E. W. MASON Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: In spirit and color it reminds us of the very remarkable books of Mr. Conon Doyle. The author has measurably caught the fascinating diction of the seventeenth century, and the strange adventures with which the story is filled are of a sufficiently perilous order to entertain the most Homeric mind.
