I'm not entirely sure of my sources, but I suspect it's Shakespeare—or perhaps some other brilliant fellow—who famously remarked that fate loves to sneak up on a chap just when he's feeling particularly top-hole and braced for anything. Well, the man was right. It's exactly that way with me. Take, for instance, the rather rummy affair of Lady Malvern and her son, Wilmot. Just moments before they arrived, I was convinced that everything was absolutely perfect.

It was one of those glorious mornings. I had just emerged from a cold shower, feeling invigorated like a two-year-old. In fact, I was especially buoyant because the previous day I had successfully asserted my independence over Jeeves. You see, things had been trending toward me becoming a mere serf; the man had been oppressing me relentlessly. I didn't mind too much when he insisted I surrender one of my new suits, for Jeeves's judgment on tailoring is impeccable. However, I nearly revolted when he forbade me from wearing a pair of cloth-topped boots I adored like brothers. And when he attempted to trample on my dignity regarding a hat, I firmly put my foot down to show him who was boss. It's a long tale, but the point is, he wanted me to wear the "Longacre" style favored by John Drew, while I was dead set on the "Country Gentleman" worn by another famous actor. After a rather painful scene, I purchased the Country Gentleman. So, on this particular morning, I felt thoroughly manly and independent.

I was in the bathroom, contemplating breakfast while massaging my spine with a rough towel and humming a tune, when there was a tap at the door. I paused my singing and cracked the door open an inch.

"What ho without there!"

"Lady Malvern wishes to see you, sir," said Jeeves.

"Eh?"

"Lady Malvern, sir. She is waiting in the sitting-room."

"Pull yourself together, Jeeves, my man," I said, rather sternly, for I bar practical jokes before breakfast. "You know perfectly well there's no one waiting for me in the sitting-room. How could there be when it's barely ten o'clock?"

"I gathered from her ladyship, sir, that she had landed from an ocean liner at an early hour this morning."

This made the situation slightly more plausible. I recalled that upon arriving in America a year prior, proceedings had begun at some ghastly hour like six, and I had been deposited on a foreign shore considerably before eight.

"Who the deuce is Lady Malvern, Jeeves?"

"Her ladyship did not confide in me, sir."

"Is she alone?"

"Her ladyship is accompanied by a Lord Pershore, sir. I fancy that his lordship would be her ladyship's son."

"Oh, well, put out some rich raiment, and I'll be dressing."

"Our heather-mixture lounge is in readiness, sir."

"Then lead me to it."

While I was dressing, I tried desperately to identify who on earth Lady Malvern could be. It wasn't until I had climbed through the top of my shirt and was reaching for my studs that the memory struck me.

"I've placed her, Jeeves. She's a pal of my Aunt Agatha."

"Indeed, sir?"

"Yes. I met her at lunch one Sunday before I left London. A very vicious specimen. Writes books. She penned a volume on social conditions in India upon returning from the Durbar."

"Yes, sir? Pardon me, sir, but not that tie!"

"Eh?"

"Not that tie with the heather-mixture lounge, sir!"

It was a shock. I thought I had quelled the fellow. It was a solemn moment. Essentially, if I weakened now, all my good work from the previous night would be thrown away. I braced myself.

"What's wrong with this tie? I've seen you give it a nasty look before. Speak out like a man! What's the matter with it?"

"Too ornate, sir."

"Nonsense! A cheerful pink. Nothing more."

"Unsuitable, sir."

"Jeeves, this is the tie I wear!"

"Very good, sir."

Dashed unpleasant. I could see the man was wounded. But I remained firm. I tied the tie, donned the coat and waistcoat, and entered the sitting-room.

"Halloa! Halloa! Halloa!" I cried. "What?"

"Ah! How do you do, Mr. Wooster? You have never met my son, Wilmot, I think? Motty, darling, this is Mr. Wooster."

Lady Malvern was a hearty, happy, healthy, and overpowering sort of female, not excessively tall but compensating by measuring approximately six feet from the O.P. to the Prompt Side. She fitted into my largest armchair as if it had been custom-built around her by someone aware of the current fashion for tight-fitting upholstery. She possessed bright, bulging eyes and a profusion of yellow hair, and when she spoke, she displayed about fifty-seven front teeth. She was one of those women who effectively numb a fellow's faculties. She made me feel as though I were ten years old, dressed in Sunday clothes, brought into a drawing-room merely to say "how-d'you-do." Altogether, it was hardly the sort of guest a chap wishes to find in his sitting-room before breakfast.

Motty, the son, was about twenty-three, tall, thin, and meek-looking. He shared his mother's yellow hair, though he wore it plastered down and parted in the middle. His eyes also bulged, but they lacked brightness; they were a dull grey with pink rims. His chin surrendered the struggle halfway down, and he appeared to possess no eyelashes. A mild, furtive, sheepish sort of blighter, in short.

"Awfully glad to see you," I said. "So you've popped over, eh? Making a long stay in America?"

"About a month. Your aunt gave me your address and told me to be sure and call on you."

I was relieved to hear this, as it indicated Aunt Agatha was beginning to thaw. There had been some unpleasantness a year prior when she sent me to New York to disentangle my Cousin Gussie from the clutches of a music-hall girl. By the time I concluded my operations, Gussie had not only married the girl but had gone on the stage himself and was thriving. You'll understand that Aunt Agatha was upset to no small extent. I simply hadn't dared return to face her, and it was a relief to find that time had healed the wound enough to make her ask her friends to look me up. What I mean is, much as I liked America, I didn't want England barred to me for the rest of my natural life; and believe me, England is a jolly sight too small for anyone to inhabit with Aunt Agatha if she's truly on the warpath. So I braced myself, hearing these kind words, and smiled genially at the assembly.

"Your aunt said that you would do anything that was in your power to be of assistance to us."

"Rather? Oh, rather! Absolutely!"

"Thank you so much. I want you to put dear Motty up for a little while."

I didn't grasp this for a moment.

"Put him up? For my clubs?"

"No, no! Darling Motty is essentially a home bird. Aren't you, Motty darling?"

Motty, who was sucking the knob of his stick, uncorked himself.

"Yes, mother," he said, and corked himself up again.

"I should not like him to belong to clubs. I mean put him up here. Have him to live with you while I am away."

These frightful words trickled out of her like honey. The woman simply didn't seem to comprehend the ghastly nature of her proposal. I gave Motty the swift east-to-west glance. He was sitting with his mouth nuzzling the stick, blinking at the wall. The thought of having this planted on me for an indefinite period appalled me. Absolutely appalled me, don't you know. I was just starting to say that the shot wasn't on the board at any price, and that the first sign Motty gave of trying to nestle into my little home I would yell for the police, when she continued, rolling placidly over me.

There was something about this woman that sapped a chap's will-power.

"I am leaving New York by the midday train, as I have to pay a visit to Sing-Sing prison. I am extremely interested in prison conditions in America. After that, I work my way gradually across to the coast, visiting the points of interest on the journey. You see, Mr. Wooster, I am in America principally on business. No doubt you read my book, *India and the Indians*? My publishers are anxious for me to write a companion volume on the United States. I shall not be able to spend more than a month in the country, as I have to get back for the season, but a month should be ample. I was less than a month in India, and my dear friend Sir Roger Cremorne wrote his *America from Within* after a stay of only two weeks. I should love to take dear Motty with me, but the poor boy gets so sick when he travels by train. I shall have to pick him up on my return."

From where I sat, I could see Jeeves in the dining-room, laying the breakfast table. I wished I could have had a minute with him alone. I felt certain he would have been able to devise some way of stopping this woman.

"It will be such a relief to know that Motty is safe with you, Mr. Wooster. I know what the temptations of a great city are. Hitherto dear Motty has been sheltered from them. He has lived quietly with me in the country. I know that you will look after him carefully, Mr. Wooster. He will give very little trouble." She spoke about the poor blighter as if he weren't there. Not that Motty seemed to mind. He had stopped chewing his walking-stick and was sitting there with his mouth open. "He is a vegetarian and a teetotaller and is devoted to reading. Give him a nice book and he will be quite contented." She rose. "Thank you so much, Mr. Wooster! I don't know what I should have done without your help. Come, Motty! We have just time to see a few of the sights before my train goes. But I shall have to rely on you for most of my information about New York, darling. Be sure to keep your eyes open and take notes of your impressions! It will be such a help. Good-bye, Mr. Wooster. I will send Motty back early in the afternoon."

They departed, and I howled for Jeeves.

"Jeeves! What about it?"

"Sir?"

"What's to be done? You heard it all, didn't you? You were in the dining-room most of the time. That pill is coming to stay here."

"Pill, sir?"

"The excrescence."

"I beg your pardon, sir?"

I looked at Jeeves sharply. This sort of thing wasn't like him. It was as if he were deliberately trying to give me the pip. Then I understood. The man was really upset about that tie. He was trying to get his own back.

"Lord Pershore will be staying here from tonight, Jeeves," I said coldly.

"Very good, sir. Breakfast is ready, sir."

I could have sobbed into the bacon and eggs. That there wasn't any sympathy to be extracted from Jeeves was what put the lid on it. For a moment I almost weakened and told him to destroy the hat and tie if he didn't like them, but I pulled myself together again. I was dashed if I was going to let Jeeves treat me like a bally one-man chain-gang!

But, what with brooding on Jeeves and brooding on Motty, I was in a pretty reduced state. The more I examined the situation, the more blighted it became. There was nothing I could do. If I slung Motty out, he would report to his mother, and she would pass it on to Aunt Agatha, and I didn't like to think what would happen then. Sooner or later, I should be wanting to return to England, and I didn't want to arrive and find Aunt Agatha waiting on the quay for me with a stuffed eelskin. There was absolutely nothing for it but to put the fellow up and make the best of it.

About midday, Motty's luggage arrived, followed soon after by a large parcel of what I took to be nice books. I brightened up a little when I saw it. It was one of those massive parcels and looked as if it contained enough reading material to keep the chap busy for a year. I felt a trifle more cheerful, retrieved my Country Gentleman hat, stuck it on my head, gave the pink tie a twist, and reeled out to take a bite of lunch with one or two lads at a neighboring hostelry. With excellent browsing, sluicing, and cheery conversation, the afternoon passed quite happily. By dinner-time, I had almost forgotten the blighted existence of Motty.

I dined at the club and attended a show afterward, and it wasn't until fairly late that I returned to the flat. There were no signs of Motty, and I assumed he had gone to bed.

It seemed rummy to me, though, that the parcel of nice books was still there, string and paper intact. It looked as if Motty, after seeing his mother off at the station, had decided to call it a day.

Jeeves entered with the nightly whisky-and-soda. I could tell by the chap's manner that he was still upset.

"Lord Pershore gone to bed, Jeeves?" I asked, with reserved hauteur.

"No, sir. His lordship has not yet returned."

"Not returned? What do you mean?"

"His lordship came in shortly after six-thirty,
