Now that the dust has settled, I must confess that during the rather uproarious affair of Rockmetteller Todd, I genuinely feared Jeeves might let me down. The man looked thoroughly baffled, like a cat staring at a vacuum cleaner.

Jeeves is my man, you know. Officially, he presses my shirts and collects his weekly wage; but in reality, he is more akin to the "guide, philosopher, and friend" the poet Johnnie once described. I rely on him implicitly.

So, when Rocky Todd told me about his aunt, I didn't hesitate. Jeeves was in on it from the start.

The trouble began one crisp spring morning. I was in bed, recovering from nine hours of dreamless slumber, when the door flew open and someone prodded my ribs and shook the bedclothes. After blinking and regaining my composure, I identified Rocky. My first thought was that it was a nightmare.

Rocky lived on Long Island, miles from New York. He had told me repeatedly that he never rose before noon and rarely before one. Constitutionally the laziest young devil in America, he had perfected a lifestyle that allowed him to maximize his inactivity. He was a poet, or at least he wrote verses when he felt like it; mostly, however, he existed in a state of suspended animation. He once claimed he could sit on a fence watching a worm ponder its existence for hours.

His schedule was precise: three days a month for writing poems; the remaining three hundred and sixty-five days for resting. I didn't know poetry paid enough to support such a lifestyle, but apparently, American editors fight over it if you avoid rhyming. Rocky showed me a piece once:

It was printed opposite a frontispiece of a semi-nude man flexing for the rising sun. Rocky said they paid him a hundred dollars for it, and he slept until four the next afternoon for over a month.

His future was secure thanks to a wealthy aunt in Illinois. Named Rockmetteller after her and being her only nephew, his position was sound. He planned to inherit her fortune and do nothing but write occasional poems recommending young men to light pipes and kick their feet up on mantelpieces.

And this was the man waking me up in the grey dawn!

"Read this, Bertie!" he waved a letter in my face. "Wake up and read this!"

"I can't read before tea and a cigarette," I groaned, reaching for the bell.

Jeeves entered, looking as fresh as a dewy violet. It remains a mystery to me how he manages it.

"Tea, Jeeves."

"Very good, sir."

He flowed silently out of the room, appearing more like a liquid substance than a man, while Rocky surged around with the letter again.

"What is it?" I asked. "What on earth's the matter?"

"Read it!"

"I can't. I haven't had my tea."

"Well, listen then."

"Who's it from?"

"My aunt."

At this, I drifted off again. I woke to hear him muttering, "So what on earth am I to do?"

Jeeves trickled in with the tray, like a silent stream over moss. I saw daylight.

"Read it again, Rocky, old top," I said. "I want Jeeves to hear it. Mr. Todd's aunt has written a rather peculiar letter, Jeeves, and we want your advice."

"Very good, sir."

He stood in the center of the room, radiating devotion, while Rocky began:

*"MY DEAR ROCKMETTELLER.—I have been thinking things over for a long while, and I have come to the conclusion that I have been very thoughtless to wait so long before doing what I have made up my mind to do now."*

"What do you make of that, Jeeves?"

"It seems a little obscure at present, sir, but no doubt it clears up later."

"It becomes as clear as mud!" said Rocky.

"Proceed, old scout," I said, chewing my bread and butter.

"You know how all my life I have longed to visit New York and see the wonderful gay life I've read about. I fear it will now be impossible for me to fulfill my dream. I am old and worn out. I seem to have no strength left."

"Sad, Jeeves, what?"

"Extremely, sir."

"Sad nothing!" said Rocky. "It's sheer laziness. I saw her last Christmas; she was bursting with health. Her doctor told me there was nothing wrong. But she insists she's a hopeless invalid, so he has to agree. She's got a fixed idea that the trip would kill her, so though it's been her ambition, she stays put."

"Rather like the chap whose heart was 'in the Highlands a-chasing of the deer,' Jeeves?"

"The cases are in some respects parallel, sir."

"Carry on, Rocky, dear boy."

"So I have decided that, if I cannot enjoy the marvels myself, I can enjoy them through you. I thought of this yesterday after reading a poem about a young man who won his lifelong desire only when he was too old to enjoy it. It was sad, and it touched me."

"A thing," Rocky interjected bitterly, "I haven't been able to do in ten years."

"As you know, you will have my money when I am gone; but until now, I haven't been able to give you an allowance. I have now decided to do so—on one condition. I have instructed lawyers in New York to pay you a substantial sum monthly. My condition is that you live in New York and enjoy yourself as I always wished. I want you to be my representative, to spend this money as I would. I want you to plunge into the gay, prismatic life of New York. I want you to be the life and soul of brilliant supper parties."

"Above all," the letter continued, "I insist that you write me letters at least once a week giving a full description of everything you are doing and all that is happening in the city, so that I may enjoy at second-hand what my wretched health prevents me from enjoying for myself. Remember that I shall expect full details, and that no detail is too trivial to interest.—Your affectionate Aunt, ISABEL ROCKMETTELLER."

"What about it?" said Rocky.

"What about it?" I echoed.

"Yes. What on earth am I going to do?"

It was only then that I realized the absurdity of his attitude. An unexpected windfall had descended from a blue sky, yet the man looked as if Fate had swung on his solar plexus.

"Aren't you bucked?" I asked.

"Bucked!"

"If I were in your place, I'd be braced. I consider this pretty soft for you."

He gave a yelp, stared at me, and then began to talk of New York in a way that reminded me of Jimmy Mundy, the reformer. Jimmy had recently hit the trail in New York, and I had popped into the Garden to hear him. He had certainly told the city some straight truths, seemingly taking a dislike to it, but dear old Rocky made him look like a publicity agent for the metropolis.

"Pretty soft!" he cried. "To have to come and live in New York! To leave my little cottage for a stuffy, smelly, overheated hole in this Heaven-forsaken, festering Gehenna. To mix night after night with a mob who think life is a St. Vitus's dance and imagine they're having a good time because they're making enough noise for six and drinking too much for ten. I loathe New York, Bertie. I wouldn't come near the place if I hadn't got to see editors occasionally. There's a blight on it. It's got moral delirium tremens. It's the limit. The very thought of staying more than a day makes me sick. And you call this thing pretty soft for me!"

I felt like Lot's friends when their host began criticizing the Cities of the Plain. I had no idea old Rocky could be so eloquent.

"It would kill me to have to live in New York," he went on. "To share the air with six million people! To wear stiff collars and decent clothes all the time! To—" He started. "Good Lord! I suppose I should have to dress for dinner in the evenings. What a ghastly notion!"

I was shocked, absolutely shocked.

"My dear chap!" I said reproachfully.

"Do you dress for dinner every night, Bertie?"

"Jeeves," I said coldly. The man was standing like a statue by the door. "How many suits of evening clothes have I?"

"We have three suits full of evening dress, sir; two dinner jackets—"

"Three."

"For practical purposes two only, sir. If you remember we cannot wear the third. We have also seven white waistcoats."

"And shirts?"

"Four dozen, sir."

"And white ties?"

"The first two shallow shelves in the chest of drawers are completely filled with our white ties, sir."

I turned to Rocky.

"You see?"

The chap writhed like an electric fan.

"I won't do it! I can't do it! I'll be hanged if I'll do it! How on earth can I dress up like that? Do you realize that most days I don't get out of my pyjamas till five in the afternoon, and then I just put on an old sweater?"

I saw Jeeves wince, poor chap! This revelation shocked his finest feelings.

"Then, what are you going to do about it?" I said.

"That's what I want to know."

"You might write and explain to your aunt."

"I might—if I wanted her to get round to her lawyer's in two rapid leaps and cut me out of her will."

I saw his point.

"What do you suggest, Jeeves?" I asked.

Jeeves cleared his throat respectfully.

"The crux of the matter appears to be, sir, that Mr. Todd is obliged by the conditions of the money to write Miss Rockmetteller long, detailed letters relating to his movements. The only method by which this can be accomplished, if Mr. Todd adheres to his intention of remaining in the country, is for Mr. Todd to induce some second party to gather the actual experiences Miss Rockmetteller wishes reported, and to convey these to him in the shape of a careful report, on which it would be possible for him, with the aid of his imagination, to base the suggested correspondence."

Having got that off his diaphragm, Jeeves was silent. Rocky looked at me helplessly. He hasn't been brought up on Jeeves as I have, and he isn't on to his curves.

"Could he put it a little clearer, Bertie?" he said. "I thought at the start it was going to make sense, but it kind of flickered. What's the idea?"

"My dear old man, perfectly simple. I knew we could stand on Jeeves. All you've got to do is get somebody to go round the town for you and take a few notes, and then you work the notes up into letters. That's it, isn't it, Jeeves?"

"Precisely, sir."

The light of hope gleamed in Rocky's eyes. He looked at Jeeves in a startled way, dazed by the man's vast intellect.

"But who would do it?" he said. "It would have to be a pretty smart sort of man, a man who would notice things."

"Jeeves!" I said. "Let Jeeves do it."

"But would he?"

"You would do it, wouldn't you, Jeeves?"

For the first time in our long connection, I observed Jeeves almost smile. The corner of his mouth curved quite a quarter of an inch, and for a moment his eye ceased to look like a meditative fish's.

"I should be delighted to oblige, sir. As a matter of fact, I have already visited some of New York's places of interest on my evening out, and it would be most enjoyable to make a practice of the pursuit."

"Fine! I know exactly what your aunt wants to hear about, Rocky. She wants an earful of cabaret stuff. The place you ought to go to first, Jeeves, is Reigelheimer's. It's on Forty-second Street. Anybody will show you the way."

Jeeves shook his head.

"Pardon me, sir. People are no longer going to Reigelheimer's. The place at the moment is Frolics on the Roof."

"You see?" I said to Rocky. "Leave it to Jeeves. He knows."

It isn't often that you find an entire group of your fellow-humans happy in this world; but our little circle was certainly an example of the fact that it can be done. We were all full of beans. Everything went absolutely right from the start.

Jeeves was happy, partly because he loved to exercise his giant brain, and partly because he was having a corking time among the bright lights. I saw him one night at the Midnight Revels. He was sitting at a table on the edge of the dancing floor, doing himself remarkably well with a fat cigar and a bottle of the best. I'd never imagined he could look so nearly human. His face wore an expression of austere benevolence, and he was making notes in a small book.

As for the rest of us, I was feeling pretty good because I was fond of old Rocky and glad to do him a good turn. Rocky was perfectly contented because he was still able to sit on fences in his pyjamas and watch worms. And as for the aunt, she seemed tickled to death. She was getting Broadway at pretty long range, but it seemed to be hitting her just right. I read one of
