The ceremony concluded with the weight of centuries pressing down on the gilded chamber. The sentence was read, the name of Phorenice, the Empress, elevated, and the new Viceroy installed amidst a pomp that had grown fat on the accumulation of ages. Formally, I had surrendered the reins; formally, Tatho had seated himself upon the snake-throne, the chain of gems tightening around his neck to signify the supreme office. While drums and trumpets blared a proclamation of noise, he rose to his feet, beginning his first state progress as Viceroy of the Province of Yucatan.

I followed him with folded arms and a bended head, moving between glittering lines of soldiers and a brilliant throng of courtiers and chiefs. The roof-beams quivered under the cries of "Long Live Tatho!" and "Flourish the Empress!" uttered as duty bound. The new ruler acknowledged the welcome with stately inclinations. In turn, he approached the three lesser thrones of the lesser governors—in the East, the North, and the South—and received homage from each as the ritual dictated. I, the man whose arrival had precipitated his deposition, followed with the prescribed meekness in his train.

It was a hard task, but those who hold higher offices learn to wear a passionless face before the people. Twenty years prior, these same fine obeisances had been rendered to me. Now, the Gods had seen fit to alter fortune. Yet, as I walked bent and humbly behind the heels of Tatho, though etiquette forbade noisy salutations to myself, it could not suppress kindly glances. These fell upon me from every soldier, every courtier, and every chief standing in that gilded hall, landing with a grateful intensity. It is rare for the fallen to meet such tender looks.

Custom dictates that on such great ceremonial days of changing rulers, those present may offer petitions, accuse their retiring head with immunity from vengeance, or propose theories for the future governance of the State. I think it pardonable to my vanity to record that not a voice was raised against me, nor against any item of my twenty years of rule. Nor did anyone speak of alterations for the future. Even as we circled the chamber three times, all present offered their approval in generous silence.

Then, one behind the other, the new Viceroy and the old marched with formal steps over golden tiles beneath the pyramid. The great officers of state left their stations to join our train. At the far wall, we reached the door of the private chambers—an hour ago, mine own.

Ah, well. I possessed no home now in any of the wondrous cities of Yucatan. A bitterness rose within me, though in truth, I should have been thankful enough to return to the Continent of Atlantis with my head still in its proper station.

Tatho issued his formal summons: "Open ye to the Viceroy," a command of the ritual. The slaves within responded, sending the massive stone valves of the door gaping wide. Tatho entered; I followed at his heels. The others halted, offering valedictions from the threshold, before the valves clanged shut on the lock behind us. We passed into the chamber beyond. Only then, for the first time alone together, with the forced etiquette of courts left outside, did the new Viceroy turn. His arms were meekly folded, and he bowed low before me.

"Deucalion," he said, "believe me that I have not sought this office. It was thrust upon me. Had I refused, my head would have paid forfeit, and another man—your enemy—would have been sent out as viceroy in your place. The Empress does not permit that her will shall ever be questioned."

"My friend," I answered, "my brother in all but blood, there is no man living in all Atlantis or her territories to whom I would rather hand over my government. For twenty years I have ruled this country of Yucatan, and Mexico beyond, first under the old King, and then as minister to this new Empress. I know my colony like a book. I am intimate with all her wonderful cities, their palaces, their pyramids, and their people. I have hunted the beasts and the savages in the forests. I have built roads and made the rivers carry shipping. I have fostered the arts and crafts like a merchant; I have discoursed, three times daily, the cult of the Gods with my own lips. Through evil years and good, I have ruled here, striving only for the prosperity of the land and the strengthening of Atlantis, growing to love the peoples like a father. To you I bequeath them, Tatho, with tender supplications for their interests."

"It is not I that can carry on Deucalion's work with Deucalion's power," he replied. "Rest content, my friend, that I shall do my humble best to follow exactly in your footsteps. Believe me, I came out to this government with a thousand regrets, but I would have died sooner than take your place had I known how vigorously the supplanting would trouble you."

"We are alone here," I said. "Away from the formalities of assemblies, a man may give vent to his natural self without fear of tarnishing a ceremony. Your coming was something of the suddenest. Until an hour ago, when you demanded audience, I had thought to rule longer; and even now, I do not know for what cause I am deposed."

"The proclamation stated: 'We relieve our well-beloved Deucalion of his present service, because we have great need of his powers at home in our kingdom of Atlantis.'"

"A mere formality."

Tatho looked uneasily around the hangings of the chamber, drew me to its center, and lowered his voice.

"I do not think so," he whispered. "I believe she has need of you. There are troublous times ahead, and Phorenice wants the ablest men in the kingdom ready to her call."

"You may speak openly," I said. "Without fear of eavesdroppers. We are in the heart of the pyramid here, built in every way by a man's length of solid stone. Myself, I oversaw the laying of every course. Besides, here in Yucatan, we lack the niceties of your old-world diplomacy. We do not listen, because we count it shame to do so."

Tatho shrugged. "I acted only according to my education. At home, a loose tongue makes a loose head, and there are those whose trade it is to carry tales. Still, what I say is this: The throne shakes, and Phorenice sees the need of sturdy props. So she has sent this proclamation."

"But why come to me? It is twenty years since I sailed to this colony, and from that day I have not returned to Atlantis once. I know little of the old country's politics. What small parcel of news drifts out to us across the ocean reads with slender interest here. Yucatan is another world, my dear Tatho, as you will learn in the course of your government, with new interests, new people, new everything. To us here, Atlantis is only a figment, a shadow, far away across the waters. It is for this new world of Yucatan that I have striven through all these years."

"If Deucalion has small time to spare from his government for brooding over his fatherland, Atlantis, at least, has found leisure to admire the deeds of her brilliant son. Why, sir, over yonder at home, your name carries magic. When you and I were lads, it was customary in the colleges to teach that the men of the past were the greatest this world has ever seen; but today this teaching is changed. It is Deucalion who is held up as the model and example. Mothers name their sons Deucalion, as the most valuable birth-gift they can make. Deucalion is a household word. Indeed, there is only one name near to it in familiarity."

"You trouble me," I said, frowning. "I have tried to do my duty for its own sake, and for the country's sake, not for the patters and fondlings of the vulgar. And besides, if there are names to be in everyone's mouth, they should be the names of the Gods."

Tatho shrugged. "The Gods? They occupy us very little these latter years. With our modern science, we have grown past the tether of the older Gods, and no new one has appeared. No, my Lord Deucalion, if it were merely the Gods who were your competitors on men's lips, your name would be a thousand times the better known."

"Of mere human names," I said, "the name of this new Empress should come first in Atlantis, our lord the old King being now dead."

"She certainly would have it so," replied Tatho, and there was something in his tone that suggested more lay behind the words. I drew him to one of the marble seats and bent familiarly toward him. "I am speaking," I said, "not to the new Viceroy of Yucatan, but to my old friend Tatho, a member of the Priests' Clan, like myself, with whom I worked side by side in a score of the smaller home governments, in hamlets, in villages, in smaller towns, in greater towns, as we gained experience in war and knowledge in the art of ruling people, and so tediously won our promotion. I am speaking in Tatho's private abode, that was mine own not two hours since, and I would have an answer with that
