It is a curious observation regarding the rook, that sedate and clerical bird, that when he flies homeward toward nightfall in a flock of his own kind, two of them will suddenly detach themselves from the rest. They retrace their flight for a distance, hovering and lingering in the air, conveying to mere men the fancy that it is of some occult importance to the body politic that this artful couple should pretend to have renounced connection with it.

Similarly, when service ended in the old Cathedral with the square tower, and the choir scuffled out again, and divers venerable persons of rook-like aspect dispersed, two of these latter retraced their steps and walked together in the echoing Close.

Not only was the day waning, but the year. The low sun was fiery and yet cold behind the monastery ruin, and the Virginia creeper on the Cathedral wall had showered half its deep-red leaves down on the pavement. There had been rain that afternoon, and a wintry shudder went among the little pools on the cracked, uneven flagstones, and through the giant elm-trees as they shed a gust of tears. Their fallen leaves lay strewn thickly about. Some of these leaves, in a timid rush, sought sanctuary within the low arched Cathedral door; but two men coming out resisted them and cast them forth again with their feet. This done, one of the two locked the door with a goodly key, and the other flitted away with a folio music-book.

"Mr. Jasper was that, Tope?"

"Yes, Mr. Dean."

"He has stayed late."

"Yes, Mr. Dean. I have stayed for him, your Reverence. He has been taken a little poorly."

"Say 'taken,' Tope—to the Dean," the younger rook interposed in a low tone with this touch of correction, as who should say: "You may offer bad grammar to the laity, or the humbler clergy, not to the Dean."

Mr. Tope, Chief Verger and Showman, and accustomed to be high with excursion parties, declined with a silent loftiness to perceive that any suggestion had been tendered to him.

"And when and how has Mr. Jasper been taken—for, as Mr. Crisparkle has remarked, it is better to say taken—taken—" repeated the Dean; "when and how has Mr. Jasper been Taken—"

"Taken, sir," Tope deferentially murmured.

"—Poorly, Tope?"

"Why, sir, Mr. Jasper was that breathed—"

"I wouldn't say 'That breathed,' Tope," Mr. Crisparkle interposed with the same touch as before. "Not English—to the Dean."

"Breathed to that extent," the Dean (not unflattered by this indirect homage) condescendingly remarked, "would be preferable."

"Mr. Jasper's breathing was so remarkably short"—thus discreetly did Mr. Tope work his way round the sunken rock—"when he came in, that it distressed him mightily to get his notes out: which was perhaps the cause of his having a kind of fit on him after a little. His memory grew DAZED." Mr. Tope, with his eyes on the Reverend Mr. Crisparkle, shot this word out, as defying him to improve upon it: "and a dimness and giddiness crept over him as strange as ever I saw: though he didn't seem to mind it particularly, himself. However, a little time and a little water brought him out of his DAZE." Mr. Tope repeated the word and its emphasis, with the air of saying: "As I _have_ made a success, I'll make it again."

"And Mr. Jasper has gone home quite himself, has he?" asked the Dean.

"Your Reverence, he has gone home quite himself. And I'm glad to see he's having his fire kindled up, for it's chilly after the wet, and the Cathedral had both a damp feel and a damp touch this afternoon, and he was very shivery."

They all three looked towards an old stone gatehouse crossing the Close, with an arched thoroughfare passing beneath it. Through its latticed window, a fire shone out upon the fast-darkening scene, involving in shadow the pendent masses of ivy and creeper covering the building's front. As the deep Cathedral-bell struck the hour, a ripple of wind went through these at their distance, like a ripple of the solemn sound that hums through tomb and tower, broken niche and defaced statue, in the pile close at hand.

"Is Mr. Jasper's nephew with him?" the Dean asked.

"No, sir," replied the Verger, "but expected. There's his own solitary shadow betwixt his two windows—the one looking this way, and the one looking down into the High Street—drawing his own curtains now."

"Well, well," said the Dean, with a sprightly air of breaking up the little conference, "I hope Mr. Jasper's heart may not be too much set upon his nephew. Our affections, however laudable, in this transitory world, should never master us; we should guide them, guide them. I find I am not disagreeably reminded of my dinner, by hearing my dinner-bell. Perhaps, Mr. Crisparkle, you will, before going home, look in on Jasper?"

"Certainly, Mr. Dean. And tell him that you had the kindness to desire to know how he was?"

"Ay; do so, do so. Certainly. Wished to know how he was. By all means. Wished to know how he was."

With a pleasant air of patronage, the Dean as nearly cocked his quaint hat as a Dean in good spirits may, and directed his comely gaiters towards the ruddy dining-room of the snug old red-brick house where he was at present, "in residence" with Mrs. Dean and Miss Dean.

Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon, fair and rosy, and perpetually pitching himself head-foremost into all the deep running water in the surrounding country; Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon, early riser, musical, classical, cheerful, kind, good-natured, social, contented, and boy-like; Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon and good man, lately "Coach" upon the chief Pagan high roads, but since promoted by a patron (grateful for a well-taught son) to his present Christian beat; betook himself to the gatehouse, on his way home to his early tea.

"Sorry to hear from Tope that you have not been well, Jasper."

"Oh, it was nothing, nothing!"

"You look a little worn."

"Do I? Oh, I don't think so. What is better, I don't feel so. Tope has made too much of it, I suspect. It's his trade to make the most of everything appertaining to the Cathedral, you know."

"I may tell the Dean—I call expressly from the Dean—that you are all right again?"

The reply, with a slight smile, was: "Certainly; with my respects and thanks to the Dean."

"I'm glad to hear that you expect young Drood."

"I expect the dear fellow every moment."

"Ah! He will do you more good than a doctor, Jasper."

"More good than a dozen doctors. For I love him dearly, and I don't love doctors, or doctors' stuff."

Mr. Jasper was a dark man of some six-and-twenty, with thick, lustrous, well-arranged black hair and whiskers. He looked older than he was, as dark men often do. His voice was deep and good, his face and figure were good, his manner was a little sombre. His room was a little sombre, and may have had its influence in forming his manner. It was mostly in shadow. Even when the sun shone brilliantly, it seldom touched the grand piano in the recess, or the folio music-books on the stand, or the book-shelves on the wall, or the unfinished picture of a blooming schoolgirl hanging over the chimneypiece; her flowing brown hair tied with a blue riband, and her beauty remarkable for a quite childish, almost babyish, touch of saucy discontent, comically conscious of itself. (There was not the least artistic merit in this picture, which was a mere daub; but it was clear that the painter had made it humorously—one might almost say, revengefully—like the original.)

"We shall miss you, Jasper, at the 'Alternate Musical Wednesdays' to-night; but no doubt you are best at home. Good-night. God bless you! 'Tell me, shep-herds, te-e-ell me; tell me-e-e, have you seen (have you seen, have you seen, have you seen) my-y-y Flo-o-ora-a pass this way!'" Melodiously good Minor Canon the Reverend Septimus Crisparkle thus delivered himself, in musical rhythm, as he withdrew his amiable face from the doorway and conveyed it downstairs.

Sounds of recognition and greeting passed between the Reverend Septimus and somebody else, at the stair-foot. Mr. Jasper listened, started from his chair, and caught a young fellow in his arms, exclaiming:

"My dear Edwin!"

"My dear Jack! So glad to see you!"

"Get off your greatcoat, bright boy, and sit down here in your own corner. Your feet are not wet? Pull your boots off. Do pull your boots off."

"My dear Jack, I am as dry as a bone. Don't moddley-coddley, there's a good fellow. I like anything better than being moddley-coddleyed."

With the check upon him of being unsympathetically restrained in a genial outburst of enthusiasm, Mr. Jasper stood still, and looked on intently at the young fellow, divesting himself of his outward coat, hat, gloves, and so forth. Once for all, a look of intentness and intensity—a look of hungry, exacting, watchful, and yet devoted affection—was always, now and ever afterwards, on the Jasper face whenever the Jasper face was addressed in this direction. And whenever it was so addressed, it was never, on this occasion or on any other, dividedly addressed; it was always concentrated.

"Now I am right, and now I'll take my corner, Jack. Any dinner, Jack?"

Mr. Jasper opened a door at the upper end of the room, and disclosed a small inner room pleasantly lighted and prepared, wherein a comely dame was in the act of setting dishes on table.

"What a jolly old Jack it is!" cried the young fellow, with a clap of his hands. "Look here, Jack; tell me; whose birthday is it?"

"Not yours, I know," Mr. Jasper answered, pausing to consider.

"Not mine, you know? No; not mine, _I_ know! Pussy's!"

Fixed as the look the young fellow met was, there was yet in it some strange power of suddenly including the sketch over the chimneypiece.

"Pussy's, Jack! We must drink Many happy returns to her. Come, uncle; take your dutiful and sharp-set nephew in to dinner."

As the boy (for he was little more) laid a hand on Jasper's shoulder, Jasper cordially and gaily laid a hand on _his_ shoulder, and so Marseillaise-wise they went in to dinner.

"And, Lord! here's Mrs. Tope!" cried the boy. "Lovelier than ever!"

"Never you mind me, Master Edwin," retorted the Verger's wife; "I can take care of myself."

"You can't. You're much too handsome. Give me a kiss because it's Pussy's birthday."

"I'd Pussy you, young man, if I was Pussy, as you call her," Mrs. Tope blushingly retorted, after being saluted. "Your uncle's too much wrapt up in you, that's where it is. He makes so much of you, that it's my opinion you think you've only to call your Pussys by the dozen, to make 'em come."

"You forget, Mrs. Tope," Mr. Jasper interposed, taking his place at the table with a genial smile, "and so do you, Ned, that Uncle and Nephew are words prohibited here by common consent and express agreement. For what we are going to receive His holy name be praised!"

"Done like the Dean! Witness, Edwin Drood! Please to carve, Jack, for I can't."

This sally ushered in the dinner. Little to the present purpose, or to any purpose, was said, while it was in course of being disposed of. At length the cloth was drawn, and a dish of walnuts and a decanter of rich-coloured sherry were placed upon the table.

"I say! Tell me, Jack," the young fellow then flowed on: "do you really and truly feel as if the mention of our relationship divided us at all? _I_ don't."

"Uncles as a rule, Ned, are so much older than their nephews," was the reply, "that I have that feeling instinctively."

"As a rule! Ah, may-be! But what is a difference in age of half-a-dozen years or so? And some uncles, in large families, are even younger than their nephews. By George, I wish it was the case with us!"

"Why?"

"Because if it was, I'd take the lead with you, Jack, and be as wise as Begone, dull Care! that turned a young man gray, and Begone, dull Care! that turned an old man to clay.—Halloa, Jack! Don't drink."

"Why not?"

"Asks why not, on Pussy's birthday, and no Happy returns proposed! Pussy, Jack, and many of 'em! Happy returns, I mean."

Laying an affectionate and laughing touch on the boy's extended hand, as if it were at once his giddy head and his light heart, Mr. Jasper drank the toast in silence.

"Hip, hip, hip, and nine times nine, and one to finish with, and all that, understood.
