John Jasper paused in his walk through the Close, halted by a scene that seemed carved from the moonlight itself. Leaning against the iron railing of the burial ground, encircling the old cloister arches, stood Stony Durdles, burdened with his dinner bundle. Opposite him, a grotesque urchin in tatters hurled stones with the precision of a marksman. The projectiles struck their target with varying frequency, yet Durdles remained unmoved, a statue of indifference. In contrast, the boy was a whirlwind of malice; a successful hit elicited a triumphant whistle from a jagged gap in his mouth where teeth were missing, while a miss provoked a yelp of "Mulled agin!" followed by a renewed, vicious aim.

"What are you doing to the man?" Jasper demanded, stepping from the shadows into the pale light.

"Making a cock-shy of him," the boy replied.

"Give me those stones in your hand."

"Yes, I'll give 'em you down your throat if you come a-ketching hold of me," the boy retorted, shaking loose and backing away. "I'll smash your eye if you don't look out!"

"Baby-Devil that you are, what has the man done to you?"

"He won't go home."

"What is that to you?"

"He gives me a 'apenny to pelt him home if I ketches him out too late," the boy explained, then began to chant like a little savage, stumbling and dancing among the rags of his dilapidated boots:

"Widdy widdy wen!
I—ket—ches—Im—out—ar—ter—ten,
Widdy widdy wy!
Then—E—don't—go—then—I—shy—
Widdy Widdy Wake-cock warning!"

With a sweeping gesture on the final word and one more delivery at Durdles, the boy signaled a poetic preparation, a caution for Durdles to stand clear or retreat homeward.

Jasper beckoned the boy to follow him, deeming it futile to drag or coax the creature, and crossed to the railing where the Stony One was deeply meditating.

"Do you know this thing, this child?" Jasper asked, struggling to find a definition for the entity.

"Deputy," Durdles nodded.

"Is that its—his—name?"

"Deputy," Durdles assented.

"I'm man-servant up at the Travellers' Twopenny in Gas Works Garding," the thing explained. "All us man-servants at Travellers' Lodgings is named Deputy. When we're chock full and the Travellers is all a-bed I come out for my 'elth." Withdrawing into the road and taking aim, he resumed his chant:

"Widdy widdy wen!
I—ket—ches—Im—out—ar—ter—"

"Hold your hand," Jasper cried, "and don't throw while I stand so near him, or I'll kill you! Come, Durdles; let me walk home with you to-night. Shall I carry your bundle?"

"Not on any account," Durdles replied, adjusting the load. "Durdles was making his reflections here when you come up, sir, surrounded by his works, like a poplar Author." He gestured to a sarcophagus within the railing, white and cold in the moonlight. "Mrs. Sapsea;" he pointed to the monument of that devoted wife. "Late Incumbent;" he indicated the Reverend Gentleman's broken column. "Departed Assessed Taxes;" he showed a vase and towel standing on what might represent a cake of soap. "Former pastrycook and Muffin-maker, much respected;" he introduced a gravestone. "All safe and sound here, sir, and all Durdles's work. Of the common folk, that is merely bundled up in turf and brambles; the less said the better. A poor lot, soon forgot."

"This creature, Deputy, is behind us," Jasper said, glancing back. "Is he to follow us?"

The relations between Durdles and Deputy were capricious. When Durdles turned with the slow gravity of beery suddenness, Deputy made a wide circuit into the road, standing on the defensive.

"You never cried Widdy Warning before you begun to-night," Durdles said, unexpectedly reminded of, or imagining, an injury.

"Yer lie, I did," Deputy replied, in his only form of polite contradiction.

"Own brother, sir," observed Durdles, turning about again and as quickly forgetting his offense as he had recalled it. "Own brother to Peter the Wild Boy! But I gave him an object in life."

"At which he takes aim?" Mr. Jasper suggested.

"That's it, sir," returned Durdles, quite satisfied. "At which he takes aim. I took him in hand and gave him an object. What was he before? A destroyer. What work did he do? Nothing but destruction. What did he earn by it? Short terms in Cloisterham jail. Not a person, not a piece of property, not a winder, not a horse, nor a dog, nor a cat, nor a bird, nor a fowl, nor a pig, but what he stoned, for want of an enlightened object. I put that enlightened object before him, and now he can turn his honest halfpenny by the three penn'orth a week."

"I wonder he has no competitors."

"He has plenty, Mr. Jasper, but he stones 'em all away. Now, I don't know what this scheme of mine comes to," Durdles pursued, considering it with the same sodden gravity. "I don't know what you may precisely call it. It ain't a sort of a—scheme of a—National Education?"

"I should say not," replied Jasper.

"I should say not," assented Durdles; "then we won't try to give it a name."

"He still keeps behind us," repeated Jasper, looking over his shoulder. "Is he to follow us?"

"We can't help going round by the Travellers' Twopenny, if we go the short way, which is the back way," Durdles answered, "and we'll drop him there."

So they proceeded; Deputy, as a rear-rank soldier, taking open order and invading the silence of the hour and place by stoning every wall, post, pillar, and other inanimate object along the deserted path.

"Is there anything new down in the crypt, Durdles?" asked John Jasper.

"Anything old, I think you mean," growled Durdles. "It ain't a spot for novelty."

"Any new discovery on your part, I meant."

"There's a old 'un under the seventh pillar on the left as you go down the broken steps of the little underground chapel as formerly was; I make him out (so fur as I've made him out yet) to be one of them old 'uns with a crook. To judge from the size of the passages in the walls, and of the steps and doors, by which they come and went, them crooks must have been a good deal in the way of the old 'uns! Two on 'em meeting promiscuous must have hitched one another by the mitre pretty often, I should say."

Without any endeavor to correct the literalness of this opinion, Jasper surveyed his companion—covered from head to foot with old mortar, lime, and stone grit—as though he, Jasper, were becoming imbued with a romantic interest in his weird life.

"Yours is a curious existence."

Without furnishing the least clue to whether he received this as a compliment or quite the reverse, Durdles gruffly answered: "Yours is another."

"Well! inasmuch as my lot is cast in the same old earthy, chilly, never-changing place, Yes. But there is much more mystery and interest in your connection with the Cathedral than in mine. Indeed, I am beginning to have some idea of asking you to take me on as a sort of student, or free 'prentice, under you, and to let me go about with you sometimes, and see some of these odd nooks in which you pass your days."

The Stony One replied in a general way, "All right. Everybody knows where to find Durdles, when he's wanted." Which, if not strictly true, was approximately so, if taken to express that Durdles might always be found in a state of vagabondage somewhere.

"What I dwell upon most," said Jasper, pursuing his subject of romantic interest, "is the remarkable accuracy with which you would seem to find out where people are buried.—What is the matter? That bundle is in your way; let me hold it."

Durdles had stopped and backed a little (Deputy, attentive to all his movements, immediately skirmishing into the road), looking about for some ledge or corner to place his bundle on, when thus relieved of it.

"Just you give me my hammer out of that," said Durdles, "and I'll show you."

*Clink, clink.* His hammer was handed to him.

"Now, lookee here. You pitch your note, don't you, Mr. Jasper?"

"Yes."

"So I sound for mine. I take my hammer, and I tap." (Here he struck the pavement, and the attentive Deputy skirmished at a rather wider range, as supposing that his head might be in requisition.) "I tap, tap, tap. Solid! I go on tapping. Solid still! Tap again. Holloa! Hollow! Tap again, persevering. Solid in hollow! Tap, tap, tap, to try it better. Solid in hollow; and inside solid, hollow again! There you are! Old 'un crumbled away in stone coffin, in vault!"

"Astonishing!"

"I have even done this," said Durdles, drawing out his two-foot rule. (Deputy meanwhile skirmished nearer, as suspecting that Treasure might be about to be discovered, which might somehow lead to his own enrichment, and the delicious treat of the discoverers being hanged by the neck, on his evidence, until they were dead.) "Say that hammer of mine's a wall—my work. Two; four; and two is six," measuring on the pavement. "Six foot inside that wall is Mrs. Sapsea."

"Not really Mrs. Sapsea?"

"Say Mrs. Sapsea. Her wall's thicker, but say Mrs. Sapsea. Durdles taps, that wall represented by that hammer, and says, after good sounding: 'Something betwixt us!' Sure enough, some rubbish has been left in that same six-foot space by Durdles's men!"

Jasper opined that such accuracy "is a gift."

"I wouldn't have it at a gift," returned Durdles, by no means receiving the observation in good part. "I worked it out for myself. Durdles comes by *his* knowledge through grubbing deep for it, and having it up by the roots when it don't want to come.—Holloa you Deputy!"

"Widdy!" was Deputy's shrill response, standing off again.

"Catch that ha'penny. And don't let me see any more of you to-night, after we come to the Travellers' Twopenny."

"Warning!" returned Deputy, having caught the halfpenny, and appearing by this mystic word to express his assent to the arrangement.

They had but to cross what was once the vineyard, belonging to what was once the Monastery, to come into the narrow back lane wherein stood the crazy wooden house of two low stories currently known as the Travellers' Twopenny: a house all warped and distorted, like the morals of the travelers, with scant remains of a lattice-work porch over the door, and also of a rustic fence before its stamped-out garden; by reason of the travelers being so bound to the premises by a tender sentiment (or so fond of having a fire by the roadside in the course of the day), that they could never be persuaded or threatened into departure, without violently possessing themselves of some wooden forget-me-not, and bearing it off.

The semblance of an inn was attempted to be given to this wretched place by fragments of conventional red curtaining in the windows, which rags were made muddily transparent in the night-season by feeble lights of rush or cotton dip burning dully in the close air of the inside. As Durdles and Jasper came near, they were addressed by an inscribed paper lantern over the door, setting forth the purport of the house. They were also addressed by some half-dozen other hideous small boys—whether twopenny lodgers or followers or hangers-on of such, who knows!—who, as if attracted by some carrion-scent of Deputy in the air, started into the moonlight, as vultures might gather in the desert, and instantly fell to stoning him and one another.

"Stop, you young brutes," cried Jasper angrily, "and let us go by!"

This remonstrance being received with yells and flying stones, according to a custom of late years comfortably established among the police regulations of our English communities, where Christians are stoned on all sides, as if the days of Saint Stephen were revived, Durdles remarked of the young savages, with some point, that "they haven't got an object," and led the way down the lane.

At the corner of the lane, Jasper, hotly enraged, checked his companion and looked back. All was silent. Next moment, a stone coming rattling at his hat, and a distant yell of "Wake-Cock! Warning!" followed by a crow, as from some infernally-hatched Chanticleer, apprising him under whose victorious fire he stood, he turned the corner into safety, and took Durdles home: Durdles stumbling among the litter of his stony yard as if he were going to turn head foremost into one of the unfinished tombs.

John Jasper returned by another way to his gatehouse, and entering softly with his key, found his fire still burning. He took from a locked press a peculiar-looking pipe, which he filled—but not with
