Christmas Eve in Cloisterham. The streets held a few strange faces, and many others that were half-familiar, once the countenances of local children, now the features of travelers returning from distant lands to find the city shrunk and altered, as if it had not washed itself clean in the intervening years. To these returnees, the cathedral clock's strike and the rooks' cawing from the tower sounded like voices from their nursery days. Some, in their dying hours far away, had imagined their floors strewn with autumn leaves from the Close's elms; so too, the rustling sounds and fresh scents of their earliest memories revived as the circle of their lives drew its final line, beginning and end merging together.

Seasonable tokens were everywhere. Red berries glowed in the lattices of Minor Canon Corner; Mr. and Mrs. Tope carefully inserted sprigs of holly into the carvings and sconces of the cathedral stalls, as if plugging the coat-button holes of the Dean and Chapter. Shops overflowed with lavish profusion: currants, raisins, spices, candied peel, and moist sugar. An unusual air of gallantry and dissipation hung over the town, evidenced by an immense bunch of mistletoe in a greengrocer's doorway and a pitifully small Twelfth Cake, culminating in a Harlequin—so meager one might call it a Twenty-fourth or Forty-eighth Cake—to be raffled at the pastrycook's for a shilling per member. Public amusements were plentiful. The Wax-Work, which had impressed the reflective mind of the Emperor of China, was available by special request during Christmas Week on the premises of the bankrupt livery-stable-keeper up the lane. A new grand comic Christmas pantomime was to be produced at the Theatre, heralded by a portrait of Signor Jacksonini the clown saying "How do you do tomorrow?" quite as large as life, and almost as miserable. In short, Cloisterham was up and doing: though the High School and Miss Twinkleton's were excluded. From the former, the scholars had gone home, every one in love with one of Miss Twinkleton's young ladies (who knew nothing of it); and only the handmaidens fluttered occasionally in the windows of the latter. It was noted that these damsels became, within the limits of decorum, more skittish when entrusted with the concrete representation of their sex than when sharing the representation with Miss Twinkleton's pupils.

Three were to meet at the gatehouse that night. How did each spend the day?

Neville Landless, though absolved from his books for the time by Mr. Crisparkle—whose fresh nature was by no means insensible to the charms of a holiday—read and wrote in his quiet room with a concentrated air until two hours past noon. He then cleared his table, arranged his books, and tore up and burned his stray papers. He made a clean sweep of all untidy accumulations, put his drawers in order, and destroyed every note or scrap of paper save those bearing directly on his studies. Done, he turned to his wardrobe, selecting a few articles of ordinary wear—among them, a change of stout shoes and socks for walking—and packed them in a new knapsack bought in the High Street the previous day. At the same time and place, he purchased a heavy walking-stick; strong in the handle for the grip of the hand, and iron-shod. He tested it, swung it, poised it, and laid it by with the knapsack on a window-seat. By then, his arrangements were complete.

He dressed for going out and was in the act of leaving—indeed, had left his room and met the Minor Canon on the staircase, coming out of his bedroom on the same story—when he turned back for his walking-stick, thinking he would carry it now. Mr. Crisparkle, who had paused on the staircase, saw it in his hand upon his reappearance, took it from him, and asked with a smile how he chose a stick?

"Really I don't know that I understand the subject," Neville answered. "I chose it for its weight."

"Much too heavy, Neville; *much* too heavy."

"To rest upon in a long walk, sir?"

"Rest upon?" repeated Mr. Crisparkle, throwing himself into pedestrian form. "You don't rest upon it; you merely balance with it."

"I shall know better, with practice, sir. I have not lived in a walking country, you know."

"True," said Mr. Crisparkle. "Get into a little training, and we will have a few score miles together. I should leave you nowhere now. Do you come back before dinner?"

"I think not, as we dine early."

Mr. Crisparkle gave him a bright nod and a cheerful good-bye, expressing (not without intention) absolute confidence and ease.

Neville repaired to the Nuns' House and requested that Miss Landless be informed that her brother was there by appointment. He waited at the gate, not even crossing the threshold, for he was on his parole not to put himself in Rosa's way.

His sister was at least as mindful of the obligation they had taken upon themselves as he could be, and lost no moment in joining him. They met affectionately, avoided lingering, and walked toward the upper inland country.

"I am not going to tread upon forbidden ground, Helena," Neville said when they had walked some distance and were turning. "You will understand in another moment that I cannot help referring to—what shall I say?—my infatuation."

"Had you not better avoid it, Neville? You know that I can hear nothing."

"You can hear, my dear, what Mr. Crisparkle has heard, and heard with approval."

"Yes; I can hear so much."

"Well, it is this. I am not only unsettled and unhappy myself, but I am conscious of unsettling and interfering with other people. How do I know that, but for my unfortunate presence, you, and—and—the rest of that former party, our engaging guardian excepted, might be dining cheerfully in Minor Canon Corner tomorrow? Indeed, it probably would be so. I can see too well that I am not high in the old lady's opinion, and it is easy to understand what an irksome clog I must be upon the hospitalities of her orderly house—especially at this time of year—when I must be kept asunder from this person, and there is such a reason for my not being brought into contact with that person, and an unfavorable reputation has preceded me with such another person; and so on. I have put this very gently to Mr. Crisparkle, for you know his self-denying ways; but still I have put it. What I have laid much greater stress upon at the same time is, that I am engaged in a miserable struggle with myself, and that a little change and absence may enable me to come through it the better. So, the weather being bright and hard, I am going on a walking expedition, and intend taking myself out of everybody's way (my own included, I hope) tomorrow morning."

"When to come back?"

"In a fortnight."

"And going quite alone?"

"I am much better without company, even if there were any one but you to bear me company, my dear Helena."

"Mr. Crisparkle entirely agrees, you say?"

"Entirely. I am not sure but that at first he was inclined to think it rather a moody scheme, and one that might do a brooding mind harm. But we took a moonlight walk last Monday night to talk it over at leisure, and I represented the case to him as it really is. I showed him that I do want to conquer myself, and that, this evening well got over, it is surely better that I should be away from here just now, than here. I could hardly help meeting certain people walking together here, and that could do no good, and is certainly not the way to forget. A fortnight hence, that chance will probably be over, for the time; and when it again arises for the last time, why, I can again go away. Farther, I really do feel hopeful of bracing exercise and wholesome fatigue. You know that Mr. Crisparkle allows such things their full weight in the preservation of his own sound mind in his own sound body, and that his just spirit is not likely to maintain one set of natural laws for himself and another for me. He yielded to my view of the matter, when convinced that I was honestly in earnest; and so, with his full consent, I start tomorrow morning. Early enough to be not only out of the streets, but out of hearing of the bells, when the good people go to church."

Helena thought it over and thought well of it. Mr. Crisparkle doing so, she would do so; but she did originally, out of her own mind, think well of it, as a healthy project denoting a sincere endeavor and an active attempt at self-correction. She was inclined to pity him, poor fellow, for going away solitary on the great Christmas festival; but she felt it much more to the purpose to encourage him. And she did encourage him.

He will write to her?

He will write to her every alternate day and tell her all his adventures.

Does he send clothes on in advance of him?

"My dear Helena, no. Travel like a pilgrim, with wallet and staff. My wallet—or my knapsack—is packed and ready for strapping on; and here is my staff!"

He handed it to her; she made the same remark as Mr. Crisparkle, that it was very heavy, and gave it back to him, asking what wood it was? Iron-wood.

Up to this point he had been extremely cheerful. Perhaps, the having to carry his case with her and therefore present it in its brightest aspect, had roused his spirits. Perhaps, the having done so with success, was followed by a revulsion. As the day closed in and the city-lights began to spring up before them, he grew depressed.

"I wish I were not going to this dinner, Helena."

"Dear Neville, is it worth while to care much about it? Think how soon it will be over."

"How soon it will be over!" he repeated gloomily. "Yes. But I don't like it."

"There may be a moment's awkwardness," she cheerfully represented to him, "but it can only last a moment. You are quite sure of yourself."

"I wish I felt as sure of everything else, as I feel of myself," he answered her.

"How strangely you speak, dear! What do you mean?"

"Helena, I don't know. I only know that I don't like it. What a strange dead weight there is in the air!"

She called his attention to those copperous clouds beyond the river and said that the wind was rising. He scarcely spoke again until he took leave of her at the gate of the Nuns' House. She did not immediately enter when they had parted, but remained looking after him along the street. Twice he passed the gatehouse, reluctant to enter. At length, the cathedral clock chiming one quarter, with a rapid turn he hurried in.

And so *he* went up the postern stair.

Edwin Drood passed a solitary day. Something of deeper moment than he had thought had gone out of his life; and in the silence of his own chamber he wept for it last night. Though the image of Miss Landless still hovered in the background of his mind, the pretty little affectionate creature, so much firmer and wiser than he had supposed, occupied its stronghold. It was with some misgiving of his own unworthiness that he thought of her, and of what they might have been to one another if he had been more in earnest some time ago; if he had set a higher value on her; if, instead of accepting his lot in life as an inheritance of course, he had studied the right way to its appreciation and enhancement. And still, for all this, and though there was a sharp heartache in all this, the vanity and caprice of youth sustained that handsome figure of Miss Landless in the background of his mind.

That was a curious look of Rosa's when they parted at the gate. Did it mean that she saw below the surface of his thoughts, and down into their twilight depths? Scarcely that, for it was a look of astonished and keen inquiry. He decided that he could not understand it, though it was remarkably expressive.

As he only waited for Mr. Grewgious now and would depart immediately after having seen him, he took a sauntering leave of the ancient city and its neighborhood. He recalled the time when Rosa and he walked here or there, mere children, full of the dignity of being engaged. Poor children! he thought, with a pitying sadness.

Finding that his watch had stopped, he turned into the jeweler's shop to have it wound and set. The jeweler was knowing on the subject of a bracelet, which he begged leave to submit, in a general and quite aimless way. It would suit (he considered) a young bride to perfection; especially if of a rather diminutive style of beauty. Finding the bracelet but coldly looked at, the jeweler invited attention to a tray of rings for gentlemen; here was a style of ring, now, he remarked—a very chaste signet—which gentlemen were much given to purchasing when changing their condition. A ring of a very responsible appearance. With the date of their wedding-day engraved inside, several gentlemen had preferred it to any other kind of memento.

The rings were as coldly viewed as the bracelet. Edwin told the tempter that he wore no jewelry but his watch and chain, which were his father's; and his shirt-pin.

"That I was aware of," was the jeweler's reply, "for Mr. Jasper dropped in for a watch-glass the other day, and, in fact, I showed these articles to him, remarking that if he *should* wish to make a present to a gentleman relative, on any particular occasion—but he said with a smile that he had an inventory in his mind of all the jewelry his gentleman relative ever wore; namely, his watch and chain, and his shirt-pin
