At this juncture, a stranger materialized in Cloisterham. He was a figure of considerable age, distinguished by a head of snow-white hair and eyebrows of stark black. Clad in a tight-fitting blue surcoat, a buff waistcoat, and grey trousers, he possessed a distinct military bearing. Yet, upon announcing his arrival at the Crozier—the city's orthodox hotel, where he deposited a portmanteau—he declared himself an idle dog subsisting entirely upon his means. Furthermore, he proclaimed his intention to secure lodging within the picturesque old city for a month or two, with the ultimate aim of settling down permanently. Both declarations were broadcast from the coffee-room of the Crozier, to all whom it might or might not concern, by the stranger as he stood with his back to the empty fireplace, patiently awaiting his fried sole, veal cutlet, and pint of sherry. The waiter, business being chronically slack at the establishment, represented "all whom it might or might not concern" and absorbed the entirety of the information.

This gentleman's white head was unusually large, and his shock of white hair was unusually thick and ample. "I suppose," he remarked, shaking his mane with the vigor of a Newfoundland dog preparing to sit for dinner, "that a fair lodging for a single buffer might be found in these parts, eh?"

The waiter harbored no doubt regarding this possibility.

"Something old," said the gentleman. "Take my hat down for a moment from that peg, will you? No, I do not wish it; look inside. What inscription bears witness there?"

The waiter read aloud: "Datchery."

"Now you know my name," said the gentleman; "Dick Datchery. Hang it up again. I was saying that something old is what I should prefer; something odd and out of the way; something venerable, architectural, and inconvenient."

"We possess a good selection of inconvenient lodgings in the town, sir, I believe," replied the waiter, displaying modest confidence in the municipality's resources in that regard; "indeed, I have no doubt we could accommodate you in that respect, however particular you might be. But an architectural lodging!" That notion seemed to trouble the waiter's brow, and he shook his head.

"Anything Cathedral-like, now," Mr. Datchery suggested.

"Mr. Tope," said the waiter, brightening as he rubbed his chin with his hand, "would be the likeliest party to inform you in that line."

"Who is Mr. Tope?" inquired Dick Datchery.

The waiter explained that he served as the Verger, and that Mrs. Tope had indeed, at one time, let lodgings or offered to do so; but since no one had ever accepted, Mrs. Tope's window-bill, long a Cloisterham institution, had vanished; presumably, it had fallen one day and never been replaced.

"I shall call upon Mrs. Tope," said Mr. Datchery, "after dinner."

Thus, having finished his repast, he was duly directed to the location and sallied forth. However, the Crozier being an hotel of a most retiring disposition, and the waiter's directions being fatally precise, he soon became bewildered. He wandered bogglingly about the Cathedral Tower, whenever he could catch a glimpse of it, carrying a general impression that Mrs. Tope's residence lay somewhere very near it, and that, like the children in the game of hot boiled beans and very good butter, he was warm in his search when he saw the Tower, and cold when he did not.

He was growing very cold indeed when he stumbled upon a fragment of burial-ground where an unhappy sheep was grazing. It was unhappy because a hideous small boy was stoning it through the railings; he had already lamed the creature in one leg and was much excited by the benevolent, sportsmanlike purpose of breaking its other three legs and bringing it down.

"'Tis him again!" cried the boy as the poor beast leaped; "and made a dint in his wool."

"Let him be!" said Mr. Datchery. "Do you not see you have lamed him?"

"Yer lie," returned the sportsman. "'E went and lamed isself. I see 'im do it, and I giv' 'im a shy as a Widdy-warning to 'im not to go a-bruisin' 'is master's mutton any more."

"Come here."

"I won't; I'll come when yer can ketch me."

"Stay there then, and show me which is Mr. Tope's."

"Ow can I stay here and show you which is Topeseses, when Topeseses is t'other side the Kinfreederal, and over the crossings, and round ever so many comers? Stoo-pid! Ya-a-ah!"

"Show me where it is, and I'll give you something."

"Come on, then."

This brisk dialogue concluded, the boy led the way and, by-and-by, stopped at some distance from an arched passage, pointing.

"Lookie yonder. You see that there winder and door?"

"That's Tope's?"

"Yer lie; it ain't. That's Jarsper's."

"Indeed?" said Mr. Datchery, with a second look of some interest.

"Yes, and I ain't a-goin' no nearer 'IM, I tell yer."

"Why not?"

"'Cos I ain't a-goin' to be lifted off my legs and 'ave my braces bust and be choked; not if I knows it, and not by 'Im. Wait till I set a jolly good flint a-flyin' at the back o' 'is jolly old 'ed some day! Now look t'other side the harch; not the side where Jarsper's door is; t'other side."

"I see."

"A little way in, o' that side, there's a low door, down two steps. That's Topeseses with 'is name on a hoval plate."

"Good. See here," said Mr. Datchery, producing a shilling. "You owe me half of this."

"Yer lie! I don't owe yer nothing; I never seen yer."

"I tell you you owe me half of this, because I have no sixpence in my pocket. So the next time you meet me you shall do something else for me, to pay me."

"All right, give us 'old."

"What is your name, and where do you live?"

"Deputy. Travellers' Twopenny, 'cross the green."

The boy instantly darted off with the shilling, lest Mr. Datchery should repent, but stopped at a safe distance, on the happy chance of his being uneasy in his mind about it, to goad him with a demon dance expressive of its irrevocability.

Mr. Datchery, taking off his hat to give that shock of white hair another shake, seemed quite resigned and betook himself whither he had been directed.

Mr. Tope's official dwelling, communicating by an upper stair with Mr. Jasper's (hence Mrs. Tope's attendance on that gentleman), was of very modest proportions and partook of the character of a cool dungeon. Its ancient walls were massive, and its rooms rather seemed to have been dug out of them than designed beforehand with any reference to them. The main door opened at once onto a chamber of no describable shape, with a groined roof, which in its turn opened onto another chamber of no describable shape, with another groined roof: their windows small and situated in the thickness of the walls. These two chambers, close as to their atmosphere and swarthy as to their illumination by natural light, were the apartments which Mrs. Tope had so long offered to an unappreciative city. Mr. Datchery, however, was more appreciative. He found that if he sat with the main door open he would enjoy the passing society of all comers to and fro by the gateway and have sufficient light. He found that if Mr. and Mrs. Tope, living overhead, used for their own egress and ingress a little side stair that came plump into the Precincts by a door opening outward—to the surprise and inconvenience of a limited public of pedestrians in a narrow way—he would be alone, as in a separate residence. He found the rent moderate, and everything as quaintly inconvenient as he could desire. He agreed, therefore, to take the lodging then and there, paying money down, with possession to be had the next evening, on condition that reference was permitted him to Mr. Jasper as occupying the gatehouse, of which, on the other side of the gateway, the Verger's hole-in-the-wall was an appanage or subsidiary part.

The poor dear gentleman was very solitary and very sad, Mrs. Tope said, but she had no doubt he would "speak for her." Perhaps Mr. Datchery had heard something of what had occurred there last winter?

Mr. Datchery possessed as confused a knowledge of the event in question, on trying to recall it, as he well could have. He begged Mrs. Tope's pardon when she found it incumbent on her to correct him in every detail of his summary of the facts, but pleaded that he was merely a single buffer getting through life upon his means as idly as he could, and that so many people were so constantly making away with so many other people, as to render it difficult for a buffer of an easy temper to preserve the circumstances of the several cases unmixed in his mind.

Mr. Jasper proving willing to speak for Mrs. Tope, Mr. Datchery, who had sent up his card, was invited to ascend the postern staircase. The Mayor was there, Mr. Tope said; but he was not to be regarded in the light of company, as he and Mr. Jasper were great friends.

"I beg pardon," said Mr. Datchery, making a leg with his hat under his arm as he addressed himself equally to both gentlemen; "a selfish precaution on my part, and not personally interesting to anybody but myself. But as a buffer living on his means, and having an idea of doing it in this lovely place in peace and quiet for the remaining span of my life, I beg to ask if the Tope family are quite respectable?"

Mr. Jasper could answer that without the slightest hesitation.

"That is enough, sir," said Mr. Datchery.

"My friend the Mayor," added Mr. Jasper, presenting Mr. Datchery with a courtly motion of his hand toward that potentate; "whose recommendation is actually much more important to a stranger than that of an obscure person like myself, will testify in their behalf, I am sure."

"The Worshipful the Mayor," said Mr. Datchery, with a low bow, "places me under an infinite obligation."

"Very good people, sir, Mr. and Mrs. Tope," said Mr. Sapsea, with condescension. "Very good opinions. Very well behaved. Very respectful. Much approved by the Dean and Chapter."

"The Worshipful the Mayor gives them a character," said Mr. Datchery, "of which they may indeed be proud. I would ask His Honour (if I might be permitted) whether there are not many objects of great interest in the city which is under his beneficent sway?"

"We are, sir," returned Mr. Sapsea, "an ancient city, and an ecclesiastical city. We are a constitutional city, as it becomes such a city to be, and we uphold and maintain our glorious privileges."

"His Honour," said Mr. Datchery, bowing, "inspires me with a desire to know more of the city, and confirms me in my inclination to end my days in the city."

"Retired from the Army, sir?" suggested Mr. Sapsea.

"His Honour the Mayor does me too much credit," returned Mr. Datchery.

"Navy, sir?" suggested Mr. Sapsea.

"Again," repeated Mr. Datchery, "His Honour the Mayor does me too much credit."

"Diplomacy is a fine profession," said Mr. Sapsea, as a general remark.

"There, I confess, His Honour the Mayor is too many for me," said Mr. Datchery, with an ingenious smile and bow; "even a diplomatic bird must fall to such a gun."

Now this was very soothing. Here was a gentleman of a great, not to say a grand, address, accustomed to rank and dignity, really setting a fine example of how to behave to a Mayor. There was something in that third-person style of being spoken to that Mr. Sapsea found particularly recognizant of his merits and position.

"But I crave pardon," said Mr. Datchery. "His Honour the Mayor will bear with me, if for a moment I have been deluded into occupying his time, and have forgotten the humble claims upon my own, of my hotel, the Crozier."

"Not at all, sir," said Mr. Sapsea. "I am returning home, and if you would like to take the exterior of our Cathedral in your way, I shall be glad to point it out."

"His Honour the Mayor," said Mr. Datchery, "is more than kind and gracious."

As Mr. Datchery, when he had made his acknowledgments to Mr. Jasper, could not be induced to go out of the room before the Worshipful, the Worshipful led the way downstairs; Mr. Datchery following with his hat under his arm and his shock of white hair streaming in the evening breeze.

"Might I ask His Honour," said Mr. Datchery, "whether that gentleman we have just left is the gentleman of whom I have heard in the neighbourhood as being much afflicted by the loss of a nephew, and concentrating his life on avenging the loss?"

"That is the gentleman. John Jasper, sir."

"Would His Honour allow me to inquire whether there are strong suspicions of any one?"

"More than suspicions, sir," returned Mr. Sapsea; "all but certainties."

"Only think now!" cried Mr. Datchery.

"But proof, sir, proof must be built up stone by stone
