Though Mr. Crisparkle and John Jasper encountered one another daily beneath the vaulted roof of the Cathedral, the air between them remained thick with unspoken tension. Since the half-year mark when Jasper had silently shown the Minor Canon the final entries of his diary regarding Edwin Drood, no direct conversation concerning the missing young man had ever occurred. It was unlikely they ever would. Each man viewed the other as a perplexing enigma; Jasper, the relentless pursuer of Neville Landless, and Crisparkle, his steadfast defender, stood in such ideological opposition that speculating on the other's hidden motives felt like walking into a trap. Yet, neither dared to break the silence.

False pretense was not in the Minor Canon's nature; he would have openly invited discussion if Jasper had allowed it. But Jasper's reticence was absolute. Impassive, moody, and resolutely solitary, he was so consumed by a single, fixed purpose that he shared nothing of his spirit with any fellow creature. While his art allowed him to move in mechanical harmony with others, his inner self remained morally isolated from the world around him—a state he had once confessed to his lost nephew before his current inflexibility hardened.

Jasper undoubtedly knew of Rosa's abrupt departure and guessed its cause. Whether he believed he had terrified her into silence or suspected she had confided in Crisparkle remained a mystery to the Minor Canon. As a just man, Crisparkle admitted that loving Rosa was no crime, nor was offering love above revenge. The dreadful suspicion that Jasper harbored—that he might have murdered his nephew—found no harbor in Crisparkle's mind. Even Mr. Grewgious, who detested Jasper, never voiced such a thought aloud, though he privately recalled a specific evening when he had warmed his hands at the gatehouse fire, staring down at a heap of torn, muddy clothes on the floor.

Cloisterham, drowsy and indifferent, oscillated between theories: had the nephew been killed by a treacherous rival, slain in open struggle, or spirited away for his own ends? The town would lift its head to note that the grieving Jasper remained devoted to discovery and revenge, only to doze off again. This was the state of affairs when the narrative resumes.

The Cathedral doors had closed for the night. The Choir-master, granted a brief leave of absence, turned his face toward London. He traveled by the same means Rosa had, arriving on a hot, dusty evening at a hybrid establishment in a small square behind Aldersgate Street, near the General Post Office. It was a lodging-house that advertised itself as a novel enterprise, timidly suggesting that travelers might have their boots blacked instead of their stomachs for a fixed charge. Many true Britons, observing such leveling times, deduced that the era was changing, save for the high roads which were destined to vanish soon.

Crisparkle ate without appetite and soon ventured forth again, walking eastward through stale streets until he reached a miserable court, the most wretched of many such. He climbed a broken staircase, opened a door, and peered into a dark, stifling room. "Are you alone here?" he asked.

"Alone, deary; worse luck for me, and better for you," replied a croaking voice. "Come in, whoever you be. I can't see you till I light a match, yet I seem to know the sound of your speaking. I'm acquainted with you, ain't I?"

"Light your match, and try."

"So I will, deary... but my hand shakes, and I cough so that my matches jump and start like live things. Are you off a voyage, deary?"

"No."

"Not seafaring?"

"No."

"Well, there's land customers and water customers. I'm a mother to both... Here's a match, and now where's the candle?"

She found the candle and lit it, but the cough seized her instantly. She sat rocking herself, gasping, "O, my lungs is awful bad! my lungs is wore away to cabbage-nets!" Until the fit passed, she had no power of sight. As it left her, she strained her eyes and stared.

"Why, it's you!"

"Are you so surprised to see me?"

"I thought I never should have seen you again, deary. I thought you was dead, and gone to Heaven."

"Why?"

"I didn't suppose you could have kept away, alive, so long, from the poor old soul with the real receipt for mixing it. And you are in mourning too! Why didn't you come and have a pipe or two of comfort? Did they leave you money, perhaps, and so you didn't want comfort?"

"No."

"Who was they as died, deary?"

"A relative."

"Died of what, lovey?"

"Probably, Death."

"We are short to-night!" cried the woman, laughing propitiatorily. "Short and snappish we are! But we're out of sorts for want of a smoke. We've got the all-overs, haven't us, deary? But this is the place to cure 'em in; this is the place where the all-overs is smoked off."

"You may make ready, then," replied the visitor, "as soon as you like."

He removed his shoes, loosened his cravat, and lay across the foot of the squalid bed, his head resting on his left hand.

"Now you begin to look like yourself," said the woman approvingly. "Now I begin to know my old customer indeed! Been trying to mix for yourself this long time, poppet?"

"I have been taking it now and then in my own way."

"Never take it your own way. It ain't good for trade, and it ain't good for you. Where's my ink-bottle, and where's my thimble, and where's my little spoon? He's going to take it in an artful form now, my deary dear!"

As she began her process, bubbling and blowing at the faint spark in the hollow of her hands, she spoke in a tone of snuffling satisfaction. When he spoke, he did so without looking at her, his thoughts already roaming away by anticipation.

"I've got a pretty many smokes ready for you, first and last, haven't I, chuckey?"

"A good many."

"When you first come, you was quite new to it; warn't ye?"

"Yes, I was easily disposed of, then."

"But you got on in the world, and was able by-and-by to take your pipe with the best of 'em, warn't ye?"

"Ah; and the worst."

"It's just ready for you. What a sweet singer you was when you first come! Used to drop your head, and sing yourself off like a bird! It's ready for you now, deary."

He took the pipe with great care and put the mouthpiece to his lips. She seated herself beside him, ready to refill it. After inhaling a few whiffs in silence, he doubtingly accosted her.

"Is it as potent as it used to be?"

"What do you speak of, deary?"

"What should I speak of, but what I have in my mouth?"

"It's just the same. Always the identical same."

"It doesn't taste so. And it's slower."

"You've got more used to it, you see."

"That may be the cause, certainly. Look here." He stopped, becoming dreamy, and seemed to forget that he had invited her attention. She bent over him, speaking in his ear.

"I'm attending to you. Says you just now, Look here. Says I now, I'm attending to ye. We was talking just before of your being used to it."

"I know all that. I was only thinking. Look here. Suppose you had something in your mind; something you were going to do."

"Yes, deary; something I was going to do?"

"But had not quite determined to do."

"Yes, deary."

"Might or might not do, you understand."

"Yes." With the point of a needle she stirred the contents of the bowl.

"Should you do it in your fancy, when you were lying here doing this?"

She nodded. "Over and over again."

"Just like me! I did it over and over again. I have done it hundreds of thousands of times in this room."

"It's to be hoped it was pleasant to do, deary."

"It _was_ pleasant to do!"

He said this with a savage air and a spring or start at her. Unmoved, she retouched and replenished the bowl with her little spatula. Seeing her intent upon the occupation, he sank into his former attitude.

"It was a journey, a difficult and dangerous journey. That was the subject in my mind. A hazardous and perilous journey, over abysses where a slip would be destruction. Look down, look down! You see what lies at the bottom there?"

He darted forward to point at the ground as though at some imaginary object far beneath. The woman looked at him, as his spasmodic face approached close to hers, not at his pointing. She seemed to know the influence of her perfect quietude; if so, she had not miscalculated it, for he subsided again.

"Well; I have told you I did it here hundreds of thousands of times. What do I say? I did it millions and billions of times. I did it so often, and through such vast expanses of time, that when it was really done, it seemed not worth the doing, it was done so soon."

"That's the journey you have been away upon," she quietly remarked.

He glared at her as he smoked; then, his eyes becoming filmy, answered: "That's the journey."

Silence ensued. His eyes were sometimes closed and sometimes open. The woman sat beside him, very attentive to the pipe, which was all the while at his lips.

"I'll warrant," she observed, when he had been looking fixedly at her for some consecutive moments, with a singular appearance in his eyes of seeming to see her a long way off, instead of so near him: "I'll warrant you made the journey in a many ways, when you made it so often?"

"No, always in one way."

"Always in the same way?"

"Ay."

"In the way in which it was really made at last?"

"Ay."

"And always took the same pleasure in harping on it?"

"Ay."

For the time he appeared unequal to any other reply than this lazy monosyllabic assent. Probably to assure herself that it was not the assent of a mere automaton, she reversed the form of her next sentence.

"Did you never get tired of it, deary, and try to call up something else for a change?"

He struggled into a sitting posture and retorted upon her: "What do you mean? What did I want? What did I come for?"

She gently laid him back again, and before returning him the instrument he had dropped, revived the fire in it with her own breath; then said to him, coaxingly:

"Sure, sure, sure! Yes, yes, yes! Now I go along with you. You was too quick for me. I see now. You come o' purpose to take the journey. Why, I might have known it, through its standing by you so."

He answered first with a laugh, and then with a passionate setting of his teeth: "Yes, I came on purpose. When I could not bear my life, I came to get the relief, and I got it. It WAS one! It WAS one!" This repetition with extraordinary vehemence, and the snarl of a wolf.

She observed him very cautiously, as though mentally feeling her way to her next remark. It was: "There was a fellow-traveller, deary."

"Ha, ha, ha!" He broke into a ringing laugh, or rather yell.

"To think," he cried, "how often fellow-traveller, and yet not know it! To think how many times he went the journey, and never saw the road!"

The woman knelt upon the floor, with her arms crossed on the coverlet of the bed, close by him, and her chin upon them. In this crouching attitude she watched him. The pipe was falling from his mouth. She put it back, and laying her hand upon his chest, moved him slightly from side to side. Upon that he spoke, as if she had spoken.

"Yes! I always made the journey first, before the changes of colours and the great landscapes and glittering processions began. They couldn't begin till it was off my mind. I had no room till then for anything else."

Once more he lapsed into silence. Once more she laid her hand upon his chest, and moved him slightly to and fro, as a cat might stimulate a half-slain mouse. Once more he spoke, as if she had spoken.

[Illustration: Sleeping it off]

"What? I told you so. When it comes to be real at last, it is so short that it seems unreal for the first time. Hark!"

"Yes, deary. I'm listening."

"Time and place are both at hand."

He was on his feet, speaking in a whisper, and as if in the dark.

"Time, place, and fellow-traveller," she suggested, adopting his tone, and holding him softly by the arm.

"How could the time be at hand unless the fellow-traveller was? Hush! The journey's made. It's over."

"So soon?"

"That's what I said to you. So soon. Wait a little. This is a vision. I shall sleep it off. It has been too short and easy. I must have a better vision than this; this is the poorest of all. No struggle, no consciousness of peril, no entreaty—and yet I never saw _that_ before." With a start.

"Saw what, deary?"

"Look at it! Look what a poor, mean, miserable thing it is! _That_ must be real. It's over."

He had accompanied this incoherence with some wild unmeaning gestures; but they trailed off into the progressive inaction of stup
