How can the ancient English Cathedral tower be here? The well-known massive gray square tower of its old Cathedral? How can that be here! There is no spike of rusty iron in the air, between the eye and it, from any point of the real prospect. What is the spike that intervenes, and who has set it up? Perhaps it is erected by the Sultan's orders for the impaling of a horde of Turkish robbers, one by one. It is so, for cymbals clash, and the Sultan goes by to his palace in long procession. Ten thousand scimitars flash in the sunlight, and thrice ten thousand dancing-girls strew flowers. Then follow white elephants caparisoned in countless gorgeous colours, and infinite in number and attendants. Still the Cathedral Tower rises in the background, where it cannot be, and still no writhing figure is on the grim spike. Stay! Is the spike so low a thing as the rusty spike on the top of a post of an old bedstead that has tumbled all awry? Some vague period of drowsy laughter must be devoted to the consideration of this possibility.

Shaking from head to foot, the man whose scattered consciousness has thus fantastically pieced itself together, at length rises, supports his trembling frame upon his arms, and looks around. He is in the meanest and closest of small rooms. Through the ragged window-curtain, the light of early day steals in from a miserable court. He lies, dressed, across a large unseemly bed, upon a bedstead that has indeed given way under the weight upon it. Lying, also dressed and also across the bed, not longwise, are a Chinaman, a Lascar, and a haggard woman. The two first are in a sleep or stupor; the last is blowing at a kind of pipe, to kindle it. And as she blows, and shading it with her lean hand, concentrates its red spark of light, it serves in the dim morning as a lamp to show him what he sees of her.

"Another?" says this woman, in a querulous, rattling whisper. "Have another?"

He looks about him, with his hand to his forehead.

"Ye've smoked as many as five since ye come in at midnight," the woman goes on, as she chronically complains. "Poor me, poor me, my head is so bad. Them two come in after ye. Ah, poor me, the business is slack, is slack! Few Chinamen about the Docks, and fewer Lascars, and no ships coming in, these say! Here's another ready for ye, deary. Ye'll remember like a good soul, won't ye, that the market price is dreffle high just now? More nor three shillings and sixpence for a thimbleful! And ye'll remember that nobody but me (and Jack Chinaman t'other side the court; but he can't do it as well as me) has the true secret of mixing it? Ye'll pay up accordingly, deary, won't ye?"

She blows at the pipe as she speaks, and, occasionally bubbling at it, inhales much of its contents.

"O me, O me, my lungs is weak, my lungs is bad! It's nearly ready for ye, deary. Ah, poor me, poor me, my poor hand shakes like to drop off! I see ye coming-to, and I ses to my poor self, 'I'll have another ready for him, and he'll bear in mind the market price of opium, and pay according.' O my poor head! I makes my pipes of old penny ink-bottles, ye see, deary—this is one—and I fits-in a mouthpiece, this way, and I takes my mixter out of this thimble with this little horn spoon; and so I fills, deary. Ah, my poor nerves! I got Heavens-hard drunk for sixteen year afore I took to this; but this don't hurt me, not to speak of. And it takes away the hunger as well as wittles, deary."

She hands him the nearly-emptied pipe, and sinks back, turning over on her face.

He rises unsteadily from the bed, lays the pipe upon the hearth-stone, draws back the ragged curtain, and looks with repugnance at his three companions. He notices that the woman has opium-smoked herself into a strange likeness of the Chinaman. His form of cheek, eye, and temple, and his colour, are repeated in her. Said Chinaman convulsively wrestles with one of his many Gods or Devils, perhaps, and snarls horribly. The Lascar laughs and dribbles at the mouth. The hostess is still.

"What visions can *she* have?" the waking man muses, as he turns her face towards him, and stands looking down at it. "Visions of many butchers' shops, and public-houses, and much credit? Of an increase of hideous customers, and this horrible bedstead set upright again, and this horrible court swept clean? What can she rise to, under any quantity of opium, higher than that!—Eh?"

He bends down his ear, to listen to her mutterings.

"Unintelligible!"

As he watches the spasmodic shoots and darts that break out of her face and limbs, like fitful lightning out of a dark sky, some contagion in them seizes upon him: insomuch that he has to withdraw himself to a lean arm-chair by the hearth—placed there, perhaps, for such emergencies—and to sit in it, holding tight, until he has got the better of this unclean spirit of imitation.

Then he comes back, pounces on the Chinaman, and seizing him with both hands by the throat, turns him violently on the bed. The Chinaman clutches the aggressive hands, resists, gasps, and protests.

"What do you say?"

A watchful pause.

"Unintelligible!"

Slowly loosening his grasp as he listens to the incoherent jargon with an attentive frown, he turns to the Lascar and fairly drags him forth upon the floor. As he falls, the Lascar starts into a half-risen attitude, glares with his eyes, lashes about him fiercely with his arms, and draws a phantom knife. It then becomes apparent that the woman has taken possession of this knife, for safety's sake; for, she too starting up, and restraining and expostulating with him, the knife is visible in her dress, not in his, when they drowsily drop back, side by side.

There has been chattering and clattering enough between them, but to no purpose. When any distinct word has been flung into the air, it has had no sense or sequence. Wherefore "unintelligible!" is again the comment of the watcher, made with some reassured nodding of his head, and a gloomy smile. He then lays certain silver money on the table, finds his hat, gropes his way down the broken stairs, gives a good morning to some rat-ridden doorkeeper, in bed in a black hutch beneath the stairs, and passes out.

That same afternoon, the massive gray square tower of an old Cathedral rises before the sight of a jaded traveller. The bells are going for daily vesper service, and he must needs attend it, one would say, from his haste to reach the open Cathedral door. The choir are getting on their sullied white robes, in a hurry, when he arrives among them, gets on his own robe, and falls into the procession filing in to service. Then, the Sacristan locks the iron-barred gates that divide the sanctuary from the chancel, and all of the procession having scuttled into their places, hide their faces; and then the intoned words, "WHEN THE WICKED MAN—" rise among groins of arches and beams of roof, awakening muttered thunder.

It is a curious observation regarding the rook, that sedate and clerical bird, that when he flies homeward toward nightfall in a flock of his own kind, two of them will suddenly detach themselves from the rest. They retrace their flight for a distance, hovering and lingering in the air, conveying to mere men the fancy that it is of some occult importance to the body politic that this artful couple should pretend to have renounced connection with it.

Similarly, when service ended in the old Cathedral with the square tower, and the choir scuffled out again, and divers venerable persons of rook-like aspect dispersed, two of these latter retraced their steps and walked together in the echoing Close.

Not only was the day waning, but the year. The low sun was fiery and yet cold behind the monastery ruin, and the Virginia creeper on the Cathedral wall had showered half its deep-red leaves down on the pavement. There had been rain that afternoon, and a wintry shudder went among the little pools on the cracked, uneven flagstones, and through the giant elm-trees as they shed a gust of tears. Their fallen leaves lay strewn thickly about. Some of these leaves, in a timid rush, sought sanctuary within the low arched Cathedral door; but two men coming out resisted them and cast them forth again with their feet. This done, one of the two locked the door with a goodly key, and the other flitted away with a folio music-book.

"Mr. Jasper was that, Tope?"

"Yes, Mr. Dean."

"He has stayed late."

"Yes, Mr. Dean. I have stayed for him, your Reverence. He has been taken a little poorly."

"Say 'taken,' Tope—to the Dean," the younger rook interposed in a low tone with this touch of correction, as who should say: "You may offer bad grammar to the laity, or the humbler clergy, not to the Dean."

Mr. Tope, Chief Verger and Showman, and accustomed to be high with excursion parties, declined with a silent loftiness to perceive that any suggestion had been tendered to him.

"And when and how has Mr. Jasper been taken—for, as Mr. Crisparkle has remarked, it is better to say taken—taken—" repeated the Dean; "when and how has Mr. Jasper been Taken—"

"Taken, sir," Tope deferentially murmured.

"—Poorly, Tope?"

"Why, sir, Mr. Jasper was that breathed—"

"I wouldn't say 'That breathed,' Tope," Mr. Crisparkle interposed with the same touch as before. "Not English—to the Dean."

"Breathed to that extent," the Dean (not unflattered by this indirect homage) condescendingly remarked, "would be preferable."

"Mr. Jasper's breathing was so remarkably short"—thus discreetly did Mr. Tope work his way round the sunken rock—"when he came in, that it distressed him mightily to get his notes out: which was perhaps the cause of his having a kind of fit on him after a little. His memory grew DAZED." Mr. Tope, with his eyes on the Reverend Mr. Crisparkle, shot this word out, as defying him to improve upon it: "and a dimness and giddiness crept over him as strange as ever I saw: though he didn't seem to mind it particularly, himself. However, a little time and a little water brought him out of his DAZE." Mr. Tope repeated the word and its emphasis, with the air of saying: "As I _have_ made a success, I'll make it again."

"And Mr. Jasper has gone home quite himself, has he?" asked the Dean.

"Your Reverence, he has gone home quite himself. And I'm glad to see he's having his fire kindled up, for it's chilly after the wet, and the Cathedral had both a damp feel and a damp touch this afternoon, and he was very shivery."

They all three looked towards an old stone gatehouse crossing the Close, with an arched thoroughfare passing beneath it. Through its latticed window, a fire shone out upon the fast-darkening scene, involving in shadow the pendent masses of ivy and creeper covering the building's front. As the deep Cathedral-bell struck the hour, a ripple of wind went through these at their distance, like a ripple of the solemn sound that hums through tomb and tower, broken niche and defaced statue, in the pile close at hand.

"Is Mr. Jasper's nephew with him?" the Dean asked.

"No, sir," replied the Verger, "but expected. There's his own solitary shadow betwixt his two windows—the one looking this way, and the one looking down into the High Street—drawing his own curtains now."

"Well, well," said the Dean, with a sprightly air of breaking up the little conference, "I hope Mr. Jasper's heart may not be too much set upon his nephew. Our affections, however laudable, in this transitory world, should never master us; we should guide them, guide them. I find I am not disagreeably reminded of my dinner, by hearing my dinner-bell. Perhaps, Mr. Crisparkle, you will, before going home, look in on Jasper?"

"Certainly, Mr. Dean. And tell him that you had the kindness to desire to know how he was?"

"Ay; do so, do so. Certainly. Wished to know how he was. By all means. Wished to know how he was."

With a pleasant air of patronage, the Dean as nearly cocked his quaint hat as a Dean in good spirits may, and directed his comely gaiters towards the ruddy dining-room of the snug old red-brick house where he was at present, "in residence" with Mrs. Dean and Miss Dean.

Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon, fair and rosy, and perpetually pitching himself head-foremost into all the deep running water in the surrounding country; Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon, early riser, musical, classical, cheerful, kind, good-natured, social, contented, and boy-like; Mr. Crisparkle, Minor Canon and good man, lately "Coach" upon the chief Pagan high roads, but since promoted by a patron (grateful for a well-taught son) to his present Christian beat; betook himself to the gatehouse, on his way home to his early tea.

"Sorry to hear from Tope that you have not been well, Jasper."

"Oh, it was nothing, nothing!"

"You look a little worn."

"Do I? Oh, I don't think so. What is better, I don't feel so. Tope has made too much of it, I suspect. It's his trade to make the most of everything appertaining to the Cathedral, you know."

"I may tell the Dean—I call expressly from the Dean—that you are all right again?"

The reply, with a slight smile, was: "Certainly; with my respects and thanks to the Dean."

"I'm glad to hear that you expect young Drood."

"I expect the dear fellow every moment."

"Ah! He will do you more good than a doctor, Jasper."

"More good than a dozen doctors. For I love him dearly, and I don't love doctors, or doctors' stuff."

Mr. Jasper was a dark man of some six-and-twenty, with thick, lustrous, well-arranged black hair and whiskers. He looked older than he was, as dark men often do. His voice was deep and good, his face and figure were good, his manner was a little sombre. His room was a little sombre, and may have had its influence in forming his manner. It was mostly in shadow. Even when the sun shone brilliantly, it seldom touched the grand piano in the recess, or the folio music-books on the stand, or the book-shelves on the wall, or the unfinished picture of a blooming schoolgirl hanging over the chimneypiece; her flowing brown hair tied with a blue riband, and her beauty remarkable for a quite childish, almost babyish, touch of saucy discontent, comically conscious of itself. (There was not the least artistic merit in this picture, which was a mere daub; but it was clear that the painter had made it humorously—one might almost say, revengefully—like the original.)

"We shall miss you, Jasper, at the 'Alternate Musical Wednesdays' to-night; but no doubt you are best at home. Good-night. God bless you! 'Tell me, shep-herds, te-e-ell me; tell me-e-e, have you seen (have you seen, have you seen, have you seen) my-y-y Flo-o-ora-a pass this way!'" Melodiously good Minor Canon the Reverend Septimus Crisparkle thus delivered himself, in musical rhythm, as he withdrew his amiable face from the doorway and conveyed it downstairs.

Sounds of recognition and greeting passed between the Reverend Septimus and somebody else, at the stair-foot. Mr. Jasper listened, started from his chair, and caught a young fellow in his arms, exclaiming:

"My dear Edwin!"

"My dear Jack! So glad to see you!"

"Get off your greatcoat, bright boy, and sit down here in your own corner. Your feet are not wet? Pull your boots off. Do pull your boots off."

"My dear Jack, I am as dry as a bone. Don't moddley-coddley, there's a good fellow. I like anything better than being moddley-coddleyed."

With the check upon him of being unsympathetically restrained in a genial outburst of enthusiasm, Mr. Jasper stood still, and looked on intently at the young fellow, divesting himself of his outward coat, hat, gloves, and so forth. Once for all, a look of intentness and intensity—a look of hungry, exacting, watchful, and yet devoted affection—was always, now and ever afterwards, on the Jasper face whenever the Jasper face was addressed in this direction. And whenever it was so addressed, it was never, on this occasion or on any other, dividedly addressed; it was always concentrated.

"Now I am right, and now I'll take my corner, Jack. Any dinner, Jack?"

Mr. Jasper opened a door at the upper end of the room, and disclosed a small inner room pleasantly lighted and prepared, wherein a comely dame was in the act of setting dishes on table.

"What a jolly old Jack it is!" cried the young fellow, with a clap of his hands. "Look here, Jack; tell me; whose birthday is it?"

"Not yours, I know," Mr. Jasper answered, pausing to consider.

"Not mine, you know? No; not mine, _I_ know! Pussy's!"

Fixed as the look the young fellow met was, there was yet in it some strange power of suddenly including the sketch over the chimneypiece.

"Pussy's, Jack! We must drink Many happy returns to her. Come, uncle; take your dutiful and sharp-set nephew in to dinner."

As the boy (for he was little more) laid a hand on Jasper's shoulder, Jasper cordially and gaily laid a hand on _his_ shoulder, and so Marseillaise-wise they went in to dinner.

"And, Lord! here's Mrs. Tope!" cried the boy. "Lovelier than ever!"

"Never you mind me, Master Edwin," retorted the Verger's wife; "I can take care of myself."

"You can't. You're much too handsome. Give me a kiss because it's Pussy's birthday."

"I'd Pussy you, young man, if I was Pussy, as you call her," Mrs. Tope blushingly retorted, after being saluted. "Your uncle's too much wrapt up in you, that's where it is. He makes so much of you, that it's my opinion you think you've only to call your Pussys by the dozen, to make 'em come."

"You forget, Mrs. Tope," Mr. Jasper interposed, taking his place at the table with a genial smile, "and so do you, Ned, that Uncle and Nephew are words prohibited here by common consent and express agreement. For what we are going to receive His holy name be praised!"

"Done like the Dean! Witness, Edwin Drood! Please to carve, Jack, for I can't."

This sally ushered in the dinner. Little to the present purpose, or to any purpose, was said, while it was in course of being disposed of. At length the cloth was drawn, and a dish of walnuts and a decanter of rich-coloured sherry were placed upon the table.

"I say! Tell me, Jack," the young fellow then flowed on: "do you really and truly feel as if the mention of our relationship divided us at all? _I_ don't."

"Uncles as a rule, Ned, are so much older than their nephews," was the reply, "that I have that feeling instinctively."

"As a rule! Ah, may-be! But what is a difference in age of half-a-dozen years or so? And some uncles, in large families, are even younger than their nephews. By George, I wish it was the case with us!"

"Why?"

"Because if it was, I'd take the lead with you, Jack, and be as wise as Begone, dull Care! that turned a young man gray, and Begone, dull Care! that turned an old man to clay.—Halloa, Jack! Don't drink."

"Why not?"

"Asks why not, on Pussy's birthday, and no Happy returns proposed! Pussy, Jack, and many of 'em! Happy returns, I mean."

Laying an affectionate and laughing touch on the boy's extended hand, as if it were at once his giddy head and his light heart, Mr. Jasper drank the toast in silence.

"Hip, hip, hip, and nine times nine, and one to finish with, and all that, understood.

For reasons that the unfolding of this tale will make plain, the ancient cathedral town must be granted a fictitious name. Let it stand in these pages as Cloisterham. It bore other names in the days of the Druids, the Romans, the Saxons, and the Normans, but a name, shifting over centuries, holds little weight against the dust of its chronicles.

Cloisterham is an ancient city, ill-suited for those with a hunger for the noisy world. It is a monotonous, silent place, deriving an earthy flavor from its cathedral crypt and abounding in the vestiges of monastic graves. Here, children grow small salads in the dust of abbots and abbesses, fashioning dirt-pies of nuns and friars; while every ploughman in the outlying fields pays homage to the once-potent Lords Treasurers, Archbishops, and Bishops, grinding their bones to make his bread.

It is a drowsy city, whose inhabitants seem to believe, with a strangeness inconsistent with reality, that all its changes lie behind them and none await them. A queer moral to derive from antiquity, older than any traceable history. The streets of Cloisterham are so silent—though prone to echo at the slightest provocation—that on a summer day, the sunblinds of its shops scarce dare to flap in the south wind. Sun-browned tramps passing along, staring, quicken their limp merely to escape the confines of its oppressive respectability. This is a feat not difficult to achieve, seeing that the streets of Cloisterham city are little more than one narrow artery by which you enter and exit; the rest being mostly disappointing yards with pumps and no thoroughfare, save for the Cathedral-close and a paved Quaker settlement, in color and confirmation very like a Quakeress's bonnet, tucked away in a shady corner.

In short, Cloisterham is a city of another and a bygone time, with its hoarse cathedral bell, its hoarse rooks hovering about the tower, and its hoarser, less distinct rooks in the stalls far beneath. Fragments of old walls, saint's chapels, chapter-houses, convents, and monasteries have been incongruously or obstructively built into many of its houses and gardens, much as kindred jumbled notions have become incorporated into the minds of its citizens. All things here are of the past. Even its single pawnbroker takes in no pledges, nor has he for a long time, offering vainly an unredeemed stock for sale: costlier articles are dim and pale old watches seemingly in a slow perspiration, tarnished sugar-tongs with ineffectual legs, and odd volumes of dismal books. The most abundant and agreeable evidences of progressing life in Cloisterham are the evidences of vegetable life in its many gardens; even its drooping, despondent little theatre has its poor strip of garden, receiving the foul fiend, when he ducks from its stage into the infernal regions, among scarlet beans or oyster shells, according to the season.

In the midst of Cloisterham stands the Nuns' House: a venerable brick edifice, whose present appellation is doubtless derived from the legend of its conventual uses. On the trim gate enclosing its old courtyard is a resplendent brass plate flashing forth the legend: "Seminary for Young Ladies. Miss Twinkleton." The house-front is so old and worn, and the brass plate so shining and staring, that the general result has reminded imaginative strangers of a battered old beau with a large modern eye-glass stuck in his blind eye.

Whether the nuns of yore, being of a submissive rather than stiff-necked generation, habitually bent their contemplative heads to avoid collision with the beams in the low ceilings of the many chambers; whether they sat in its long low windows telling their beads for mortification instead of making necklaces of them for adornment; whether they were ever walled up alive in odd angles and jutting gables for having some ineradicable leaven of busy mother Nature in them which has kept the fermenting world alive ever since; these may be matters of interest to its haunting ghosts (if any), but constitute no item in Miss Twinkleton's half-yearly accounts. They are neither of Miss Twinkleton's inclusive regulars nor her extras. The lady who undertakes the poetical department of the establishment at so much (or so little) a quarter has no pieces in her list of recitals bearing on such unprofitable questions.

As, in some cases of drunkenness and in others of animal magnetism, there are two states of consciousness which never clash, but each pursues its separate course as though it were continuous instead of broken (thus, if I hide my watch when I am drunk, I must be drunk again before I can remember where), so Miss Twinkleton has two distinct and separate phases of being. Every night, the moment the young ladies retire to rest, does Miss Twinkleton smarten up her curls a little, brighten her eyes a little, and become a sprightlier Miss Twinkleton than the young ladies have ever seen. Every night, at the same hour, does Miss Twinkleton resume the topics of the previous night, comprehending the tenderer scandal of Cloisterham, of which she has no knowledge whatever by day, and references to a certain season at Tunbridge Wells (airily called by Miss Twinkleton in this state of her existence "The Wells"), notably the season wherein a certain finished gentleman (compassionately called by Miss Twinkleton, in this stage of her existence, "Foolish Mr. Porters") revealed a homage of the heart, whereof Miss Twinkleton, in her scholastic state of existence, is as ignorant as a granite pillar. Miss Twinkleton's companion in both states of existence, and equally adaptable to either, is one Mrs. Tisher: a deferential widow with a weak back, a chronic sigh, and a suppressed voice, who looks after the young ladies' wardrobes and leads them to infer that she has seen better days. Perhaps this is the reason why it is an article of faith with the servants, handed down from race to race, that the departed Tisher was a hairdresser.

The pet pupil of the Nuns' House is Miss Rosa Bud, of course called Rosebud; wonderfully pretty, wonderfully childish, wonderfully whimsical. An awkward interest (awkward because romantic) attaches to Miss Bud in the minds of the young ladies, on account of its being known to them that a husband has been chosen for her by will and bequest, and that her guardian is bound down to bestow her on that husband when he comes of age. Miss Twinkleton, in her seminarial state of existence, has combated the romantic aspect of this destiny by affecting to shake her head over it behind Miss Bud's dimpled shoulders, and to brood on the unhappy lot of that doomed little victim. But with no better effect—possibly some unfelt touch of Foolish Mr. Porters has undermined the endeavor—than to evoke from the young ladies a unanimous bedchamber cry of "O, what a pretending old thing Miss Twinkleton is, my dear!"

The Nuns' House is never in such a state of flutter as when this allotted husband calls to see little Rosebud. (It is unanimously understood by the young ladies that he is lawfully entitled to this privilege, and that if Miss Twinkleton disputed it, she would be instantly taken up and transported.) When his ring at the gate-bell is expected, or takes place, every young lady who can, under any pretence, look out of a window, looks out of a window; while every young lady who is "practising" practises out of time; and the French class becomes so demoralized that the mark goes round as briskly as the bottle at a convivial party in the last century.

On the afternoon of the day next after the dinner of two at the gatehouse, the bell is rung with the usual fluttering results.

"Mr. Edwin Drood to see Miss Rosa."

This is the announcement of the parlour-maid in chief. Miss Twinkleton, with an exemplary air of melancholy on her, turns to the sacrifice and says, "You may go down, my dear." Miss Bud goes down, followed by all eyes.

Mr. Edwin Drood is waiting in Miss Twinkleton's own parlour: a dainty room, with nothing more directly scholastic in it than a terrestrial and a celestial globe. These expressive machines imply (to parents and guardians) that even when Miss Twinkleton retires into the bosom of privacy, duty may at any moment compel her to become a sort of Wandering Jewess, scouring the earth and soaring through the skies in search of knowledge for her pupils.

The last new maid, who has never seen the young gentleman Miss Rosa is engaged to, and who is making his acquaintance between the hinges of the open door left ajar for the purpose, stumbles guiltily down the kitchen stairs, as a charming little apparition, with its face concealed by a little silk apron thrown over its head, glides into the parlour.

"O! it _is_ so ridiculous!" says the apparition, stopping and shrinking. "Don't, Eddy!"

"Don't what, Rosa?"

"Don't come any nearer, please. It _is_ so absurd."

"What is absurd, Rosa?"

"The whole thing is. It _is_ so absurd to be an engaged orphan and it _is_ so absurd to have the girls and the servants scuttling about after one, like mice in the wainscot; and it _is_ so absurd to be called upon!"

The apparition appears to have a thumb in the corner of its mouth while making this complaint.

"You give me an affectionate reception, Pussy, I must say."

"Well, I will in a minute, Eddy, but I can't just yet. How are you?" (very shortly.)

"I am unable to reply that I am much the better for seeing you, Pussy, inasmuch as I see nothing of you."

This second remonstrance brings a dark, bright, pouting eye out from a corner of the apron; but it swiftly becomes invisible again, as the apparition exclaims: "O good gracious! you have had half your hair cut off!"

"I should have done better to have had my head cut off, I think," says Edwin, rumpling the hair in question with a fierce glance at the looking-glass, and giving an impatient stamp. "Shall I go?"

"No; you needn't go just yet, Eddy. The girls would all be asking questions why you went."

"Once for all, Rosa, will you uncover that ridiculous little head of yours and give me a welcome?"

The apron is pulled off the childish head, as its wearer replies: "You're very welcome, Eddy. There! I'm sure that's nice. Shake hands. No, I can't kiss you, because I've got an acidulated drop in my mouth."

"Are you at all glad to see me, Pussy?"

"O, yes, I'm dreadfully glad.—Go and sit down.—Miss Twinkleton."

It is the custom of that excellent lady when these visits occur to appear every three minutes, either in her own person or in that of Mrs. Tisher, and lay an offering on the shrine of Propriety by affecting to look for some desiderated article. On the present occasion Miss Twinkleton, gracefully gliding in and out, says in passing: "How do you do, Mr. Drood? Very glad indeed to have the pleasure. Pray excuse me. Tweezers. Thank you!"

"I got the gloves last evening, Eddy, and I like them very much. They are beauties."

"Well, that's something," the affianced replies, half grumbling. "The smallest encouragement thankfully received. And how did you pass your birthday, Pussy?"

"Delightfully! Everybody gave me a present. And we had a feast. And we had a ball at night."

"A feast and a ball, eh? These occasions seem to go off tolerably well without me, Pussy."

"De-lightfully!" cries Rosa, in a quite spontaneous manner, and without the least pretence of reserve.

"Hah! And what was the feast?"

"Tarts, oranges, jellies, and shrimps."

"Any partners at the ball?"

"We danced with one another, of course, sir. But some of the girls made game to be their brothers. It _was_ so droll!"

"Did anybody make game to be—"

"To be you? O dear yes!" cries Rosa, laughing with great enjoyment. "That was the first thing done."

"I hope she did it pretty well," says Edwin rather doubtfully.

"O, it was excellent!—I wouldn't dance with you, you know."

Edwin scarcely seems to see the force of this; begs to know if he may take the liberty to ask why?

"Because I was so tired of you," returns Rosa. But she quickly adds, and pleadingly too, seeing displeasure in his face: "Dear Eddy, you were just as tired of me, you know."

"Did I say so, Rosa?"

"Say so! Do you ever say so? No, you only showed it. O, she did it so well!" cries Rosa, in a sudden ecstasy with her counterfeit betrothed.

"It strikes me that she must be a devilish impudent girl," says Edwin Drood. "And so, Pussy, you have passed your last birthday in this old house."

"Ah, yes!" Rosa clasps her hands, looks down with a sigh, and shakes her head.

"You seem to be sorry, Rosa."

"I am sorry for the poor old place. Somehow, I feel as if it would miss me, when I am gone so far away, so young."

"Perhaps we had better stop short, Rosa?"

She looks up at him with a swift bright look; next moment shakes her head, sighs, and looks down again.

"That is to say, is it, Pussy, that we are both resigned?"

She nods her head again, and after a short silence, quaintly bursts out with: "You know we must be married, and married from here, Eddy, or the poor girls

In the hierarchy of Cloisterham, where self-importance is often mistaken for self-sufficiency, Thomas Sapsea, the auctioneer, stands as the undisputed monarch of the jackass. He is a creature of immense stature, both in physical presence and in the sheer volume of his own importance. Mr. Sapsea dresses "at" the Dean, a privilege that has led to him being mistaken for the prelate himself on more than one occasion; he has been greeted with the reverence due to a bishop wandering incognito, a misidentification he wears with the pride of a man who has finally been recognized for his true station. He cultivates this image meticulously, adopting a pulpit-like cadence in his speech and a gait that suggests he is constantly preparing to confirm the souls of those he meets. Even in his auctions, he concludes not merely with a sale, but with a benediction that leaves the actual Dean, a modest and worthy gentleman, looking distinctly out of place by comparison.

The town regards him as a credit to society, a verdict reached by a large majority that includes even those who privately doubt his wisdom. Mr. Sapsea possesses the rare combination of being portentous, dull, and undeniably confident. He rolls his words and his body with a heavy, deliberate grace, his hands moving in a flowery manner as if conducting an invisible choir. He is nearly sixty, with a stomach that flows like a river and waistcoat creases that map the history of his prosperity. Reputed wealthy, politically sound, and morally convinced that he is the only person in the world who has truly grown since infancy, Mr. Sapsea is, in his own estimation, the pinnacle of Cloisterham's achievements.

His premises, located on the High Street directly opposite the Nuns' House, reflect a history of gradual decline. The building, roughly contemporary with the convent across the way, bears the scars of generations that traded fever and plague for mere air and light, modernizing irregularly until the structure itself seemed to be deteriorating alongside its inhabitants. Above the door hangs a wooden effigy of his father, depicted in a curly wig and toga, caught in the act of selling. The simplicity of the scene—the little finger, the hammer, the pulpit—has been admired by the locals as a masterpiece of chastity and naturalism.

Inside, the ground-floor sitting room is a sanctuary of Mr. Sapsea's ego. It overlooks a paved yard and a railed garden, but the true focus is the hearth, where a bottle of port wine sits beside an early luxury fireplace. The room is populated by his portrait, an eight-day clock, and a weather-glass, objects he treats as rivals to nature and time itself. As he sits, reviewing a scrap of manuscript, he reads it aloud with lofty dignity, pacing the room with his thumbs hooked in his waistcoat. The only word clearly audible is "Ethelinda," the name of his late wife, which he repeats from memory with a solemnity that suggests the weight of history rests on those syllables.

The door opens, and his serving-maid announces, "Mr. Jasper is come, sir." Mr. Sapsea waves her away with a flourish, drawing two wineglasses from a tray.

"Glad to see you, sir," he declares, pouring with theatrical ceremony. "I congratulate myself on having the honour of receiving you here for the first time."

"You are very good," Jasper replies, smiling. "The honour is mine, and the self-congratulation is yours."

"It is a satisfaction to me to receive you in my humble home," Sapsea insists, his voice rising with ineffable loftiness. "And that is what I would not say to everybody. You will not easily believe that your society can be a satisfaction to a man like myself; nevertheless, it is."

"I have for some time desired to know you, Mr. Sapsea," Jasper says.

"And I, sir, have long known you by reputation as a man of taste. Let me fill your glass. I will give you, sir," Sapsea continues, filling his own cup as well, "When the French come over, May we meet them at Dover!"

It was a patriotic toast from Mr. Sapsea's infancy, and he remains fully convinced of its appropriateness for any era.

"You can scarcely be ignorant, Mr. Sapsea," Jasper observes, watching the auctioneer stretch his legs before the fire, "that you know the world."

"Well, sir," chuckles Sapsea, "I think I know something of it; something of it."

"Your reputation for that knowledge has always interested and surprised me," Jasper admits. "For Cloisterham is a little place. Cooped up in it myself, I know nothing beyond it, and feel it to be a very little place."

"If I have not gone to foreign countries, young man," Sapsea begins, pausing to correct himself, "you will excuse me calling you young man, Mr. Jasper? You are much my junior."

"By all means."

"If I have not gone to foreign countries, young man, foreign countries have come to me. They have come to me in the way of business, and I have improved upon my opportunities. Put it that I take an inventory, or make a catalogue. I see a French clock. I never saw him before in my life, but I instantly lay my finger on him and say 'Paris!' I see some cups and saucers of Chinese make, equally strangers to me personally: I put my finger on them, then and there, and I say 'Pekin, Nankin, and Canton.' It is the same with Japan, with Egypt, and with bamboo and sandalwood from the East Indies; I put my finger on them all. I have put my finger on the North Pole before now, and said 'Spear of Esquimaux make, for half a pint of pale sherry!'"

"Really? A very remarkable way, Mr. Sapsea, of acquiring a knowledge of men and things."

"I mention it, sir," Sapsea rejoins with unspeakable complacency, "because, as I say, it don't do to boast of what you are; but show how you came to be it, and then you prove it."

"Most interesting. We were to speak of the late Mrs. Sapsea."

"We were, sir." Sapsea fills both glasses and secures the decanter. "Before I consult your opinion as a man of taste on this little trifle—which is *but* a trifle, and still has required some thought, sir, some little fever of the brow—I ought perhaps to describe the character of the late Mrs. Sapsea, now dead three quarters of a year."

Jasper, in the act of yawning behind his wineglass, lowers the screen of his face and calls up a look of interest, though his expression is slightly impaired by the lingering yawn and watering eyes.

"Half a dozen years ago, or so," Sapsea proceeds, "when I had enlarged my mind up to—I will not say to what it now is, for that might seem to aim at too much, but up to the pitch of wanting another mind to be absorbed in it—I cast my eye about me for a nuptial partner. Because, as I say, it is not good for man to be alone."

Jasper appears to commit this original idea to memory.

"Miss Brobity at that time kept, I will not call it the rival establishment to the establishment at the Nuns' House opposite, but I will call it the other parallel establishment down town. The world did have it that she showed a passion for attending my sales, when they took place on half holidays, or in vacation time. The world did put it about, that she admired my style. The world did notice that as time flowed by, my style became traceable in the dictation-exercises of Miss Brobity's pupils. Young man, a whisper even sprang up in obscure malignity, that one ignorant and besotted Churl (a parent) so committed himself as to object to it by name. But I do not believe this. For is it likely that any human creature in his right senses would so lay himself open to be pointed at, by what I call the finger of scorn?"

Jasper shakes his head. Not in the least likely. Sapsea, in a grandiloquent state of absent-mindedness, refills Jasper's glass, which is already full, and then genuinely refills his own, which is empty.

"Miss Brobity's Being, young man, was deeply imbued with homage to Mind. She revered Mind, when launched, or, as I say, precipitated, on an extensive knowledge of the world. When I made my proposal, she did me the honour to be so overshadowed with a species of Awe, as to be able to articulate only the two words, 'O Thou!' meaning myself. Her limpid blue eyes were fixed upon me, her semi-transparent hands were clasped together, pallor overspread her aquiline features, and, though encouraged to proceed, she never did proceed a word further. I disposed of the parallel establishment by private contract, and we became as nearly one as could be expected under the circumstances. But she never could, and she never did, find a phrase satisfactory to her perhaps-too-favourable estimate of my intellect. To the very last (feeble action of liver), she addressed me in the same unfinished terms."

Jasper has closed his eyes as the auctioneer has deepened his voice. He now abruptly opens them and says, in unison with the deepened voice, "Ah!"—rather as if stopping himself on the extreme verge of adding—"men!"

"I have been since," says Sapsea, with his legs stretched out, solemnly enjoying himself with the wine and the fire, "what you behold me; I have been since a solitary mourner; I have been since, as I say, wasting my evening conversation on the desert air. I will not say that I have reproached myself; but there have been times when I have asked myself the question: What if her husband had been nearer on a level with her? If she had not had to look up quite so high, what might the stimulating action have been upon the liver?"

Jasper says, with an appearance of having fallen into dreadfully low spirits, that he "supposes it was to be."

"We can only suppose so, sir," Sapsea coincides. "As I say, Man proposes, Heaven disposes. It may or may not be putting the same thought in another form; but that is the way I put it."

Jasper murmurs assent.

"And now, Mr. Jasper," resumes the auctioneer, producing his scrap of manuscript, "Mrs. Sapsea's monument having had full time to settle and dry, let me take your opinion, as a man of taste, on the inscription I have (as I before remarked, not without some little fever of the brow) drawn out for it. Take it in your own hand. The setting out of the lines requires to be followed with the eye, as well as the contents with the mind."

Jasper complying, sees and reads as follows:

Reverential Wife of
Whose Knowledge of the World,
Though somewhat extensive,
Never brought him acquainted with
More capable of
And ask thyself the Question,
If Not,

Sapsea having risen and stationed himself with his back to the fire, for the purpose of observing the effect of these lines on the countenance of a man of taste, consequently has his face towards the door, when his serving-maid, again appearing, announces, "Durdles is come, sir!" He promptly draws forth and fills the third wineglass, as being now claimed, and replies, "Show Durdles in."

"Admirable!" quoth Jasper, handing back the paper.

"You approve, sir?"

"Impossible not to approve. Striking, characteristic, and complete."

The auctioneer inclines his head, as one accepting his due and giving a receipt; and invites the entering Durdles to take off that glass of wine (handing the same), for it will warm him.

Durdles is a stonemason; chiefly in the gravestone, tomb, and monument way, and wholly of their colour from head to foot. No man is better known in Cloisterham. He is the chartered libertine of the place. Fame trumpets him a wonderful workman—which, for aught that anybody knows, he may be (as he never works); and a wonderful sot—which everybody knows he is. With the Cathedral crypt he is better acquainted than any living authority; it may even be than any dead one. It is said that the intimacy of this acquaintance began in his habitually resorting to that secret place, to lock-out the Cloisterham boy-populace, and sleep off fumes of liquor: he having ready access to the Cathedral, as contractor for rough repairs. Be this as it may, he does know much about it, and, in the demolition of impedimental fragments of wall, buttress, and pavement, has seen strange sights. He often speaks of himself in the third person; perhaps, being a little misty as to his own identity, when he narrates; perhaps impartially adopting the Cloisterham nomenclature in reference to a character of acknowledged distinction. Thus he will say, touching his strange sights: "Durdles come upon the old chap," in reference to a buried magnate of ancient time and high degree, "by striking right into the coffin with his pick. The old chap gave Durdles a look with his open eyes, as much as to say, 'Is your name Durdles? Why, my man, I've been waiting for you a devil of a time!' And then he turned to powder." With a two-foot rule always in his pocket, and a mason's hammer all but always in his hand, Durdles goes continually sounding and tapping all about and about the Cathedral; and whenever he says to Tope

John Jasper paused in his walk through the Close, halted by a scene that seemed carved from the moonlight itself. Leaning against the iron railing of the burial ground, encircling the old cloister arches, stood Stony Durdles, burdened with his dinner bundle. Opposite him, a grotesque urchin in tatters hurled stones with the precision of a marksman. The projectiles struck their target with varying frequency, yet Durdles remained unmoved, a statue of indifference. In contrast, the boy was a whirlwind of malice; a successful hit elicited a triumphant whistle from a jagged gap in his mouth where teeth were missing, while a miss provoked a yelp of "Mulled agin!" followed by a renewed, vicious aim.

"What are you doing to the man?" Jasper demanded, stepping from the shadows into the pale light.

"Making a cock-shy of him," the boy replied.

"Give me those stones in your hand."

"Yes, I'll give 'em you down your throat if you come a-ketching hold of me," the boy retorted, shaking loose and backing away. "I'll smash your eye if you don't look out!"

"Baby-Devil that you are, what has the man done to you?"

"He won't go home."

"What is that to you?"

"He gives me a 'apenny to pelt him home if I ketches him out too late," the boy explained, then began to chant like a little savage, stumbling and dancing among the rags of his dilapidated boots:

"Widdy widdy wen!
I—ket—ches—Im—out—ar—ter—ten,
Widdy widdy wy!
Then—E—don't—go—then—I—shy—
Widdy Widdy Wake-cock warning!"

With a sweeping gesture on the final word and one more delivery at Durdles, the boy signaled a poetic preparation, a caution for Durdles to stand clear or retreat homeward.

Jasper beckoned the boy to follow him, deeming it futile to drag or coax the creature, and crossed to the railing where the Stony One was deeply meditating.

"Do you know this thing, this child?" Jasper asked, struggling to find a definition for the entity.

"Deputy," Durdles nodded.

"Is that its—his—name?"

"Deputy," Durdles assented.

"I'm man-servant up at the Travellers' Twopenny in Gas Works Garding," the thing explained. "All us man-servants at Travellers' Lodgings is named Deputy. When we're chock full and the Travellers is all a-bed I come out for my 'elth." Withdrawing into the road and taking aim, he resumed his chant:

"Widdy widdy wen!
I—ket—ches—Im—out—ar—ter—"

"Hold your hand," Jasper cried, "and don't throw while I stand so near him, or I'll kill you! Come, Durdles; let me walk home with you to-night. Shall I carry your bundle?"

"Not on any account," Durdles replied, adjusting the load. "Durdles was making his reflections here when you come up, sir, surrounded by his works, like a poplar Author." He gestured to a sarcophagus within the railing, white and cold in the moonlight. "Mrs. Sapsea;" he pointed to the monument of that devoted wife. "Late Incumbent;" he indicated the Reverend Gentleman's broken column. "Departed Assessed Taxes;" he showed a vase and towel standing on what might represent a cake of soap. "Former pastrycook and Muffin-maker, much respected;" he introduced a gravestone. "All safe and sound here, sir, and all Durdles's work. Of the common folk, that is merely bundled up in turf and brambles; the less said the better. A poor lot, soon forgot."

"This creature, Deputy, is behind us," Jasper said, glancing back. "Is he to follow us?"

The relations between Durdles and Deputy were capricious. When Durdles turned with the slow gravity of beery suddenness, Deputy made a wide circuit into the road, standing on the defensive.

"You never cried Widdy Warning before you begun to-night," Durdles said, unexpectedly reminded of, or imagining, an injury.

"Yer lie, I did," Deputy replied, in his only form of polite contradiction.

"Own brother, sir," observed Durdles, turning about again and as quickly forgetting his offense as he had recalled it. "Own brother to Peter the Wild Boy! But I gave him an object in life."

"At which he takes aim?" Mr. Jasper suggested.

"That's it, sir," returned Durdles, quite satisfied. "At which he takes aim. I took him in hand and gave him an object. What was he before? A destroyer. What work did he do? Nothing but destruction. What did he earn by it? Short terms in Cloisterham jail. Not a person, not a piece of property, not a winder, not a horse, nor a dog, nor a cat, nor a bird, nor a fowl, nor a pig, but what he stoned, for want of an enlightened object. I put that enlightened object before him, and now he can turn his honest halfpenny by the three penn'orth a week."

"I wonder he has no competitors."

"He has plenty, Mr. Jasper, but he stones 'em all away. Now, I don't know what this scheme of mine comes to," Durdles pursued, considering it with the same sodden gravity. "I don't know what you may precisely call it. It ain't a sort of a—scheme of a—National Education?"

"I should say not," replied Jasper.

"I should say not," assented Durdles; "then we won't try to give it a name."

"He still keeps behind us," repeated Jasper, looking over his shoulder. "Is he to follow us?"

"We can't help going round by the Travellers' Twopenny, if we go the short way, which is the back way," Durdles answered, "and we'll drop him there."

So they proceeded; Deputy, as a rear-rank soldier, taking open order and invading the silence of the hour and place by stoning every wall, post, pillar, and other inanimate object along the deserted path.

"Is there anything new down in the crypt, Durdles?" asked John Jasper.

"Anything old, I think you mean," growled Durdles. "It ain't a spot for novelty."

"Any new discovery on your part, I meant."

"There's a old 'un under the seventh pillar on the left as you go down the broken steps of the little underground chapel as formerly was; I make him out (so fur as I've made him out yet) to be one of them old 'uns with a crook. To judge from the size of the passages in the walls, and of the steps and doors, by which they come and went, them crooks must have been a good deal in the way of the old 'uns! Two on 'em meeting promiscuous must have hitched one another by the mitre pretty often, I should say."

Without any endeavor to correct the literalness of this opinion, Jasper surveyed his companion—covered from head to foot with old mortar, lime, and stone grit—as though he, Jasper, were becoming imbued with a romantic interest in his weird life.

"Yours is a curious existence."

Without furnishing the least clue to whether he received this as a compliment or quite the reverse, Durdles gruffly answered: "Yours is another."

"Well! inasmuch as my lot is cast in the same old earthy, chilly, never-changing place, Yes. But there is much more mystery and interest in your connection with the Cathedral than in mine. Indeed, I am beginning to have some idea of asking you to take me on as a sort of student, or free 'prentice, under you, and to let me go about with you sometimes, and see some of these odd nooks in which you pass your days."

The Stony One replied in a general way, "All right. Everybody knows where to find Durdles, when he's wanted." Which, if not strictly true, was approximately so, if taken to express that Durdles might always be found in a state of vagabondage somewhere.

"What I dwell upon most," said Jasper, pursuing his subject of romantic interest, "is the remarkable accuracy with which you would seem to find out where people are buried.—What is the matter? That bundle is in your way; let me hold it."

Durdles had stopped and backed a little (Deputy, attentive to all his movements, immediately skirmishing into the road), looking about for some ledge or corner to place his bundle on, when thus relieved of it.

"Just you give me my hammer out of that," said Durdles, "and I'll show you."

*Clink, clink.* His hammer was handed to him.

"Now, lookee here. You pitch your note, don't you, Mr. Jasper?"

"Yes."

"So I sound for mine. I take my hammer, and I tap." (Here he struck the pavement, and the attentive Deputy skirmished at a rather wider range, as supposing that his head might be in requisition.) "I tap, tap, tap. Solid! I go on tapping. Solid still! Tap again. Holloa! Hollow! Tap again, persevering. Solid in hollow! Tap, tap, tap, to try it better. Solid in hollow; and inside solid, hollow again! There you are! Old 'un crumbled away in stone coffin, in vault!"

"Astonishing!"

"I have even done this," said Durdles, drawing out his two-foot rule. (Deputy meanwhile skirmished nearer, as suspecting that Treasure might be about to be discovered, which might somehow lead to his own enrichment, and the delicious treat of the discoverers being hanged by the neck, on his evidence, until they were dead.) "Say that hammer of mine's a wall—my work. Two; four; and two is six," measuring on the pavement. "Six foot inside that wall is Mrs. Sapsea."

"Not really Mrs. Sapsea?"

"Say Mrs. Sapsea. Her wall's thicker, but say Mrs. Sapsea. Durdles taps, that wall represented by that hammer, and says, after good sounding: 'Something betwixt us!' Sure enough, some rubbish has been left in that same six-foot space by Durdles's men!"

Jasper opined that such accuracy "is a gift."

"I wouldn't have it at a gift," returned Durdles, by no means receiving the observation in good part. "I worked it out for myself. Durdles comes by *his* knowledge through grubbing deep for it, and having it up by the roots when it don't want to come.—Holloa you Deputy!"

"Widdy!" was Deputy's shrill response, standing off again.

"Catch that ha'penny. And don't let me see any more of you to-night, after we come to the Travellers' Twopenny."

"Warning!" returned Deputy, having caught the halfpenny, and appearing by this mystic word to express his assent to the arrangement.

They had but to cross what was once the vineyard, belonging to what was once the Monastery, to come into the narrow back lane wherein stood the crazy wooden house of two low stories currently known as the Travellers' Twopenny: a house all warped and distorted, like the morals of the travelers, with scant remains of a lattice-work porch over the door, and also of a rustic fence before its stamped-out garden; by reason of the travelers being so bound to the premises by a tender sentiment (or so fond of having a fire by the roadside in the course of the day), that they could never be persuaded or threatened into departure, without violently possessing themselves of some wooden forget-me-not, and bearing it off.

The semblance of an inn was attempted to be given to this wretched place by fragments of conventional red curtaining in the windows, which rags were made muddily transparent in the night-season by feeble lights of rush or cotton dip burning dully in the close air of the inside. As Durdles and Jasper came near, they were addressed by an inscribed paper lantern over the door, setting forth the purport of the house. They were also addressed by some half-dozen other hideous small boys—whether twopenny lodgers or followers or hangers-on of such, who knows!—who, as if attracted by some carrion-scent of Deputy in the air, started into the moonlight, as vultures might gather in the desert, and instantly fell to stoning him and one another.

"Stop, you young brutes," cried Jasper angrily, "and let us go by!"

This remonstrance being received with yells and flying stones, according to a custom of late years comfortably established among the police regulations of our English communities, where Christians are stoned on all sides, as if the days of Saint Stephen were revived, Durdles remarked of the young savages, with some point, that "they haven't got an object," and led the way down the lane.

At the corner of the lane, Jasper, hotly enraged, checked his companion and looked back. All was silent. Next moment, a stone coming rattling at his hat, and a distant yell of "Wake-Cock! Warning!" followed by a crow, as from some infernally-hatched Chanticleer, apprising him under whose victorious fire he stood, he turned the corner into safety, and took Durdles home: Durdles stumbling among the litter of his stony yard as if he were going to turn head foremost into one of the unfinished tombs.

John Jasper returned by another way to his gatehouse, and entering softly with his key, found his fire still burning. He took from a locked press a peculiar-looking pipe, which he filled—but not with

The Reverend Septimus Crisparkle, a minor canon whose lineage had seen six predecessors extinguished like fragile rushlights before his birth, found his morning invigorated by breaking the thin ice of Cloisterham Weir with his head. Now, he was engaging in a vigorous exercise of self-defense, boxing a mirror with scientific precision. The glass reflected a man of radiant innocence and benevolent intent, feinting with art and striking with straight, powerful blows.

It was barely breakfast time. Mrs. Crisparkle, his widowed mother, had just arrived, waiting for the tea urn. At this precise moment, Septimus paused his assault to kiss her face, his gloved hands tenderly framing hers. Once released, he resumed his vigorous counter-attacks, moving with tremendous energy.

"I say, Sept," the old lady observed, watching him, "you'll break the pier-glass or burst a blood-vessel at last."

"Neither, please God, Ma dear. Here's wind!" Septimus declared. He delivered a final, severe round, ending with a light tap that sent her cap flying into the air—a maneuver he termed "Chancery"—without disturbing a single ribbon. Magnanimously, he released her, tucked his gloves away, and feigned contemplation by the window until a servant entered.

Once the breakfast preparations were complete, the two sat alone. It was a serene scene: the mother reciting the Lord's Prayer aloud, her voice clear and bright, while her son, nearly forty, bowed his head in reverent silence, just as he had when he was nearly four.

Mrs. Crisparkle was a vision of trim elegance, her dress as dainty as a china shepherdess, her face cheerful and calm. Septimus often thought nothing was prettier than her. Her entire existence seemed to revolve around the two words she used most often: "My Sept!"

They were a perfect pair in the quiet shadow of the Cathedral, where the cawing of rooks and the distant tolling of bells seemed to enhance the silence rather than disturb it. The history of Minor Canon Corner—its fighting men, its drudging serfs, its powerful monks—had all faded, leaving behind a tranquil air and a romantic sense of pity born from stories fully told.

Surrounded by red-brick walls, strong ivy, and stone gardens where monkish trees still bore fruit, Septimus asked, "And what, Ma dear, does the letter say?"

His mother handed him the note, though she kept her own spectacles off, proud of her sharp eyesight. Septimus, equally proud of his inability to read without aid, donned a pair of grave, oversized glasses that obscured his view and inconvenienced his breakfast.

"It's from Mr. Honeythunder," his mother said, folding her arms.

"Of course," Septimus agreed, struggling to read the script. "'Haven of Philanthropy... I write in the—'"

"In the chair," his mother supplied.

"Why, what should he write in?" Septimus asked, removing his glasses to see her face clearly.

"You don't see the context, Sept!" she exclaimed gently. "Give it back."

Relieved to remove the water-inducing lenses, Septimus handed the letter back. His mother read with precision: "'I write from the chair, to which I shall probably be confined for some hours.' Septimus looked at the row of chairs with a half-protesting face.

"'We have a meeting of our Convened Chief Composite Committee,' she continued, 'and it is their unanimous pleasure that I take the chair.' Septimus breathed easier. 'Not to lose a day's post, I take the opportunity of a long report being read, denouncing a public miscreant—'"

"It is extraordinary," Septimus interrupted, rubbing his ear in vexation, "that these philanthropists are always denouncing someone. And that they are always so flush with miscreants!"

"'Denouncing a public miscreant' to get our business off my mind," his mother read on. "I have spoken with my wards, Neville and Helena Landless, regarding their defective education. They agree to the plan. Therefore, prepare your son to expect Neville as an inmate next Monday. Helena will accompany him to Cloisterham to take up quarters at the Nuns' House, the establishment you and I recommended. The terms are as stated in my correspondence with you. With compliments to the Rev. Mr. Septimus, I am, Dear Madam, Your affectionate brother (In Philanthropy), LUKE HONEYTHUNDER.'"

"Well, Ma," Septimus said after more ear-rubbing, "we must try it. We have room, time, and inclination. I confess I'm glad it isn't Mr. Honeythunder himself. Though that seems prejudiced, doesn't it? Is he a large man?"

"I call him a large man," his mother hesitated, "but his voice is much larger."

"Than himself?"

"Than anybody."

"Hah!" Septimus sighed, finishing his breakfast with diminished enthusiasm.

Mrs. Crisparkle's sister, a delicate ornament matching her perfectly, lived in London with her clergyman husband. Mr. Honeythunder, a Professor of Philanthropy, had met them during her annual visit, following a public event where orphaned children were fed plum buns. These were the only known antecedents of the incoming pupils.

"I am sure you agree," Septimus said, thinking the matter over, "that we must put these young people at ease. There is nothing disinterested in the notion; we cannot be at ease unless they are. Jasper's nephew is here; like takes to like. We will have him meet them at dinner. That's three. We can't ask him without asking Jasper. That's four. Add Miss Twinkleton and the fairy bride-to-be, that's six. Add ourselves, that's eight. Would eight at a friendly dinner trouble you, Ma?"

"Nine would, Sept," the old lady replied, visibly nervous.

"My dear Ma, I particularize eight."

"The exact size of the table and room."

So it was settled. Septimus visited Miss Twinkleton to arrange Helena Landless's reception at the Nuns' House, and the other invitations were accepted. Miss Twinkleton glanced sadly at her globes, regretting they couldn't be taken into society, but soon reconciled herself. Instructions were sent to the Philanthropist for the timely arrival of Neville and Helena, and the scent of soup filled the air of Minor Canon Corner.

There was no railway to Cloisterham, and Mr. Sapsea insisted there never would be. Yet, express trains now whirled through the town without stopping, casting dust as a testament to its insignificance. A remote fragment of the main line, threatening the money market if it failed and the constitution if it succeeded, had already unsettled the local traffic, forcing it to sneak in via a back stable-way labeled "Beware of the Dog."

To this ignominious avenue, Septimus repaired, awaiting a short, squat omnibus laden with luggage like an elephant carrying too much castle. As it lumbered up, a large passenger sat on the box, elbows squared, compressing the driver into a tiny space, glowering with a strongly marked face.

"Is this Cloisterham?" the passenger demanded in a tremendous voice.

"It is," the driver replied, rubbing his aching bones. "And I never was so glad to see it."

"Tell your master to make his box-seat wider," the passenger commanded. "Your master is morally bound—and ought to be legally, under ruinous penalties—to provide for the comfort of his fellow-man."

The driver patted his skeleton anxiously. "Have I sat upon you?"

"You have," the driver admitted reluctantly.

"Take that card, my friend."

"I think I won't deprive you on it," the driver said, casting a disfavorable eye at the card. "What's the good of it to me?"

"Be a Member of that Society," the passenger said.

"What shall I get by it?"

"Brotherhood," the passenger replied in a ferocious voice.

"Thankee," the driver said deliberately, getting down. "My mother was contented with myself, and so am I. I don't want no brothers."

"But you must have them," the passenger insisted, descending. "Whether you like it or not. I am your brother."

"I say!" the driver protested, chafed. "Not too fur! The worm _will_, when—"

Just then, Septimus interposed in a friendly voice, "Joe, Joe, Joe! Don't forget yourself, Joe, my good fellow!" When Joe touched his hat, Septimus accosted the passenger: "Mr. Honeythunder?"

"That is my name, sir."

"My name is Crisparkle."

"Reverend Mr. Septimus? Glad to see you, sir. Neville and Helena are inside. Having succumbed lately to the pressure of my public labors, I thought I'd take a mouthful of fresh air and come down with them." Honeythunder surveyed Septimus with disappointment, twisting a double eye-glass by its ribbon as if roasting it. "Hah! I expected to see you older, sir."

"I hope you will," Septimus replied good-humoredly.

"Eh?" Honeythunder demanded.

"Only a poor little joke. Not worth repeating."

"Joke? Ay; I never see a joke," Honeythunder frowningly retorted. "A joke is wasted upon me, sir. Where are they? Helena and Neville, come here! Mr. Crisparkle has come down to meet you."

An unusually handsome, lithe young man and an equally handsome, lithe girl emerged. Both were very dark, rich in color, and of almost the gypsy type. There was something untamed about them, an air of hunter and huntress, yet they also seemed objects of the chase. Slender, supple, and quick of eye, they were half shy, half defiant, with fierce looks and an indefinable pause in their expressions, like the moment before a crouch or a bound.

Septimus invited Honeythunder to dinner with a troubled mind, the discomfiture of his mother weighing heavily on him. He gave his arm to Helena Landless. As they walked through the ancient streets, pointing out the Cathedral and the monastery ruins, the young people delighted in the sights, wondering much as if they were beautiful barbaric captives brought from a wild tropical dominion. Honeythunder walked in the middle of the road, shouldering natives out of his way, loudly developing a scheme to raid all unemployed persons in the United Kingdom, laying them by the heels in jail and forcing them, on pain of extermination, to become philanthropists.

Mrs. Crisparkle needed her own share of philanthropy when she beheld this large, loud excrescence on the little party. Always a boil upon the face of society, Honeythunder expanded into an inflammatory wen in Minor Canon Corner. Though it wasn't literally true that he called aloud, "Curse your souls and bodies, come here and be blessed!" his philanthropy was of a gunpowderous sort where the difference between it and animosity was hard to determine. One was to abolish military force, but first bring all commanding officers who had done their duty to trial and shoot them. One was to abolish war, but make converts by making war upon them. One was to have no capital punishment, but sweep off the face of the earth all legislators, jurists, and judges who held the contrary opinion. One was to have universal concord, but get it by eliminating all who wouldn't or couldn't be concordant. One was to love one's brother, but after an indefinite interval of maligning him and calling him all manner of names. Above all, one was to do nothing in private. One was to go to the offices of the Haven of Philanthropy, put one's name down as a Member and Professing Philanthropist, pay the subscription, get the card, ribbon, and medal, and evermore live upon a platform, saying what Mr. Honeythunder said, and what the Treasurer said, and what the Committee said, and what the Secretary said, and what the Vice-Secretary said. This was usually said in unanimously carried resolutions under hand and seal, to the effect: "That this assembled Body of Professing Philanthropists views, with indignant scorn and contempt, not unmixed with utter detestation and loathing abhorrence"—in short, the baseness of all those who do not belong to it, pledging itself to make as many obnoxious statements as possible about them without being particular as to facts.

The dinner was a most doleful breakdown. The philanthropist deranged the symmetry of the table, sat in the way of the waiter, blocked the thoroughfare, and drove Mr. Tope, who assisted the parlour-maid, to the verge of distraction by passing plates over his own head. Nobody could talk to anyone because Honeythunder held forth to everyone at once, as if the company had no individual existence but were a Meeting. He impounded Septimus as an official personage to be addressed, or a human peg to hang his oratorical hat on, falling into the exasperating habit of impersonating him as a wicked and weak opponent. Thus, he would ask, "And will you, sir, now stultify yourself by telling me"—when the innocent man had not opened his lips. Or he would say, "Now see, sir, to what a position you are reduced. I will leave you no escape. After exhausting all the resources of fraud and falsehood... you have now the hypocrisy to bend the knee before the most degraded of mankind, and to sue and whine and howl for mercy!" Whereat the unfortunate Minor Canon looked in part indignant and in part perplexed, while his worthy mother sat bridling with tears in her eyes, and the rest of the party lapsed into a gelatinous state with no flavor or solidity.

But the gush of philanthropy that burst forth when Honeythunder's departure began to impend must have been highly gratifying to the distinguished man. His coffee was produced by the special activity of Mr. Tope a full hour before he wanted it

"I know very little of that gentleman, sir," Neville said to the Minor Canon as they turned back into the shadows of the garden path.

"You know very little of your guardian?" the Minor Canon repeated, his voice steady but probing.

"Almost nothing!" Neville replied, his tone sharp with a defensive edge.

"How came he—"

"To *be* my guardian? I'll tell you, sir. Suppose you know that we come from Ceylon? My sister and I."

"Indeed, no."

"I wonder at that. We lived with a stepfather there. Our mother died there, when we were little children. We have had a wretched existence. She made him our guardian, and he was a miserly wretch who grudged us food to eat, and clothes to wear. At his death, he passed us over to this man; for no better reason that I know of, than his being a friend or connexion of his, whose name was always in print and catching his attention."

"That was lately, I suppose?"

"Quite lately, sir. This stepfather of ours was a cruel brute as well as a grinding one. It is well he died when he did, or I might have killed him."

Mr. Crisparkle stopped short in the moonlight and looked at his hopeful pupil in consternation.

"I surprise you, sir?" he said, his demeanor shifting instantly to one of submissive deference.

"You shock me; unspeakably shock me."

The pupil hung his head for a little while, as they walked on, and then said: "You never saw him beat your sister. I have seen him beat mine, more than once or twice, and I never forgot it."

"Nothing," said Mr. Crisparkle, "not even a beloved and beautiful sister's tears under dastardly ill-usage;" he became less severe, in spite of himself, as his indignation rose; "could justify those horrible expressions that you used."

"I am sorry I used them, and especially to you, sir. I beg to recall them. But permit me to set you right on one point. You spoke of my sister's tears. My sister would have let him tear her to pieces, before she would have let him believe that he could make her shed a tear."

Mr. Crisparkle reviewed those mental notes of his, and was neither at all surprised to hear it, nor at all disposed to question it.

"Perhaps you will think it strange, sir,"—this was said in a hesitating voice—"that I should so soon ask you to allow me to confide in you, and to have the kindness to hear a word or two from me in my defence?"

"Defence?" Mr. Crisparkle repeated. "You are not on your defence, Mr. Neville."

"I think I am, sir. At least I know I should be, if you were better acquainted with my character."

"Well, Mr. Neville," was the rejoinder. "What if you leave me to find it out?"

"Since it is your pleasure, sir," answered the young man, with a quick change in his manner to sullen disappointment: "since it is your pleasure to check me in my impulse, I must submit."

There was that in the tone of this short speech which made the conscientious man to whom it was addressed uneasy. It hinted to him that he might, without meaning it, turn aside a trustfulness beneficial to a mis-shapen young mind and perhaps to his own power of directing and improving it. They were within sight of the lights in his windows, and he stopped.

"Let us turn back and take a turn or two up and down, Mr. Neville, or you may not have time to finish what you wish to say to me. You are hasty in thinking that I mean to check you. Quite the contrary. I invite your confidence."

"You have invited it, sir, without knowing it, ever since I came here. I say 'ever since,' as if I had been here a week. The truth is, we came here (my sister and I) to quarrel with you, and affront you, and break away again."

"Really?" said Mr. Crisparkle, at a dead loss for anything else to say.

"You see, we could not know what you were beforehand, sir; could we?"

"Clearly not," said Mr. Crisparkle.

"And having liked no one else with whom we have ever been brought into contact, we had made up our minds not to like you."

"Really?" said Mr. Crisparkle again.

"But we do like you, sir, and we see an unmistakable difference between your house and your reception of us, and anything else we have ever known. This—and my happening to be alone with you—and everything around us seeming so quiet and peaceful after Mr. Honeythunder's departure—and Cloisterham being so old and grave and beautiful, with the moon shining on it—these things inclined me to open my heart."

"I quite understand, Mr. Neville. And it is salutary to listen to such influences."

"In describing my own imperfections, sir, I must ask you not to suppose that I am describing my sister's. She has come out of the disadvantages of our miserable life, as much better than I am, as that Cathedral tower is higher than those chimneys."

Mr. Crisparkle in his own breast was not so sure of this.

"I have had, sir, from my earliest remembrance, to suppress a deadly and bitter hatred. This has made me secret and revengeful. I have been always tyrannically held down by the strong hand. This has driven me, in my weakness, to the resource of being false and mean. I have been stinted of education, liberty, money, dress, the very necessaries of life, the commonest pleasures of childhood, the commonest possessions of youth. This has caused me to be utterly wanting in I don't know what emotions, or remembrances, or good instincts—I have not even a name for the thing, you see!—that you have had to work upon in other young men to whom you have been accustomed."

"This is evidently true. But this is not encouraging," thought Mr. Crisparkle as they turned again.

"And to finish with, sir: I have been brought up among abject and servile dependents, of an inferior race, and I may easily have contracted some affinity with them. Sometimes, I don't know but that it may be a drop of what is tigerish in their blood."

"As in the case of that remark just now," thought Mr. Crisparkle.

"In a last word of reference to my sister, sir (we are twin children), you ought to know, to her honour, that nothing in our misery ever subdued her, though it often cowed me. When we ran away from it (we ran away four times in six years, to be soon brought back and cruelly punished), the flight was always of her planning and leading. Each time she dressed as a boy, and showed the daring of a man. I take it we were seven years old when we first decamped; but I remember, when I lost the pocket-knife with which she was to have cut her hair short, how desperately she tried to tear it out, or bite it off. I have nothing further to say, sir, except that I hope you will bear with me and make allowance for me."

"Of that, Mr. Neville, you may be sure," returned the Minor Canon. "I don't preach more than I can help, and I will not repay your confidence with a sermon. But I entreat you to bear in mind, very seriously and steadily, that if I am to do you any good, it can only be with your own assistance; and that you can only render that, efficiently, by seeking aid from Heaven."

"I will try to do my part, sir."

"And, Mr. Neville, I will try to do mine. Here is my hand on it. May God bless our endeavours!"

They were now standing at his house-door, and a cheerful sound of voices and laughter was heard within.

"We will take one more turn before going in," said Mr. Crisparkle, "for I want to ask you a question. When you said you were in a changed mind concerning me, you spoke, not only for yourself, but for your sister too?"

"Undoubtedly I did, sir."

"Excuse me, Mr. Neville, but I think you have had no opportunity of communicating with your sister, since I met you. Mr. Honeythunder was very eloquent; but perhaps I may venture to say, without ill-nature, that he rather monopolised the occasion. May you not have answered for your sister without sufficient warrant?"

Neville shook his head with a proud smile.

"You don't know, sir, yet, what a complete understanding can exist between my sister and me, though no spoken word—perhaps hardly as much as a look—may have passed between us. She not only feels as I have described, but she very well knows that I am taking this opportunity of speaking to you, both for her and for myself."

Mr. Crisparkle looked in his face, with some incredulity; but his face expressed such absolute and firm conviction of the truth of what he said, that Mr. Crisparkle looked at the pavement, and mused, until they came to his door again.

"I will ask for one more turn, sir, this time," said the young man, with a rather heightened colour rising in his face. "But for Mr. Honeythunder's—I think you called it eloquence, sir?" (somewhat slyly.)

"I—yes, I called it eloquence," said Mr. Crisparkle.

"But for Mr. Honeythunder's eloquence, I might have had no need to ask you what I am going to ask you. This Mr. Edwin Drood, sir: I think that's the name?"

"Quite correct," said Mr. Crisparkle. "D-r-double o-d."

"Does he—or did he—read with you, sir?"

"Never, Mr. Neville. He comes here visiting his relation, Mr. Jasper."

"Is Miss Bud his relation too, sir?"

("Now, why should he ask that, with sudden superciliousness?" thought Mr. Crisparkle.) Then he explained, aloud, what he knew of the little story of their betrothal.

"O! *that's* it, is it?" said the young man. "I understand his air of proprietorship now!"

This was said so evidently to himself, or to anybody rather than Mr. Crisparkle, that the latter instinctively felt as if to notice it would be almost tantamount to noticing a passage in a letter which he had read by chance over the writer's shoulder. A moment afterwards they re-entered the house.

Mr. Jasper was seated at the piano as they came into his drawing-room, and was accompanying Miss Rosebud while she sang. It was a consequence of his playing the accompaniment without notes, and of her being a heedless little creature, very apt to go wrong, that he followed her lips most attentively, with his eyes as well as hands; carefully and softly hinting the key-note from time to time. Standing with an arm drawn round her, but with a face far more intent on Mr. Jasper than on her singing, stood Helena, between whom and her brother an instantaneous recognition passed, in which Mr. Crisparkle saw, or thought he saw, the understanding that had been spoken of, flash out. Mr. Neville then took his admiring station, leaning against the piano, opposite the singer; Mr. Crisparkle sat down by the china shepherdess; Edwin Drood gallantly furled and unfurled Miss Twinkleton's fan; and that lady passively claimed that sort of exhibitor's proprietorship in the accomplishment on view, which Mr. Tope, the Verger, daily claimed in the Cathedral service.

[Illustration: At the piano]

The song went on. It was a sorrowful strain of parting, and the fresh young voice was very plaintive and tender. As Jasper watched the pretty lips, and ever and again hinted the one note, as though it were a low whisper from himself, the voice became less steady, until all at once the singer broke into a burst of tears, and shrieked out, with her hands over her eyes: "I can't bear this! I am frightened! Take me away!"

With one swift turn of her lithe figure, Helena laid the little beauty on a sofa, as if she had never caught her up. Then, on one knee beside her, and with one hand upon her rosy mouth, while with the other she appealed to all the rest, Helena said to them: "It's nothing; it's all over; don't speak to her for one minute, and she is well!"

Jasper's hands had, in the same instant, lifted themselves from the keys, and were now poised above them, as though he waited to resume. In that attitude he yet sat quiet: not even looking round, when all the rest had changed their places and were reassuring one another.

"Pussy's not used to an audience; that's the fact," said Edwin Drood. "She got nervous, and couldn't hold out. Besides, Jack, you are such a conscientious master, and require so much, that I believe you make her afraid of you. No wonder."

"No wonder," repeated Helena.

"There, Jack, you hear! You would be afraid of him, under similar circumstances, wouldn't you, Miss Landless?"

"Not under any circumstances," returned Helena.

Jasper brought down his hands, looked over his shoulder, and begged to thank Miss Landless for her vindication of his character. Then he fell to dumbly playing, without striking the notes, while his little pupil was taken to an open window for air, and was otherwise petted and restored. When she was brought back, his place was empty. "Jack's gone, Pussy," Edwin told her. "I am more than half afraid he didn't like to be charged with being the Monster who had frightened you." But she answered never a word, and shivered, as if they had made her a little too

The two young men watched the damsels, their charges, vanish into the courtyard of the Nuns' House. Behind them, the brazen door-plate seemed to stare with insolent judgment, its glass eye reflecting the moonlight like a mocking glint. The pair exchanged a glance, looked down the perspective of the silent street, and turned slowly to walk away together.

"Do you stay here long, Mr. Drood?" Neville asked, his voice steady but probing.

"Not this time," Edwin replied, his tone careless. "I leave for London tomorrow. But I shall be here, off and on, until next Midsummer; then I shall take my leave of Cloisterham, and England too; for many a long day, I expect."

"Are you going abroad?"

"Going to wake up Egypt a little," Edwin answered, with a condescending lift of his chin.

"Are you reading?"

"Reading?" Edwin repeated, a flicker of contempt crossing his features. "No. Doing. Working. Engineering. My small patrimony was left as a part of the capital of the Firm I am with by my father, a former partner; and I am a charge upon the Firm until I come of age. Then I step into my modest share in the concern. Jack—you met him at dinner—is, until then, my guardian and trustee."

"I heard from Mr. Crisparkle of your other good fortune."

"What do you mean by my other good fortune?"

Neville had spoken in a manner that was watchfully advancing yet furtively shy, embodying that peculiar air of being simultaneously hunter and hunted. Edwin's retort was abrupt, lacking all polish. They halted, exchanging a heated, silent look.

"I hope," Neville said, "there is no offence, Mr. Drood, in my innocently referring to your betrothal?"

"By George!" Edwin cried, quickening his pace. "Everybody in this chattering old Cloisterham refers to it. I wonder no public-house has been set up, with my portrait for the sign of *The Betrothed's Head*. Or *Pussy's* portrait. One or the other."

"I am not accountable for Mr. Crisparkle's mentioning the matter to me, quite openly," Neville began.

"No; that's true; you are not," Edwin assented.

"But," Neville resumed, "I am accountable for mentioning it to you. And I did so, on the supposition that you could not fail to be highly proud of it."

Two curious springs of human nature drove this dialogue. Neville Landless was already sufficiently impressed by Little Rosebud to feel indignant that Edwin Drood, far beneath her, should hold his prize so lightly. Conversely, Edwin Drood was sufficiently impressed by Helena to feel indignant that Helena's brother, far beneath her, should dispose of him so coolly and put him out of the way so entirely.

Edwin answered the last remark. "I don't know, Mr. Neville"—adopting the mode of address from Mr. Crisparkle—"that what people are proudest of, they usually talk most about; I don't know either that what they are proudest of, they most like other people to talk about. But I live a busy life, and I speak under correction by you readers, who ought to know everything, and I daresay do."

By now, both had become savage. Mr. Neville stood in the open; Edwin hid under the transparent cover of a popular tune, stopping occasionally to pretend to admire picturesque effects in the moonlight.

"It does not seem to me very civil in you," Neville remarked at length, "to reflect upon a stranger who comes here, not having had your advantages, to try to make up for lost time. But, to be sure, I was not brought up in 'busy life,' and my ideas of civility were formed among Heathens."

"Perhaps, the best civility, whatever kind of people we are brought up among," Edwin retorted, "is to mind our own business. If you will set me that example, I promise to follow it."

"Do you know that you take a great deal too much upon yourself?" came the angry rejoinder. "And that in the part of the world I come from, you would be called to account for it?"

"By whom, for instance?" Edwin asked, coming to a halt and surveying the other with a look of disdain.

Suddenly, a startling right hand was laid upon Edwin's shoulder, and Jasper stepped between them. It appeared he too had strolled round by the Nuns' House, emerging from the shadowy side of the road.

"Ned, Ned, Ned!" Jasper said. "We must have no more of this. I don't like this. I have overheard high words between you two. Remember, my dear boy, you are almost in the position of host tonight. You belong, as it were, to the place, and in a manner represent it towards a stranger. Mr. Neville is a stranger, and you should respect the obligations of hospitality. And, Mr. Neville," laying his left hand on the inner shoulder of the young gentleman, walking on between them, hand to shoulder on either side: "you will pardon me; but I appeal to you to govern your temper too. Now, what is amiss? But why ask! Let there be nothing amiss, and the question is superfluous. We are all three on a good understanding, are we not?"

After a silent struggle between the two young men to see who would speak last, Edwin struck in: "So far as I am concerned, Jack, there is no anger in me."

"Nor in me," said Neville Landless, though not so freely; or perhaps so carelessly. "But if Mr. Drood knew all that lies behind me, far away from here, he might know better how it is that sharp-edged words have sharp edges to wound me."

"Perhaps," Jasper said in a soothing manner, "we had better not qualify our good understanding. We had better not say anything having the appearance of a remonstrance or condition; it might not seem generous. Frankly and freely, you see there is no anger in Ned. Frankly and freely, there is no anger in you, Mr. Neville?"

"None at all, Mr. Jasper." Still, not quite so frankly or so freely; or, be it said once again, not quite so carelessly perhaps.

"All over then! Now, my bachelor gatehouse is a few yards from here, and the heater is on the fire, and the wine and glasses are on the table, and it is not a stone's throw from Minor Canon Corner. Ned, you are up and away tomorrow. We will carry Mr. Neville in with us, to take a stirrup-cup."

"With all my heart, Jack."

"And with all mine, Mr. Jasper." Neville felt it impossible to say less, but would rather not go. He had an impression that he had lost hold of his temper; he felt that Edwin Drood's coolness, far from being infectious, made him red-hot.

Mr. Jasper, still walking in the centre, hand to shoulder on either side, beautifully turned the refrain of a drinking song, and they all went up to his rooms. There, the first object visible, when he added the light of a lamp to that of the fire, was the portrait over the chimneypiece. It was not an object calculated to improve the understanding between the two young men, as rather awkwardly reviving the subject of their difference. Accordingly, they both glanced at it consciously, but said nothing. Jasper, however—who would appear from his conduct to have gained but an imperfect clue to the cause of their late high words—directly called attention to it.

"You recognise that picture, Mr. Neville?" Jasper shaded the lamp to throw the light upon it.

"I recognise it, but it is far from flattering the original."

"Oh, you are hard upon it! It was done by Ned, who made me a present of it."

"I am sorry for that, Mr. Drood." Neville apologized, with a real intention to apologize; "if I had known I was in the artist's presence—"

"Oh, a joke, sir, a mere joke," Edwin cut in, with a provoking yawn. "A little humouring of Pussy's points! I'm going to paint her gravely, one of these days, if she's good."

The air of leisurely patronage and indifference with which this was said, as the speaker threw himself back in a chair and clasped his hands at the back of his head as a rest for it, was very exasperating to the excitable and excited Neville. Jasper looked observantly from one to the other, slightly smiled, and turned his back to mix a jug of mulled wine at the fire. It seemed to require much mixing and compounding.

"I suppose, Mr. Neville," said Edwin, quick to resent the indignant protest against himself in the face of young Landless, which was fully as visible as the portrait, or the fire, or the lamp: "I suppose that if you painted the picture of your lady love—"

"I can't paint," was the hasty interruption.

"That's your misfortune, and not your fault. You would if you could. But if you could, I suppose you would make her (no matter what she was in reality), Juno, Minerva, Diana, and Venus, all in one. Eh?"

"I have no lady love, and I can't say."

"If I were to try my hand," said Edwin, with a boyish boastfulness getting up in him, "on a portrait of Miss Landless—in earnest, mind you; in earnest—you should see what I could do!"

"My sister's consent to sit for it being first got, I suppose? As it never will be got, I am afraid I shall never see what you can do. I must bear the loss."

Jasper turned round from the fire, filled a large goblet glass for Neville, filled a large goblet glass for Edwin, and handed each his own; then filled for himself, saying:

"Come, Mr. Neville, we are to drink to my nephew, Ned. As it is his foot that is in the stirrup—metaphorically—our stirrup-cup is to be devoted to him. Ned, my dearest fellow, my love!"

Jasper set the example of nearly emptying his glass, and Neville followed it. Edwin Drood said, "Thank you both very much," and followed the double example.

"Look at him," cried Jasper, stretching out his hand admiringly and tenderly, though rallyingly too. "See where he lounges so easily, Mr. Neville! The world is all before him where to choose. A life of stirring work and interest, a life of change and excitement, a life of domestic ease and love! Look at him!"

Edwin Drood's face had become quickly and remarkably flushed with the wine; so had the face of Neville Landless. Edwin still sat thrown back in his chair, making that rest of clasped hands for his head.

"See how little he heeds it all!" Jasper proceeded in a bantering vein. "It is hardly worth his while to pluck the golden fruit that hangs ripe on the tree for him. And yet consider the contrast, Mr. Neville. You and I have no prospect of stirring work and interest, or of change and excitement, or of domestic ease and love. You and I have no prospect (unless you are more fortunate than I am, which may easily be), but the tedious unchanging round of this dull place."

"Upon my soul, Jack," said Edwin, complacently, "I feel quite apologetic for having my way smoothed as you describe. But you know what I know, Jack, and it may not be so very easy as it seems, after all. May it, Pussy?" To the portrait, with a snap of his thumb and finger. "We have got to hit it off yet; haven't we, Pussy? You know what I mean, Jack."

His speech had become thick and indistinct. Jasper, quiet and self-possessed, looked to Neville, as expecting his answer or comment. When Neville spoke, *his* speech was also thick and indistinct.

"It might have been better for Mr. Drood to have known some hardships," he said, defiantly.

"Pray," retorted Edwin, turning merely his eyes in that direction, "pray why might it have been better for Mr. Drood to have known some hardships?"

"Ay," Jasper assented, with an air of interest; "let us know why?"

"Because they might have made him more sensible," said Neville, "of good fortune that is not by any means necessarily the result of his own merits."

Mr. Jasper quickly looked to his nephew for his rejoinder.

"Have *you* known hardships, may I ask?" said Edwin Drood, sitting upright.

Mr. Jasper quickly looked to the other for his retort.

"I have."

"And what have they made you sensible of?"

Mr. Jasper's play of eyes between the two held good throughout the dialogue, to the end.

"I have told you once before tonight."

"You have done nothing of the sort."

"I tell you I have. That you take a great deal too much upon yourself."

"You added something else to that, if I remember?"

"Yes, I did say something else."

"Say it again."

"I said that in the part of the world I come from, you would be called to account for it."

"Only there?" cried Edwin Drood, with a contemptuous laugh. "A long way off, I believe? Yes; I see! That part of the world is at a safe distance."

"Say here, then," rejoined the other, rising in a fury. "Say anywhere! Your vanity is intolerable, your conceit is beyond endurance; you talk as if you were some rare and precious prize, instead of a common boaster. You are a common fellow, and a common boaster."

"Pooh, pooh," said Edwin Drood, equally furious, but more collected; "how should you know? You may know a black common fellow, or a black common boaster, when you see him (and no doubt you have a large acquaintance that way

Rosa had known no home but the Nuns' House since she was seven, and no mother but Miss Twinkleton. Her memory of her own mother was a vivid, haunting image of a pretty little creature, drowned at a party of pleasure, her long wet hair tangled with the scattered petals of ruined flowers. She remembered the wild despair of her father, who died broken-hearted on the first anniversary of that tragedy. His grief had been soothed by his old college friend, Edwin Drood, a widower like himself, and it was through this bond that the young couple had been united.

Yet, the atmosphere of pity that surrounded the orphan girl when she first arrived in Cloisterham had never truly faded. As she grew older, brighter, and prettier, the hue of that pity shifted from golden to roseate to azure, but it always adorned her with a soft, protective light. This desire to console and caress her led to her being treated as a child long past her years, petted and spoiled by everyone. Rivalries flared within the Nuns' House over who should bring her gifts or write to her most faithfully, bitter little skirmishes hidden beneath the veil of charity. Thus, Rosa became an amiable, giddy, and wilful creature, accustomed to receiving kindness but possessing an exhaustless well of affection in return.

News of a quarrel between two young men reached the establishment before breakfast, though no one knew exactly how. Whether carried by the birds, blown in with the air, kneaded into the bread, or delivered by the milkman, the rumor permeated every gable before Miss Twinkleton was fully dressed. The report was specific: Miss Landless's brother had thrown a bottle, a knife, and a fork at Mr. Edwin Drood.

The cook insisted it was all three items, along with a decanter. Psychologically, it mattered less what was thrown and more why. Miss Landless's brother had admitted admiring Miss Bud, and Mr. Drood had rebuked him for it. Enraged, the brother had "up'd" with the collection of kitchenware. Poor Rosa, hearing the rumors, put her fingers in her ears and retreated to a corner, begging not to be told more. Miss Landless, however, sought accurate intelligence from Mr. Crisparkle. Upon returning, she reported the incident to Miss Twinkleton, who filtered the details before sharing them with Rosa. Miss Landless emphasized the provocation her brother had received, glossing over the fact that the initial words had come from her lover's easy-going nature. She delivered a petition from her brother asking for forgiveness and then abruptly ended the subject.

Miss Twinkleton then addressed the schoolroom, dismissing the rumor as an exaggeration typical of "Rumour," a concept she illustrated with a theatrical reference to Shakespeare's depiction of the Devil. She declared the matter settled, urging the girls to focus on their studies. Yet, the subject persisted; Miss Ferdinand later wore a paper moustache and attempted to aim a water-bottle at Miss Giggles during dinner, resulting in a spoon being drawn in defense.

Rosa dwelt on the quarrel with an uncomfortable sense of involvement, fearing her engagement placed her in a false position. Her uneasiness was compounded when her guardian, Mr. Grewgious, arrived unexpectedly. He was a man of arid, sandy demeanor, with a scanty, mangy-looking crop of hair that resembled a wig, and a face carved with hard, unrefined curves. Despite his awkward walk, near-sightedness, and lack of polish, he possessed a strange capacity to make an agreeable impression.

He found Rosa and Miss Twinkleton in the study. After politely requesting Miss Twinkleton's withdrawal, he sat with Rosa by the fire. He introduced himself with a self-deprecating comparison to angels, noting that while angels were upstairs, his visits were few and far between. He consulted a pocket-book containing a "guiding memorandum" to navigate the conversation, as he lacked conversational powers.

He began with "Well and happy," confirming Rosa's contentment and praising Miss Twinkleton's care. Next came "Pounds, shillings, and pence." He questioned if her allowance was sufficient and if she was in debt. Rosa laughed at the notion of debt, finding it a comical vagary. Mr. Grewgious noted her innocence, lining out the financial notes in his book.

Then, he turned to "Marriage." He explained that he was visiting specifically to address the betrothal. He described himself as a "particularly Angular man," ill-suited to intrude on such intimate spheres, comparing himself to a bear with cramp in a Cotillon. He confirmed that Mr. Edwin Drood had visited recently and that their mutual liking was evident. He clarified that while they wrote to one another, true correspondence required a deeper alignment of wills.

Crucially, Mr. Grewgious explained the legal reality of their engagement. He handed Rosa a certified copy of her father's will. He detailed the terms: the betrothal was a sentiment and a friendly project, but it was not legally binding against the free will of the parties. If either party lost affection or the desire to marry, there was no forfeiture. Rosa would simply remain his ward until of age, and Mr. Drood would inherit his father's partnership and debts upon reaching majority. The arrangement was designed for their happiness, not obligation.

Rosa, perplexed, asked if she could settle these matters directly with Edwin. Mr. Grewgious agreed, suggesting they wait until Christmas when Edwin returned to finalize the details between themselves. He would then step back as a mere business acquaintance. Rosa requested he visit her at Christmas if she had anything to say, to which he agreed with characteristic humility, mentioning his upcoming Christmas dinner with a particularly angular clerk. Overwhelmed with gratitude, Rosa kissed him on the shoulder.

After releasing Miss Twinkleton from his presence, Mr. Grewgious visited Mr. Jasper at the gatehouse, finding him absent at the Cathedral. He then entered the cathedral itself, where the setting sun cast a sepulchral gray over the ancient stones. Inside, the choir sang a powerful, drowning music that eventually subsided into silence.

Mr. Jasper met him at the chancel steps. Mr. Grewgious reiterated his purpose: to inform Rosa that the engagement could be dissolved without penalty if either party wished it. When Jasper asked if there was a special reason, Mr. Grewgious replied bluntly that it was simply his duty. He then added, somewhat sharply, that he hoped this did not imply doubt regarding Mr. Drood.

Jasper, sensing the tension, pressed Mr. Grewgious's arm and smiled, though his lips were pale. He wagered that Rosa had not hinted at wanting to be released from Ned. Mr. Grewgious retorted confidently that he would win the wager, attributing any hesitation to Rosa's delicate nature as a motherless girl. He observed that Rosa seemed to have an instinct that preliminary arrangements should be made solely between herself and Mr. Drood, excluding them.

Agreeing, they decided that when Mr. Drood returned at Christmas, the young couple would complete their preparations independently. Only then would Mr. Grewgious and Mr. Jasper intervene to finalize the business and release them from their trusts on Edwin's birthday. They parted with a handshake, Mr. Grewgious blessing them, and Mr. Jasper saving them.

It is a well-known truth that women possess an innate, instinctive faculty for reading the male character—a power arrived at without reasoning, offering no self-account, and pronouncing with absolute confidence even against the accumulated observations of men. Yet, this power, fallible as any human trait, is rarely capable of self-correction. When it delivers a verdict later proven false, it indistinguishably becomes prejudice, refusing amendment. Indeed, the mere possibility of contradiction seems to strengthen this feminine judgment, connecting the observer so personally to her intuition that she views any challenge as the testimony of an interested party.

"Now, don't you think, Ma dear," the Minor Canon asked his mother one afternoon as she knitted in his small study, "that you are rather hard on Mr. Neville?"

"No, I do *not*, Sept," the old lady replied.

"Let us discuss it, Ma."

"I have no objection to discussion, Sept. I trust I am always open to it." A vibration ran through her cap, suggesting an internal thought: *And I should like to see the discussion that would change my mind!*

"Very good, Ma," said her conciliatory son. "There is nothing like openness."

"I hope not, my dear," the old lady returned, effectively shutting the door.

"Well! Mr. Neville, on that unfortunate occasion, committed himself under provocation."

"And under mulled wine," added the old lady.

"I must admit the wine. Though I believe the two young men were alike in that regard."

"I don't," said the old lady.

"Why not, Ma?"

"Because I *don't*," she insisted. "Still, I am quite open to discussion."

"But, my dear Ma, how can we discuss if you take that line?"

"Blame Mr. Neville for it, Sept, and not me," she said with stately severity.

"My dear Ma! Why Mr. Neville?"

"Because," Mrs. Crisparkle retreated to first principles, "he came home intoxicated, brought great discredit to this house, and showed great disrespect to this family."

"That is not to be denied, Ma. He was then, and is now, very sorry for it."

"But for Mr. Jasper's well-bred consideration in coming to me the next day, after service, in the Nave itself, with his gown still on, to express hope that I had not been greatly alarmed or had my rest broken, I believe I might never have heard of that disgraceful transaction," the old lady noted.

"To be candid, Ma, I think I should have kept it from you if I could: though I had not decidedly made up my mind. I was following Jasper out to confer with him on hushing the thing up, when I found him speaking to you. Then it was too late."

"Too late, indeed, Sept. He was still as pale as gentlemanly ashes at what had taken place in his rooms overnight."

"If I *had* kept it from you, Ma, you may be sure it would have been for your peace and quiet, and for the good of the young men, and in my best discharge of duty."

The old lady immediately crossed the room to kiss him, saying, "Of course, my dear Sept, I am sure of that."

"However, it became town-talk," Mr. Crisparkle rubbed his ear as his mother resumed her seat, "and passed out of my power."

"And I said then, Sept," the old lady returned, "that I thought ill of Mr. Neville. And I say now, that I think ill of Mr. Neville. And I said then, and I say now, that I hope Mr. Neville may come to good, but I don't believe he will." Her cap vibrated again.

"I am sorry to hear you say so, Ma—"

"I am sorry to say so, my dear," the old lady interposed, knitting firmly, "but I can't help it."

"—For," pursued the Minor Canon, "it is undeniable that Mr. Neville is exceedingly industrious, attentive, and improving apace, and that he has—I hope I may say—an attachment to me."

"There is no merit in the last article, my dear," the old lady said quickly; "and if he says there is, I think the worse of him for the boast."

"But, my dear Ma, he never said there was."

"Perhaps not," returned the old lady; "still, I don't see that it greatly signifies."

Mr. Crisparkle contemplated the pretty old piece of china she held with a pleasant, humorous sense of its being a poor opponent for close argument.

"Besides, Sept, ask yourself what he would be without his sister. You know her influence; you know her capacity; you know that whatever he reads with you, he reads with her. Give her her fair share of your praise, and how much do you leave for him?"

At these words, Mr. Crisparkle fell into a reverie. He thought of the times he had seen the brother and sister in deep converse over his old college books: in the rimy mornings of his pilgrimages to Cloisterham Weir; in the sombre evenings when he faced the sunset from his favorite lookout, a beetling fragment of monastery ruin, watching the two studious figures pass below him along the river's margin, where town fires made the landscape bleaker. He thought how the consciousness had stolen upon him that in teaching one, he was teaching two; how he had insensibly adapted his explanations to both minds. He recalled the gossip from the Nuns' House that Helena, whom he had mistrusted as proud and fierce, had submitted to the fairy-bride he called her, learning from her what she knew. He pondered the picturesque alliance between those two, externally so different. He wondered—perhaps most of all—if these things, though but weeks old, had already become an integral part of his life.

Whenever the Reverend Septimus fell a-musing, his good mother took it as an infallible sign that he "wanted support." The blooming old lady hastened to the dining-room closet to produce the support embodied in a glass of Constantia and a home-made biscuit. It was a wonderful closet, worthy of Cloisterham and Minor Canon Corner. Above it, a portrait of Handel in a flowing wig beamed down with a knowing air of understanding the contents and a musical air of intending to combine all its harmonies in one delicious fugue. This was no common closet with a vulgar door; it had a lock in mid-air where two perpendicular slides met. The upper slide, pulled down, revealed deep shelves of pickle-jars, jam-pots, tin canisters, and agreeably outlandish vessels of blue and white, the luscious lodgings of preserved tamarinds and ginger. Every benevolent inhabitant had his name inscribed upon his stomach. The pickles, in a uniform of rich brown double-breasted coats, announced their portly forms in printed capitals as Walnut, Gherkin, Onion, Cabbage, Cauliflower, and Mixed. The jams, of a less masculine temperament and wearing curlpapers, whispered in feminine caligraphy of Raspberry, Gooseberry, Apricot, Plum, Damson, Apple, and Peach. Closing the scene, the lower slide ascending revealed oranges attended by a mighty japanned sugar-box to temper their acerbity. Home-made biscuits waited at the Court of these Powers, accompanied by plum-cake and slender ladies' fingers to be dipped into sweet wine. Lowest of all, a compact leaden vault enshrined the sweet wine and stock of cordials: whence issued whispers of Seville Orange, Lemon, Almond, and Caraway-seed. There was a crowning air upon this closet of closets of having been hummed through by the Cathedral bell and organ for ages, until those venerable bees had made sublimated honey of everything in store; and every dipper emerged mellow-faced, seeming to have undergone a saccharine transfiguration.

The Reverend Septimus yielded himself quite as willing a victim to a nauseous medicinal herb-closet, also presided over by the china shepherdess, as to this glorious cupboard. To what amazing infusions of gentian, peppermint, gilliflower, sage, parsley, thyme, rue, rosemary, and dandelion did his courageous stomach submit! In what wonderful wrappers, enclosing layers of dried leaves, would he swathe his rosy face if his mother suspected a toothache! What botanical blotches would he cheerfully stick upon his cheek if she convicted him of a pimple! Into this herbaceous penitentiary, situated on an upper staircase-landing—a low, narrow whitewashed cell where bunches of dried leaves hung from rusty hooks—he would be led submissively, like a popular lamb led to slaughter, and there he would, unlike that lamb, bear nobody but himself. Not even doing that much, so that the old lady were busy and pleased, he would quietly swallow what was given him, merely taking a corrective dip of hands and face into the great bowls of dried rose-leaves and lavender, then go out as confident in the sweetening powers of Cloisterham Weir and a wholesome mind as Lady Macbeth was hopeless of the seas that roll.

In the present instance, the good Minor Canon took his glass of Constantia with excellent grace, and, so supported to his mother's satisfaction, applied himself to the remaining duties of the day. Their orderly progress brought round Vesper Service and twilight. The Cathedral being very cold, he set off for a brisk trot after service, ending in a charge at his favorite fragment of ruin, to be carried by storm without a pause for breath.

He carried it in a masterly manner, standing breathless looking down upon the river. The river at Cloisterham is near enough to the sea to throw up seaweed. An unusual quantity had come in with the last tide, and this, the confusion of the water, the restless dipping of noisy gulls, and an angry light out seaward beyond the brown-sailed barges turning black, foreshadowed a stormy night. In his mind, he contrasted the wild, noisy sea with the quiet harbor of Minor Canon Corner, when Helena and Neville Landless passed below him. He had had the two in his thoughts all day and climbed down to speak to them together. The footing was rough in the uncertain light, but the Minor Canon was as good a climber as most men and stood beside them before many good climbers would be half-way down.

"A wild evening, Miss Landless! Do you not find your usual walk with your brother too exposed and cold for the time of year? Or at all events, when the sun is down and the weather is driving in from the sea?"

Helena thought not. It was their favorite walk. It was very retired.

"It is very retired," assented Mr. Crisparkle, seizing his opportunity and walking on with them. "It is a place of all others where one can speak without interruption, as I wish to do. Mr. Neville, I believe you tell your sister everything that passes between us?"

"Everything, sir."

"Consequently," said Mr. Crisparkle, "your sister is aware that I have repeatedly urged you to make some kind of apology for that unfortunate occurrence which befell on the night of your arrival here." He looked to her, and not to him; therefore it was she, and not he, who replied:

"Yes."

"I call it unfortunate, Miss Helena," resumed Mr. Crisparkle, "forasmuch as it certainly has engendered a prejudice against Neville. There is a notion about that he is a dangerously passionate fellow, of an uncontrollable and furious temper: he is really avoided as such."

"I have no doubt he is, poor fellow," said Helena, with a look of proud compassion at her brother, expressing a deep sense of his being ungenerously treated. "I should be quite sure of it, from your saying so; but what you tell me is confirmed by suppressed hints and references that I meet with every day."

"Now," Mr. Crisparkle resumed, in a tone of mild though firm persuasion, "is not this to be regretted, and ought it not to be amended? These are early days of Neville's in Cloisterham, and I have no fear of his outliving such a prejudice, and proving himself to have been misunderstood. But how much wiser to take action at once, than to trust to uncertain time! Besides, apart from its being politic, it is right. For there can be no question that Neville was wrong."

"He was provoked," Helena submitted.

"He was the assailant," Mr. Crisparkle submitted.

They walked on in silence, until Helena raised her eyes to the Minor Canon's face and said, almost reproachfully: "O Mr. Crisparkle, would you have Neville throw himself at young Drood's feet, or at Mr. Jasper's, who maligns him every day? In your heart you cannot mean it. From your heart you could not do it, if his case were yours."

"I have represented to Mr. Crisparkle, Helena," said Neville, with a glance of deference towards his tutor, "that if I could do it from my heart, I would. But I cannot, and I revolt from the pretence. You forget however, that to put the case to Mr. Crisparkle as his own, is to suppose to have done what I did."

"I ask his pardon," said Helena.

"You see," remarked Mr. Crisparkle, again laying hold of his opportunity, though with a moderate and delicate touch, "you both instinctively acknowledge that Neville did wrong. Then why stop short, and not otherwise acknowledge it?"

"Is there no difference," asked Helena, with a little faltering in her manner; "between submission to a generous spirit, and submission to a base or trivial one?"

Before the worthy Minor Canon was quite ready with his argument regarding this nice distinction, Neville struck in:

"Help me to clear myself with Mr. Crisparkle, Helena. Help me to convince him that I cannot be the first to make concessions without mockery and falsehood. My nature must be changed before I can do so, and it is not changed. I am sensible of inexpressible affront, and deliberate aggravation of inexpressible affront, and I am angry. The plain truth is, I am still as angry when I

Deep within the labyrinthine folds of Holborn, London, where ancient gabled houses stand like weary sentinels overlooking a street that has long forgotten the Old Bourne, lies a secluded enclave known as Staple Inn. It is a place where the mere act of turning the corner offers the pedestrian a sudden, profound relief—a sensation akin to stuffing cotton into one's ears and velvet into one's boots. Here, smoky sparrows twitter in smoky trees, playing a game of "country" that requires only a few feet of garden soil and a yard of gravel to confuse their tiny minds. It is a legal nook, housing a small hall with a lantern in its roof, the purpose of which remains a mystery to history itself.

In the distant past, when the very existence of a railroad threatened to offend the sensitive constitution of Cloisterham, this district stood alone, unshadowed by towering architecture. The sun once bathed it in glory, and the south-west wind swept through unimpeded. But on a December afternoon, nearing six o'clock, neither sun nor wind favored Staple Inn. Instead, a thick fog rolled in, filling the air until candles inside the occupied chambers shed only murky, blurred rays. Among these, one set of rooms in a corner house of the inner quadrangle stood out, marked above its grim portal by the inscription:

1747

Inside these chambers, Mr. Grewgious sat by his fire, his mind rarely troubled by the inscription above him. Occasionally, he would glance up, wondering if it stood for *Perhaps John Thomas* or *Perhaps Joe Tyler*, but mostly he ignored it. Who could judge Mr. Grewgious by his appearance? Had he ever known ambition? Disappointment? He had been trained for the Bar, aiming for chamber practice and the conveyancing of deeds—"convey the wise it call," as Pistol might say. Yet, Conveyancing and he had parted by mutual consent; she was wooed but never won.

However, an unexpected wind of Arbitration blew him toward success, earning him credit for indefatigable justice. This was followed by a more traceable wind delivering a lucrative Receivership to his pocket. By chance, he had found his niche. Now a Receiver and Agent for two wealthy estates, delegating legal matters to a firm below, he had extinguished his ambition and settled down beneath the dry vine and fig-tree of P. J. T., planted in 1747.

His room was a testament to order rather than luxury. Countless accounts, files, and strongboxes lined the space, arranged with such conscientious precision that they did not clutter the room but defined it. The fear of dying suddenly, leaving a single fact or figure incomplete, would have driven Mr. Grewgious mad. Fidelity to trust was his lifeblood; while other life-bloods course more gaily, none circulated with greater integrity.

Comforts were sparse. The room was merely dry and warm, centered around a faded fireside. Its private life consisted of the hearth, an easy-chair, and an old-fashioned round table that emerged from a corner like a shield after business hours. Behind it lay a closet stocked with good drink. The clerk's room was adjacent; Mr. Grewgious slept across the common stair and held some cellarage below. For three hundred days a year, he crossed to Furnival's Inn for dinner and returned to maximize these simple pleasures until the broad daylight of business returned.

As Mr. Grewgious wrote by the fire, so did his clerk, Bazzard, write by his own. Bazzard was a pale, puffy-faced man of thirty, with dark, lustreless eyes and a doughy complexion that seemed perpetually in need of a baker's touch. He possessed a strange power over Mr. Grewgious, sticking to his master's stool like a familiar summoned by a spell that refused to break. Though his presence was a burden, Mr. Grewgious treated him with unaccountable consideration.

"Now, Bazzard," Mr. Grewgious said as the clerk entered, looking up from his papers. "What is in the wind besides fog?"

"Mr. Drood," replied Bazzard.

"What of him?"

"He has called," said Bazzard.

"You might have shown him in."

"I am doing it," Bazzard replied.

The visitor entered.

"Dear me!" Mr. Grewgious exclaimed, surveying the pair of office candles. "I thought you had merely left your name. How do you do, Mr. Edwin? Dear me, you're choking!"

"It's this fog," Edwin returned. "It makes my eyes smart like Cayenne pepper."

"Is it really so bad? Pray undo your wrappers. It's fortunate I have such a good fire; Mr. Bazzard has taken care of me."

"No, I haven't," Bazzard interjected from the doorway.

"Ah! Then I must have taken care of myself without observing it," Mr. Grewgious said smoothly. "Please sit in my chair. No, I beg! Coming from such an atmosphere, you should not sit in *my* chair."

Edwin took the easy-chair in the corner. The fog he brought in, and the fog he shed with his greatcoat and neck-shawl, was quickly consumed by the eager fire.

"I look," Edwin smiled, "as if I had come to stay."

"—By the by," cried Mr. Grewgious, interrupting his own train of thought. "Stay. The fog may clear in an hour or two. We can have dinner brought in from just across Holborn. You had better take your Cayenne pepper here than outside; please stay and dine."

"You are very kind," Edwin said, glancing around as if attracted by the prospect of a new, relishing sort of gathering.

"Not at all," Mr. Grewgious replied. "*You* are very kind to join issue with a bachelor in chambers and take pot-luck. And I'll ask," he dropped his voice, his eyes twinkling with a sudden bright thought, "I'll ask Bazzard. He mightn't like it otherwise.—Bazzard!"

Bazzard reappeared.

"Dine presently with Mr. Drood and me."

"If I am ordered to dine, of course I will, sir," the gloomy clerk answered.

"Save the man!" cried Mr. Grewgious. "You're not ordered; you're invited."

"Thank you, sir," Bazzard said. "In that case, I don't care if I do."

"That's arranged. And perhaps you wouldn't mind," Mr. Grewgious continued, "stepping over to the hotel in Furnival's and asking them to send in materials for laying the cloth. For dinner, we'll have the hottest, strongest soup available, the best made-dish recommended, a joint—perhaps a haunch of mutton—and a goose or turkey, or any stuffed thing on the bill of fare. In short, we'll have whatever is on hand."

These liberal directions were issued with Mr. Grewgious's usual air of reading an inventory or reciting a lesson by rote. Bazzard, after pulling out the round table, withdrew to execute them.

"I was a little delicate," Mr. Grewgious whispered after the clerk's departure, "about employing him in the foraging or commissariat department. Because he mightn't like it."

"He seems to have his own way, sir," remarked Edwin.

"His own way?" Mr. Grewgious returned. "Oh, no! Poor fellow, you quite mistake him. If he had his own way, he wouldn't be here."

"I wonder where he would be!" Edwin thought silently. But he only thought it because Mr. Grewgious stood with his back to the other corner of the fire, his shoulder-blades against the chimneypiece, collecting his skirts for easy conversation.

"I take it, without the gift of prophecy, that you have done me the favor of calling to mention that you are going down yonder—where I can tell you, you are expected—and to offer to execute any little commission for my charming ward, and perhaps to sharpen me up on any proceedings? Eh, Mr. Edwin?"

"I called, sir, before going down, as an act of attention."

"Of attention!" Mr. Grewgious said. "Ah! Of course, not of impatience?"

"Impatience, sir?"

Mr. Grewgious had intended to be arch, bringing himself into scarcely supportable proximity to the fire to burn the effect of his wit into himself, much like subtle impressions are burned into hard metals. But his archness fled before the composed face of his visitor, leaving only the fire. He started and rubbed himself.

"I have lately been down yonder," Mr. Grewgious said, rearranging his skirts. "That is what I referred to when I said you are expected."

"Indeed, sir! Yes; I knew that Pussy was looking out for me."

"Do you keep a cat down there?" asked Mr. Grewgious.

Edwin colored slightly as he explained, "I call Rosa Pussy."

"Oh, really," Mr. Grewgious said, smoothing down his head. "That's very affable."

Edwin glanced at his face, uncertain if he objected to the appellation. But Edwin might as well have glanced at a clock face.

"A pet name, sir," he explained again.

"Umps," Mr. Grewgious nodded. But it was a compromise between unqualified assent and qualified dissent that disconcerted his visitor.

"Did PRosa—" Edwin began to recover himself.

"PRosa?" repeated Mr. Grewgious.

"I was going to say Pussy, and changed my mind; did she tell you anything about the Landlesses?"

"No," said Mr. Grewgious. "What are the Landlesses? An estate? A villa? A farm?"

"A brother and sister. The sister is at the Nuns' House and has become a great friend of P—"

"PRosa's," Mr. Grewgious struck in, his face fixed.

"She is a strikingly handsome girl, sir, and I thought she might have been described to you, or presented to you perhaps?"

"Neither," said Mr. Grewgious. "But here is Bazzard."

Bazzard returned, accompanied by two waiters—an immovable waiter and a flying waiter. The three brought in so much fog that the fire roared anew. The flying waiter, carrying everything on his shoulders, laid the cloth with amazing rapidity, while the immovable waiter, carrying nothing, found fault with him. The flying waiter then polished all the glasses, and the immovable waiter inspected them. The flying waiter flew across Holborn for the soup, returned, flew again for the made-dish, returned, flew again for the joint and poultry, and returned, taking supplementary flights for various articles as the immovable waiter discovered he had forgotten them. Yet, no matter how the flying waiter cleaved the air, he was always reproached on his return by the immovable waiter for bringing fog and being out of breath.

At the conclusion of the repast, the flying waiter was severely winded. The immovable waiter gathered the tablecloth under his arm with a grand air, sternly looked on at the flying waiter while he set the clean glasses, directed a valedictory glance toward Mr. Grewgious conveying, "Let it be clearly understood that the reward is mine, and Nil is the claim of this slave," and pushed the flying waiter out of the room.

It was like a highly finished miniature of the Circumlocution Department, Commandership-in-Chief of any sort, Government. It was an edifying little picture suitable for the National Gallery.

Since the fog was the proximate cause of this sumptuous repast, it also served as its general sauce. Hearing the out-door clerks sneeze and beat their feet on the gravel was a zest surpassing Doctor Kitchener's. Bidding the unfortunate flying waiter shut the door before he had opened it was a condiment of profounder flavor than Harvey. Notably, the leg of this young man, in its application to the door, evinced the finest sense of touch: always preceding himself and tray by some seconds with an angling air, and always lingering after he and the tray had disappeared, like Macbeth's leg accompanying him off the stage with reluctance to the assassination of Duncan.

The host had gone below to the cellar and brought up bottles of ruby, straw-coloured, and golden drinks, which had ripened long ago in lands where no fogs exist and had since lain slumbering in the shade. Sparkling and tingling after so long a nap, they pushed at their corks to help the corkscrew, like prisoners helping rioters to force their gates, and danced out gaily. If P. J. T. in 1747, or any other year of his period, drank such wines, then certainly P. J. T. was Pretty Jolly Too.

Externally, Mr. Grewgious showed no signs of being mellowed by these glowing vintages. Instead of drinking them, they might have been poured over him in high-dried snuff form and run to waste, for any lights and shades they caused to flicker over his face. His manner was unchanged. But, in his wooden way, he had observant eyes for Edwin. When, at the end of dinner, he motioned Edwin back to his own easy-chair in the fireside corner, and Edwin sank luxuriously into it after brief remonstrance, Mr. Grewgious, turning his seat round toward the fire and smoothing his head and face, might have been seen looking at his visitor between his smoothing fingers.

"Bazzard!" Mr. Grewgious suddenly turned to him.

"I follow you, sir," returned Bazzard, who had consumed meat and drink in a workmanlike manner, though mostly in speechlessness.

"I drink to you, Bazzard; Mr. Edwin, success to Mr. Bazzard!"

"Success to Mr. Bazzard!" echoed Edwin, with a totally unfounded

When the Mayor, Mr. Sapsea, finds himself with nothing more pressing to occupy his thoughts in the late afternoon, and discovers that contemplating the depths of his own wisdom has begun to feel slightly repetitive despite the grandeur of the subject, he often takes a stroll through the Cathedral Close. He enjoys passing the churchyard with an air of ownership, nurturing a benevolent landlord's heart within him, knowing he has been generous to his most deserving tenant, Mrs. Sapsea, and has publicly awarded her a prize. He delights in seeing unfamiliar faces peering through the railings, perhaps reading his inscription. If he encounters a stranger departing the churchyard with a hurried pace, he is morally certain that the individual is "retiring with a blush," exactly as his monument instructs.

Mr. Sapsea's stature has grown; he is now the Mayor of Cloisterham. Without mayors, and many of them, it cannot be argued that the entire fabric of society—Mr. Sapsea is convinced he coined that powerful phrase—would collapse. Mayors have been knighted for delivering speeches that act like explosive machines, firing shells into the English Grammar. Mr. Sapsea is capable of such a performance. Rise, Sir Thomas Sapsea! Such is the essence of the earth.

Since their initial meeting to share port, epitaphs, backgammon, beef, and salad, Mr. Sapsea's relationship with Mr. Jasper has deepened. He was welcomed at the gatehouse with warm hospitality; on that occasion, Mr. Jasper sat at the piano and sang to him, figuratively tickling his ears long enough to create a significant area for such amusement. What Mr. Sapsea appreciates about the young man is his readiness to learn from the wisdom of elders and his solidity at the core. As proof, that evening he sang not frivolous tunes favored by national enemies, but the authentic "George the Third," brewed at home, urging him (as "my brave boys") to smash every other island except this one, and to sweep the seas and continents in all directions. In short, he made it clear that Providence made a distinct error in creating such a small nation of hearts of oak and so many other verminous peoples.

Walking slowly on this damp evening near the churchyard, hands clasped behind his back, on the lookout for a blushing and retiring stranger, Mr. Sapsea rounds a corner and unexpectedly finds himself in the presence of the Dean, conversing with the Verger and Mr. Jasper. Mr. Sapsea offers his respects and is immediately struck with a demeanor more ecclesiastical than any Archbishop of York or Canterbury.

"You are evidently planning to write a book about us, Mr. Jasper," the Dean says. "To write a book about us. Well! We are very ancient, and we ought to make a good book. We are not so richly endowed in possessions as in age; but perhaps you will include _that_ in your book, among other things, and draw attention to our grievances."

Mr. Tope, as duty dictates, is greatly amused.

"I really have no intention at all, sir," replies Jasper, "of becoming an author or an archaeologist. It is merely a whim. And even for my whim, Mr. Sapsea here is more accountable than I am."

"How so, Mr. Mayor?" asks the Dean, nodding with good-natured recognition of his Fetch. "How is that, Mr. Mayor?"

"I am not aware," Mr. Sapsea remarks, scanning the surroundings for information, "to what the Very Reverend the Dean does me the honor of referring." He then turns his attention to his original work, examining it in minute detail.

"Durdles," Mr. Tope hints.

"Ay!" the Dean echoes; "Durdles, Durdles!"

"The truth is, sir," explains Jasper, "that my curiosity regarding the man was first truly sparked by Mr. Sapsea. Mr. Sapsea's knowledge of mankind and his ability to draw out whatever is reclusive or odd around him first led me to give the man a second thought: though, of course, I have met him constantly. You would not be surprised by this, Mr. Dean, if you had seen Mr. Sapsea deal with him in his own parlour, as I did."

"Oh!" cries Sapsea, picking up the ball thrown to him with ineffable complacency and pomposity; "yes, yes. The Very Reverend the Dean refers to that? Yes. I happened to bring Durdles and Mr. Jasper together. I regard Durdles as a Character."

"A character, Mr. Sapsea, that with a few skillful touches you turn inside out," says Jasper.

"Nay, not quite that," returns the lumbering auctioneer. "I may have a little influence over him, perhaps; and a little insight into his character, perhaps. The Very Reverend the Dean will please to bear in mind that I have seen the world." Here Mr. Sapsea steps slightly behind the Dean to inspect his coat-buttons.

"Well!" says the Dean, looking around to see where his copyist has gone: "I hope, Mr. Mayor, you will use your study and knowledge of Durdles for the good purpose of exhorting him not to break our worthy and respected Choir-Master's neck; we cannot afford it; his head and voice are much too valuable to us."

Mr. Tope is again highly entertained, and, having fallen into respectful convulsions of laughter, subsides into a deferential murmur implying that surely any gentleman would consider it a pleasure and an honor to have his neck broken in return for such a compliment from such a source.

"I will take it upon myself, sir," observes Sapsea loftily, "to answer for Mr. Jasper's neck. I will tell Durdles to be careful of it. He will mind what _I_ say. How is it currently endangered?" he inquires, looking about with magnificent patronage.

"Only by my making a moonlight expedition with Durdles among the tombs, vaults, towers, and ruins," returns Jasper. "You remember suggesting, when you brought us together, that, as a lover of the picturesque, it might be worth my while?"

"I remember!" replies the auctioneer. And the solemn idiot genuinely believes he does remember.

"Profiting by your hint," pursues Jasper, "I have had some day-rambles with the extraordinary old fellow, and we are to make a moonlight hole-and-corner exploration tonight."

"And here he is," says the Dean.

Durdles, with his dinner-bundle in hand, is indeed seen slouching toward them. Slouching closer, and perceiving the Dean, he removes his hat and is slouching away with it under his arm, when Mr. Sapsea stops him.

"Mind you take care of my friend," is the injunction Mr. Sapsea lays upon him.

"What friend o' yourn is dead?" asks Durdles. "No orders has come in for any friend o' yourn."

"I mean my live friend there."

"Oh! him?" says Durdles. "He can take care of himself, can Mister Jarsper."

"But do you take care of him too," says Sapsea.

Whom Durdles (there being command in his tone) surlily surveys from head to foot.

"With submission to his Reverence the Dean, if you'll mind what concerns you, Mr. Sapsea, Durdles he'll mind what concerns him."

"You're out of temper," says Mr. Sapsea, winking to the company to observe how smoothly he will manage him. "My friend concerns me, and Mr. Jasper is my friend. And you are my friend."

"Don't you get into a bad habit of boasting," retorts Durdles, with a grave cautionary nod. "It'll grow upon you."

[Illustration: Durdles cautions Mr. Sapsea against boasting]

"You are out of temper," says Sapsea again; reddening, but again sinking to the company.

"I own to it," returns Durdles; "I don't like liberties."

Mr. Sapsea winks a third wink to the company, as if to say: "I think you will agree with me that I have settled _his_ business;" and stalks out of the controversy.

Durdles then gives the Dean a good evening, and adding, as he puts his hat on, "You'll find me at home, Mister Jarsper, as agreed, when you want me; I'm a-going home to clean myself," soon slouches out of sight. This going home to clean himself is one of the man's incomprehensible compromises with inexorable facts; he, and his hat, and his boots, and his clothes, never showing any trace of cleaning, but being uniformly in one condition of dust and grit.

The lamplighter now dots the quiet Close with specks of light, running at a great rate up and down his little ladder with that object—his little ladder under the sacred shadow of whose inconvenience generations had grown up, and which all Cloisterham would have stood aghast at the idea of abolishing—the Dean withdraws to his dinner, Mr. Tope to his tea, and Mr. Jasper to his piano. There, with no light but that of the fire, he sits chanting choir-music in a low and beautiful voice, for two or three hours; in short, until it has been for some time dark, and the moon is about to rise.

Then he closes his piano softly, quietly changes his coat for a pea-jacket, with a goodly wicker-cased bottle in its largest pocket, and putting on a low-crowned, flap-brimmed hat, goes softly out. Why does he move so softly tonight? No outward reason is apparent for it. Can there be any sympathetic reason crouching darkly within him?

Repairing to Durdles's unfinished house, or hole in the city wall, and seeing a light within it, he softly picks his course among the gravestones, monuments, and stony lumber of the yard, already touched here and there, sidewise, by the rising moon. The two journeymen have left their two great saws sticking in their blocks of stone; and two skeleton journeymen out of the Dance of Death might be grinning in the shadow of their sheltering sentry-boxes, about to slash away at cutting out the gravestones of the next two people destined to die in Cloisterham. Likely enough, the two think little of that now, being alive, and perhaps merry. Curious, to make a guess at the two—or say one of the two!

"Ho! Durdles!"

The light moves, and he appears with it at the door. He would seem to have been "cleaning himself" with the aid of a bottle, jug, and tumbler; for no other cleansing instruments are visible in the bare brick room with rafters overhead and no plastered ceiling, into which he shows his visitor.

"Are you ready?"

"I am ready, Mister Jarsper. Let the old 'uns come out if they dare, when we go among their tombs. My spirit is ready for 'em."

"Do you mean animal spirits, or ardent?"

"The one's the t'other," answers Durdles, "and I mean 'em both."

He takes a lantern from a hook, puts a match or two in his pocket wherewith to light it, should there be need; and they go out together, dinner-bundle and all.

Surely an unaccountable sort of expedition! That Durdles himself, who is always prowling among old graves and ruins, like a Ghoul—that he should be stealing forth to climb, and dive, and wander without an object, is nothing extraordinary; but that the Choir-Master or anyone else should hold it worth his while to be with him, and to study moonlight effects in such company is another affair. Surely an unaccountable sort of expedition, therefore!

"'Ware that there mound by the yard-gate, Mister Jarsper."

"I see it. What is it?"

"Lime."

Mr. Jasper stops, and waits for him to come up, for he lags behind. "What you call quick-lime?"

"Ay!" says Durdles; "quick enough to eat your boots. With a little handy stirring, quick enough to eat your bones."

They go on, presently passing the red windows of the Travellers' Twopenny, and emerging into the clear moonlight of the Monks' Vineyard. This crossed, they come to Minor Canon Corner: of which the greater part lies in shadow until the moon shall rise higher in the sky.

The sound of a closing house-door strikes their ears, and two men come out. These are Mr. Crisparkle and Neville. Jasper, with a strange and sudden smile upon his face, lays the palm of his hand upon the breast of Durdles, stopping him where he stands.

At that end of Minor Canon Corner the shadow is profound in the existing state of the light: at that end, too, there is a piece of old dwarf wall, breast high, the only remaining boundary of what was once a garden, but is now the thoroughfare. Jasper and Durdles would have turned this wall in another instant; but, stopping so short, stand behind it.

"Those two are only sauntering," Jasper whispers; "they will go out into the moonlight soon. Let us keep quiet here, or they will detain us, or want to join us, or what not."

Durdles nods assent, and falls to munching some fragments from his bundle. Jasper folds his arms upon the top of the wall, and, with his chin resting on them, watches. He takes no note whatever of the Minor Canon, but watches Neville, as though his eye were at the trigger of a loaded rifle, and he had covered him, and were going to fire. A sense of destructive power is so expressed in his face, that even Durdles pauses in his munching, and looks at him, with an unmunched something in his cheek.

Meanwhile Mr. Crisparkle and Neville walk to and fro, quietly

A serene hush was descending upon Miss Twinkleton's establishment. The Christmas recess loomed, bringing with it the end of "the term"—a more elegant designation than the old "half," now strictly collegiate. For several days, the discipline of the Nuns' House had relaxed into a festive haze. Club suppers had migrated to the bedrooms, where a dressed tongue was carved with scissors and served with curling tongs, while marmalade was distributed on plates made of curlpaper. Cowslip wine flowed from small squat glasses, shared even by the frail little Rickitts, who usually took her steel drops. The housemaids, bribed with ribbons and worn-out shoes, were silenced regarding crumbs found in beds. Costumes were airier than usual, and the daring Miss Ferdinand had even attempted a solo on a comb-and-curlpaper, only to be suffocated by two pillow-hair executioners.

Boxes appeared in the bedrooms, and packing commenced with a frantic energy disproportionate to the actual contents. Odds and ends of cold cream and hairpins were doled out to attendants under vows of inviolable secrecy, during which confidences were exchanged regarding the "golden youth" of England expected to visit. Miss Giggles, deficient in sentiment, claimed she acknowledged such homage by making faces, but she was outvoted by the immense majority.

On the eve of departure, it was a point of honor that no one should sleep, and ghosts should be encouraged. Yet, the compact invariably failed; all the young ladies fell asleep early and rose early.

The final ceremony took place at noon. Miss Twinkleton, supported by Mrs. Tisher, presided over a drawing-room draped in brown Holland, where glasses of white wine and plates of pound-cake awaited. "Ladies," Miss Twinkleton began, "another revolving year has brought us to this festive period... our hearts." She paused, substituting "hearts" for the word "bosoms" she intended to use. She spoke of yearning for home, quoting Addison's tragedy about the overcast dawn, only to declare that for them, the horizon was *couleur de rose*. Redolent of friends and relations, they wished one another happiness until they met again.

As the handmaidens, in their best caps, carried away the trays and the coaches choked the street, the young ladies departed. Miss Twinkleton saluted each cheek and handed over a neat letter addressed to the recipient's next friend at law, delivered with an air of delightful surprise, though it was clearly a bill.

Rosa, having seen many such dispersals, felt content to remain, especially with her latest friend beside her. Yet, a blank space marred her joy. Helena Landless, having witnessed her brother's revelation to Rosa and entered a pact of silence with Mr. Crisparkle, shrank from mentioning Edwin Drood's name. The reason was mysterious to Rosa, who could only ponder her own doubts, wondering why Helena avoided the name now that she knew a reconciliation was planned.

Outside, the High Street became musical with cries of "Good-bye, Rosebud darling!" The effigy of Mr. Sapsea's father seemed to urge the departing crowd to bid farewell with spirit. Then, the street ran dry, and Cloisterham returned to its usual stillness.

While Rosebud waited in her bower with an uneasy heart, Edwin Drood was equally unsettled. Unlike the acclamated fairy queen of the school, he possessed a conscience that Mr. Grewgious had pricked. The gentleman's steady convictions regarding right and wrong could not be brushed aside. The dinner at Staple Inn and the ring in his breast pocket had halted his drift toward marriage. He was forced to a narrow path: give the ring to Rosa, or take it back. In this narrowed way, he began to consider Rosa's claims more unselfishly and found himself less sure of himself than in his easy-going days.

"I will be guided by what she says," he decided as he walked from the gatehouse toward the Nuns' House. "Whatever comes, I will bear his words in mind and try to be true to the living and the dead."

Rosa was dressed for walking and awaited him. It was a bright, frosty day, and Miss Twinkleton had graciously sanctioned fresh air. Thus, they emerged before the usual offerings to Propriety were required.

"My dear Eddy," Rosa said, turning onto the quiet walks near the Cathedral and the river, "I want to say something very serious. I have been thinking about it for a long time."

"I want to be serious with you too, Rosa dear. I mean to be serious and earnest."

"Thank you, Eddy. And you will not think me unkind because I begin, will you? You will not think I speak for myself only? That would not be generous, would it?"

He replied, "I hope I am not ungenerous to you, Rosa." He called her "Pussy" no more; never again.

"And there is no fear," Rosa continued, clasping her hand on his arm, "of our quarrelling, is there? Because we have so much reason to be lenient to each other!"

"We will be, Rosa."

"That's a dear good boy! Eddy, let us be courageous. Let us change to brother and sister from this day forth."

"Never be husband and wife?"

"Never!"

Silence fell between them. Then, with effort, Edwin said, "Of course I know this has been in both our minds, Rosa, and of course I am in honor bound to confess freely that it does not originate with you."

"No, nor with you, dear," she returned with pathetic earnestness. "That sprung up between us. You are not truly happy in our engagement; I am not truly happy in it. Oh, I am so sorry, so sorry!" Tears broke from her eyes.

"I am deeply sorry too, Rosa. Deeply sorry for you."

"And I for you, poor boy! And I for you!"

This pure, gentle feeling brought a softening light to their position. Their relations did not appear wilful or capricious; they were elevated into something self-denying, honorable, and affectionate.

"If we knew yesterday," Rosa said, drying her eyes, "that we were far from right together in those relations which were not of our own choosing, what better could we do today than change them? It is natural to be sorry, and you see how sorry we both are; but how much better to be sorry now than then!"

"When, Rosa?"

"When it would be too late. And then we should be angry, besides."

Another silence ensued.

"And you know," Rosa said innocently, "you couldn't like me then; and you can always like me now, for I shall not be a drag upon you, or a worry to you. And I can always like you now, and your sister will not tease or trifle with you. I often did when I was not your sister, and I beg your pardon for it."

"Don't let us come to that, Rosa; or I shall want more pardoning than I like to think of."

"No, indeed, Eddy; you are too hard, my generous boy, upon yourself. Let us sit down, brother, on these ruins, and let me tell you how it was with us. I think I know, for I have considered it much since you were here last. You liked me, didn't you? You thought I was a nice little thing?"

"Everybody thinks that, Rosa."

"Do they?" She knitted her brow, then flashed out with a bright induction. "Well, but say they do. Surely it was not enough that you should think of me only as other people did; now, was it?"

The point could not be got over. It was not enough.

"That is just what I mean," Rosa said. "You liked me very well, and you had grown used to me, and used to the idea of our being married. You accepted the situation as inevitable, didn't you? It was to be, you thought, and why discuss or dispute it?"

It was new and strange for him to see himself so clearly reflected in her gaze. He had always patronized her, superior to her share of woman's wit. Was that another instance of something radically amiss in the terms leading to a life-long bondage?

"All this that I say of you is true of me as well, Eddy. Unless it was, I might not be bold enough to say it. Only, the difference between us was that by little and little there crept into my mind a habit of thinking about it, instead of dismissing it. My life is not so busy as yours, and I have not so many things to think of. So I thought about it very much, and I cried about it very much too (though that was not your fault, poor boy); when all at once my guardian came down, to prepare for my leaving the Nuns' House. I tried to hint to him that I was not quite settled in my mind, but I hesitated and failed, and he didn't understand me. But he is a good, good man. And he put before me so kindly, and yet so strongly, how seriously we ought to consider, in our circumstances, that I resolved to speak to you the next moment we were alone and grave. And if I seemed to come to it easily just now, because I came to it all at once, don't think it was so really, Eddy, for oh, it was very, very hard, and oh, I am very, very sorry!"

Her heart broke into tears again. He put his arm about her waist, and they walked by the river-side.

"Your guardian has spoken to me too, Rosa dear. I saw him before I left London." His right hand went to his breast, seeking the ring, but he checked it. "If I am to take it back, why should I tell her of it?"

"And that made you more serious about it, didn't it, Eddy? And if I had not spoken to you, as I have, you would have spoken to me? I hope you can tell me so? I don't like it to be *all* my doing, though it *is* so much better for us."

"Yes, I should have spoken; I should have put everything before you; I came intending to do it. But I never could have spoken to you as you have spoken to me, Rosa."

"Don't say you mean so coldly or unkindly, Eddy, please, if you can help it."

"I mean so sensibly and delicately, so wisely and affectionately."

"That's my dear brother!" She kissed his hand in a little rapture. "The dear girls will be dreadfully disappointed," she added, laughing, with dewdrops glistening in her bright eyes. "They have looked forward to it so, poor pets!"

"Ah! but I fear it will be a worse disappointment to Jack," said Edwin Drood, starting. "I never thought of Jack!"

Her swift, intent look at him as he spoke could no more be recalled than a flash of lightning. It appeared as though she would instantly recall it if she could; for she looked down, confused, and breathed quickly.

"You don't doubt its being a blow to Jack, Rosa?"

She merely replied, evasively and hurriedly: "Why should she? She had not thought about it. He seemed, to her, to have so little to do with it."

"My dear child! can you suppose that anyone so wrapped up in another—Mrs. Tope's expression: not mine—as Jack is in me, could fail to be struck all of a heap by such a sudden and complete change in my life? I say sudden, because it will be sudden to *him*, you know."

She nodded twice or thrice, her lips parted as if to assent, but she uttered no sound, and her breathing remained rapid.

"How shall I tell Jack?" Edwin ruminated. If he had been less occupied, he must have seen her singular emotion. "I never thought of Jack. It must be broken to him, before the town-crier knows it. I dine with the dear fellow tomorrow and next day—Christmas Eve and Christmas Day—but it would never do to spoil his feast-days. He always worries about me, and moddles-coddles in the merest trifles. The news is sure to overset him. How on earth shall this be broken to Jack?"

"He must be told, I suppose?" said Rosa.

"My dear Rosa! who ought to be in our confidence, if not Jack?"

"My guardian promised to come down, if I should write and ask him. I am going to do so. Would you like to leave it to him?"

"A bright idea!" cried Edwin. "The other trustee. Nothing more natural. He comes down, he goes to Jack, he relates what we have agreed upon, and he states our case better than we could. He has already spoken feelingly to you, he has already spoken feelingly to me, and he'll put the whole thing feelingly to Jack. That's it! I am not a coward, Rosa, but to tell you a secret, I am a little afraid of Jack."

"No, no! you are not afraid of him!" cried Rosa, turning white, and clasping her hands.

"Why, sister Rosa, sister Rosa, what do you see from the turret?" Edwin rallied her. "My dear girl!"

"You frightened me."

"Most unintentionally, but I am as sorry as if I had meant to do it. Could you possibly suppose for a moment, from any loose way of speaking of mine, that I was literally afraid of the dear fond fellow? What I mean is, that he is subject to a kind of paroxysm, or fit—I saw him in it once—and I don't know but that so great a surprise, coming upon him direct from me whom he is so wrapped up in, might bring it on perhaps. Which—and this is the secret I was going to tell you—is another reason for your guardian's making the communication. He is so steady, precise, and exact, that he will talk Jack's thoughts into shape, in no time: whereas with me Jack is always impulsive and hurried, and, I may say, almost womanish."

Christmas Eve in Cloisterham. The streets held a few strange faces, and many others that were half-familiar, once the countenances of local children, now the features of travelers returning from distant lands to find the city shrunk and altered, as if it had not washed itself clean in the intervening years. To these returnees, the cathedral clock's strike and the rooks' cawing from the tower sounded like voices from their nursery days. Some, in their dying hours far away, had imagined their floors strewn with autumn leaves from the Close's elms; so too, the rustling sounds and fresh scents of their earliest memories revived as the circle of their lives drew its final line, beginning and end merging together.

Seasonable tokens were everywhere. Red berries glowed in the lattices of Minor Canon Corner; Mr. and Mrs. Tope carefully inserted sprigs of holly into the carvings and sconces of the cathedral stalls, as if plugging the coat-button holes of the Dean and Chapter. Shops overflowed with lavish profusion: currants, raisins, spices, candied peel, and moist sugar. An unusual air of gallantry and dissipation hung over the town, evidenced by an immense bunch of mistletoe in a greengrocer's doorway and a pitifully small Twelfth Cake, culminating in a Harlequin—so meager one might call it a Twenty-fourth or Forty-eighth Cake—to be raffled at the pastrycook's for a shilling per member. Public amusements were plentiful. The Wax-Work, which had impressed the reflective mind of the Emperor of China, was available by special request during Christmas Week on the premises of the bankrupt livery-stable-keeper up the lane. A new grand comic Christmas pantomime was to be produced at the Theatre, heralded by a portrait of Signor Jacksonini the clown saying "How do you do tomorrow?" quite as large as life, and almost as miserable. In short, Cloisterham was up and doing: though the High School and Miss Twinkleton's were excluded. From the former, the scholars had gone home, every one in love with one of Miss Twinkleton's young ladies (who knew nothing of it); and only the handmaidens fluttered occasionally in the windows of the latter. It was noted that these damsels became, within the limits of decorum, more skittish when entrusted with the concrete representation of their sex than when sharing the representation with Miss Twinkleton's pupils.

Three were to meet at the gatehouse that night. How did each spend the day?

Neville Landless, though absolved from his books for the time by Mr. Crisparkle—whose fresh nature was by no means insensible to the charms of a holiday—read and wrote in his quiet room with a concentrated air until two hours past noon. He then cleared his table, arranged his books, and tore up and burned his stray papers. He made a clean sweep of all untidy accumulations, put his drawers in order, and destroyed every note or scrap of paper save those bearing directly on his studies. Done, he turned to his wardrobe, selecting a few articles of ordinary wear—among them, a change of stout shoes and socks for walking—and packed them in a new knapsack bought in the High Street the previous day. At the same time and place, he purchased a heavy walking-stick; strong in the handle for the grip of the hand, and iron-shod. He tested it, swung it, poised it, and laid it by with the knapsack on a window-seat. By then, his arrangements were complete.

He dressed for going out and was in the act of leaving—indeed, had left his room and met the Minor Canon on the staircase, coming out of his bedroom on the same story—when he turned back for his walking-stick, thinking he would carry it now. Mr. Crisparkle, who had paused on the staircase, saw it in his hand upon his reappearance, took it from him, and asked with a smile how he chose a stick?

"Really I don't know that I understand the subject," Neville answered. "I chose it for its weight."

"Much too heavy, Neville; *much* too heavy."

"To rest upon in a long walk, sir?"

"Rest upon?" repeated Mr. Crisparkle, throwing himself into pedestrian form. "You don't rest upon it; you merely balance with it."

"I shall know better, with practice, sir. I have not lived in a walking country, you know."

"True," said Mr. Crisparkle. "Get into a little training, and we will have a few score miles together. I should leave you nowhere now. Do you come back before dinner?"

"I think not, as we dine early."

Mr. Crisparkle gave him a bright nod and a cheerful good-bye, expressing (not without intention) absolute confidence and ease.

Neville repaired to the Nuns' House and requested that Miss Landless be informed that her brother was there by appointment. He waited at the gate, not even crossing the threshold, for he was on his parole not to put himself in Rosa's way.

His sister was at least as mindful of the obligation they had taken upon themselves as he could be, and lost no moment in joining him. They met affectionately, avoided lingering, and walked toward the upper inland country.

"I am not going to tread upon forbidden ground, Helena," Neville said when they had walked some distance and were turning. "You will understand in another moment that I cannot help referring to—what shall I say?—my infatuation."

"Had you not better avoid it, Neville? You know that I can hear nothing."

"You can hear, my dear, what Mr. Crisparkle has heard, and heard with approval."

"Yes; I can hear so much."

"Well, it is this. I am not only unsettled and unhappy myself, but I am conscious of unsettling and interfering with other people. How do I know that, but for my unfortunate presence, you, and—and—the rest of that former party, our engaging guardian excepted, might be dining cheerfully in Minor Canon Corner tomorrow? Indeed, it probably would be so. I can see too well that I am not high in the old lady's opinion, and it is easy to understand what an irksome clog I must be upon the hospitalities of her orderly house—especially at this time of year—when I must be kept asunder from this person, and there is such a reason for my not being brought into contact with that person, and an unfavorable reputation has preceded me with such another person; and so on. I have put this very gently to Mr. Crisparkle, for you know his self-denying ways; but still I have put it. What I have laid much greater stress upon at the same time is, that I am engaged in a miserable struggle with myself, and that a little change and absence may enable me to come through it the better. So, the weather being bright and hard, I am going on a walking expedition, and intend taking myself out of everybody's way (my own included, I hope) tomorrow morning."

"When to come back?"

"In a fortnight."

"And going quite alone?"

"I am much better without company, even if there were any one but you to bear me company, my dear Helena."

"Mr. Crisparkle entirely agrees, you say?"

"Entirely. I am not sure but that at first he was inclined to think it rather a moody scheme, and one that might do a brooding mind harm. But we took a moonlight walk last Monday night to talk it over at leisure, and I represented the case to him as it really is. I showed him that I do want to conquer myself, and that, this evening well got over, it is surely better that I should be away from here just now, than here. I could hardly help meeting certain people walking together here, and that could do no good, and is certainly not the way to forget. A fortnight hence, that chance will probably be over, for the time; and when it again arises for the last time, why, I can again go away. Farther, I really do feel hopeful of bracing exercise and wholesome fatigue. You know that Mr. Crisparkle allows such things their full weight in the preservation of his own sound mind in his own sound body, and that his just spirit is not likely to maintain one set of natural laws for himself and another for me. He yielded to my view of the matter, when convinced that I was honestly in earnest; and so, with his full consent, I start tomorrow morning. Early enough to be not only out of the streets, but out of hearing of the bells, when the good people go to church."

Helena thought it over and thought well of it. Mr. Crisparkle doing so, she would do so; but she did originally, out of her own mind, think well of it, as a healthy project denoting a sincere endeavor and an active attempt at self-correction. She was inclined to pity him, poor fellow, for going away solitary on the great Christmas festival; but she felt it much more to the purpose to encourage him. And she did encourage him.

He will write to her?

He will write to her every alternate day and tell her all his adventures.

Does he send clothes on in advance of him?

"My dear Helena, no. Travel like a pilgrim, with wallet and staff. My wallet—or my knapsack—is packed and ready for strapping on; and here is my staff!"

He handed it to her; she made the same remark as Mr. Crisparkle, that it was very heavy, and gave it back to him, asking what wood it was? Iron-wood.

Up to this point he had been extremely cheerful. Perhaps, the having to carry his case with her and therefore present it in its brightest aspect, had roused his spirits. Perhaps, the having done so with success, was followed by a revulsion. As the day closed in and the city-lights began to spring up before them, he grew depressed.

"I wish I were not going to this dinner, Helena."

"Dear Neville, is it worth while to care much about it? Think how soon it will be over."

"How soon it will be over!" he repeated gloomily. "Yes. But I don't like it."

"There may be a moment's awkwardness," she cheerfully represented to him, "but it can only last a moment. You are quite sure of yourself."

"I wish I felt as sure of everything else, as I feel of myself," he answered her.

"How strangely you speak, dear! What do you mean?"

"Helena, I don't know. I only know that I don't like it. What a strange dead weight there is in the air!"

She called his attention to those copperous clouds beyond the river and said that the wind was rising. He scarcely spoke again until he took leave of her at the gate of the Nuns' House. She did not immediately enter when they had parted, but remained looking after him along the street. Twice he passed the gatehouse, reluctant to enter. At length, the cathedral clock chiming one quarter, with a rapid turn he hurried in.

And so *he* went up the postern stair.

Edwin Drood passed a solitary day. Something of deeper moment than he had thought had gone out of his life; and in the silence of his own chamber he wept for it last night. Though the image of Miss Landless still hovered in the background of his mind, the pretty little affectionate creature, so much firmer and wiser than he had supposed, occupied its stronghold. It was with some misgiving of his own unworthiness that he thought of her, and of what they might have been to one another if he had been more in earnest some time ago; if he had set a higher value on her; if, instead of accepting his lot in life as an inheritance of course, he had studied the right way to its appreciation and enhancement. And still, for all this, and though there was a sharp heartache in all this, the vanity and caprice of youth sustained that handsome figure of Miss Landless in the background of his mind.

That was a curious look of Rosa's when they parted at the gate. Did it mean that she saw below the surface of his thoughts, and down into their twilight depths? Scarcely that, for it was a look of astonished and keen inquiry. He decided that he could not understand it, though it was remarkably expressive.

As he only waited for Mr. Grewgious now and would depart immediately after having seen him, he took a sauntering leave of the ancient city and its neighborhood. He recalled the time when Rosa and he walked here or there, mere children, full of the dignity of being engaged. Poor children! he thought, with a pitying sadness.

Finding that his watch had stopped, he turned into the jeweler's shop to have it wound and set. The jeweler was knowing on the subject of a bracelet, which he begged leave to submit, in a general and quite aimless way. It would suit (he considered) a young bride to perfection; especially if of a rather diminutive style of beauty. Finding the bracelet but coldly looked at, the jeweler invited attention to a tray of rings for gentlemen; here was a style of ring, now, he remarked—a very chaste signet—which gentlemen were much given to purchasing when changing their condition. A ring of a very responsible appearance. With the date of their wedding-day engraved inside, several gentlemen had preferred it to any other kind of memento.

The rings were as coldly viewed as the bracelet. Edwin told the tempter that he wore no jewelry but his watch and chain, which were his father's; and his shirt-pin.

"That I was aware of," was the jeweler's reply, "for Mr. Jasper dropped in for a watch-glass the other day, and, in fact, I showed these articles to him, remarking that if he *should* wish to make a present to a gentleman relative, on any particular occasion—but he said with a smile that he had an inventory in his mind of all the jewelry his gentleman relative ever wore; namely, his watch and chain, and his shirt-pin

Neville Landless had risen before the dawn, his boots clicking a steady rhythm against the cobblestones of Cloisterham. By the time the church bells tolled for morning service, he was already eight miles out, his stomach growling in protest against the crust of bread he had eaten on the road. He pulled his coat tighter and sought refuge at the nearest roadside inn, the *Tilted Wagon*.

The establishment lived up to its name in every sense of the word. It sat precariously atop a hill, a painted facade promising comfort that the reality beneath denied. Inside, the air was thick with the scent of damp fagots and stale ale. A scolding landlady, her apron stained, slapped a baby in the corner—one sock red, the other missing—while the cheese on the shelf seemed to weep alongside a moldy tablecloth. It was a place where men and beasts alike were treated as transient inconveniences, yet Neville, weary and hungry, accepted the meager tea and toast with a grateful silence.

Once fed, he stepped outside to survey the path ahead. The road stretched straight and level, but a cart track cut through the heath, winding between high hedgerows. Neville chose the latter, the ascent steep and rutted, demanding every ounce of his strength. Halfway up, the silence of the heath was broken.

He sensed them first—a pressure in the air, a shift in the wind. Turning, he saw four figures approaching rapidly, their strides long and purposeful. Behind them, four more slowed their pace, lagging as if reluctant to commit. Further back, a dozen others turned and retreated into the shadows.

Neville froze against the bank, watching the procession. Four passed him, then four more emerged from the brush, closing the gap. They formed a phalanx, eight men surrounding him on the open slope. There was no escape.

"Why do you attend upon me in this way?" Neville called out, his voice trembling with a mix of fear and indignation. "Are you a pack of thieves?"

"Don't answer him," one of the men muttered, his voice low and urgent. "Better be quiet."

"Better be quiet?" Neville repeated, his anger flaring. "Who said so?"

No one replied. The silence was heavier than the threat.

"It's good advice, whichever of you skulkers gave it," Neville spat, stepping forward. "I will not submit to be penned in between four men there and four men here. I wish to pass, and I mean to pass!"

The men did not move. Neville, enraged by their stony defiance, shouldered his heavy walking stick and charged toward the lead group. The largest man among them shifted instantly, intercepting Neville with a practiced ease. The clash was sudden and brutal; Neville's stick descended with a sharp crack, but the attacker caught him mid-swing.

"Let him be!" the man commanded, his voice suppressed but firm. "Fair play! His is the build of a girl to mine, and he's got a weight strapped to his back besides. Let him alone. I'll manage him."

A scuffle ensued, rolling across the grass until both men were breathless and bloodied. Finally, the attacker disengaged, wiping a smear of crimson from his cheek. "There! Now take him arm-in-arm, any two of you!"

Immediately, two of the men seized Neville's arms, holding him fast.

"As to our being a pack of thieves, Mr. Landless," the leader said, spitting blood onto the ground, "you know better than that at midday. We wouldn't have touched you if you hadn't forced us. We're going to take you round to the high road, anyhow, and you'll find help enough against thieves there, if you want it. Wipe his face, somebody; see how it's a-trickling down him!"

As his face was cleansed, Neville recognized the speaker. It was Joe, the driver of the Cloisterham omnibus, a man he had seen only once before, on the day of his arrival.

"And what I recommend you for the present is, don't talk, Mr. Landless," Joe instructed. "You'll find a friend waiting for you at the high road—gone ahead by the other way when we split into two parties—and you had much better say nothing till you come up with him. Bring that stick along, somebody else, and let's be moving!"

Bewildered and speechless, Neville allowed himself to be led. Walking between his captors, he drifted like a dreamwalker until they reached the main road, where a small group of people waited. Among them were Mr. Jasper and Mr. Crisparkle. The men released Neville with a deferential bow to the Minor Canon.

"What is all this, sir? What is the matter? I feel as if I had lost my senses!" Neville cried, collapsing slightly as the crowd closed in.

"Where is my nephew?" Mr. Jasper demanded, his voice wild with panic.

"Where is your nephew?" Neville echoed, confused. "Why do you ask me?"

"I ask you," Jasper retorted, his eyes narrowing, "because you were the last person in his company, and he is not to be found."

"Not to be found!" Neville gasped, horror dawning on him.

"Stay, stay," Mr. Crisparkle interjected, placing a calming hand on Neville's shoulder. "Permit me, Jasper. Mr. Neville, you are confounded; collect your thoughts; it is of great importance that you should collect your thoughts; attend to me."

"I will try, sir, but I seem mad," Neville admitted, clutching his head.

"You left Mr. Jasper last night with Edwin Drood?" Crisparkle asked gently.

"Yes."

"At what hour?"

"Was it at twelve o'clock?" Neville asked, turning to Jasper for confirmation.

"Quite right," Crisparkle confirmed. "The hour Mr. Jasper has already named to me. You went down to the river together?"

"Undoubtedly. To see the action of the wind there."

"What followed? How long did you stay there?"

"About ten minutes; I should say not more. We then walked together to your house, and he took leave of me at the door."

"Did he say that he was going down to the river again?"

"No. He said that he was going straight back."

The bystanders exchanged uneasy glances. Then, Jasper's gaze locked onto Neville's clothes. "What are those stains upon his dress?"

All eyes turned to the dark smears on Neville's trousers.

"And here are the same stains upon this stick!" Jasper accused, snatching the walking stick from one of the men. "I know the stick to be his, and he carried it last night. What does this mean?"

"In the name of God, say what it means, Neville!" Crisparkle urged.

"That man and I," Neville pointed to Joe, "had a struggle for the stick just now, and you may see the same marks on him, sir. What was I to suppose, when I found myself molested by eight people? Could I dream of the true reason when they would give me none at all?"

They admitted that they had thought it discreet to remain silent and that the struggle had indeed occurred. Yet, even as they spoke, the men who had witnessed it looked darkly at the drying blood on Neville's clothes, their expressions grim.

"We must return, Neville," Crisparkle said firmly. "Of course you will be glad to come back to clear yourself?"

"Of course, sir," Neville replied.

"Mr. Landless will walk at my side," Crisparkle announced, scanning the crowd. "Come, Neville!"

They set off, the others straggling behind. Jasper walked on Neville's other side, never breaking contact. He remained silent while Crisparkle pressed Neville for details, his face a mask of fixed determination. When they approached the city and Crisparkle suggested calling on the Mayor immediately, Neville nodded sternly but said nothing until they stood in Mr. Sapsea's parlour.

Mr. Sapsea, informed by Crisparkle of the circumstances, broke the tension by declaring his absolute reliance on his own penetration. He argued that there was no conceivable reason for his nephew's sudden disappearance unless Mr. Sapsea could suggest one, and no likelihood of accidental drowning unless it appeared probable to him. He washed his hands of all suspicion, placing the burden of judgment entirely on the Mayor's shoulders.

Mr. Sapsea declared the case had a "dark look," an "Un-English complexion." After wandering through a dense haze of nonsensical legalistic ramblings, he arrived at the brilliant discovery that to take the life of a fellow-creature was to take something that didn't belong to you. He hovered on the brink of issuing a warrant for Neville's arrest, but Crisparkle's indignant protest saved the young man, undertaking to keep him in his own house until produced. Jasper interpreted this as a suggestion to scour the river, examine the banks, send notices to London and the countryside, and publish placards imploring Edwin Drood to reveal himself. These measures were enacted immediately.

It was difficult to determine who was more oppressed by horror: Neville Landless or John Jasper. Jasper's position forced him to be active, while Neville's forced him to be passive, yet both were bowed down and broken.

With the earliest light of the next morning, the search began. Men worked upon the river with barges, poles, drags, and nets. Others combed the muddy, rushy shores with jack-boots, hatchets, spades, ropes, and dogs. Even at night, the river was specked with lanterns, lurid with fires; far-off creeks and lonely causeways were guarded by watchers listening to the lapping stream, but no trace of Edwin Drood revisited the light of the sun.

All day long, the search continued. Now in boats, now ashore among the osiers, tramping amidst mud and jagged stones where solitary watermarks showed like spectres, John Jasper worked and toiled. But to no purpose; still, no sign of Edwin. Setting his watches for the night to ensure vigilant eyes watched every change of tide, Jasper went home exhausted. Unkempt, disordered, bedaubed with dried mud and torn clothing, he collapsed into his easy-chair just as Mr. Grewgious stood before him.

"This is strange news," Grewgious said.

"Strange and fearful news," Jasper replied, lifting his heavy eyes before dropping them again, drooping over the side of his chair.

Grewgious smoothed his head and face, standing silently by the fire.

"How is your ward?" Jasper asked after a time, his voice faint and fatigued.

"Poor little thing! You may imagine her condition," Grewgious answered.

"Have you seen his sister?" Jasper inquired.

"Whose?"

The curtness of the question, coupled with Grewgious's slow movement of his eyes from the fire to Jasper's face, might have been exasperating under normal circumstances. But in his depression, Jasper merely opened his eyes to say, "The suspected young man's."

"Do you suspect him?" Grewgious asked.

"I don't know what to think. I cannot make up my mind."

"Nor I," Grewgious said. "But as you spoke of him as the suspected young man, I thought you *had* made up your mind. I have just left Miss Landless."

"What is her state?"

"Defiance of all suspicion, and unbounded faith in her brother."

"Poor thing!"

"However," Grewgious pursued, "it is not of her that I came to speak. It is of my ward. I have a communication to make that will surprise you. At least, it has surprised me."

Jasper, with a groaning sigh, turned wearily in his chair.

"Shall I put it off till to-morrow?" Grewgious asked, warning him. "Mind, I warn you, that I think it will surprise you!"

Attention sharpened in Jasper's eyes as he caught sight of Grewgious smoothing his head again, looking at the fire with a compressed, determined mouth.

"What is it?" Jasper demanded, sitting upright.

"To be sure," Grewgious said, provokingly slowly, keeping his eyes on the fire. "I might have known it sooner; she gave me the opening; but I am such an exceedingly Angular man, that it never occurred to me; I took all for granted."

"What is it?" Jasper demanded again.

Grewgious, warming his hands by the fire and looking fixedly at Jasper sideways, replied. "This young couple, the lost youth and Miss Rosa, my ward, though so long betrothed, and so long recognising their betrothal, and so near being married—"

Grewgious saw a staring white face and two quivering white lips in the easy-chair, and two muddy hands gripping its sides.

"—This young couple came gradually to the discovery (made on both sides pretty equally, I think), that they would be happier and better, both in their present and their future lives, as affectionate friends, or say rather as brother and sister, than as husband and wife."

Grewgious saw a lead-coloured face in the easy-chair, and on its surface dreadful starting drops or bubbles, as if of steel.

"This young couple formed at length the healthy resolution of interchanging their discoveries, openly, sensibly, and tenderly. They met for that purpose. After some innocent and generous talk, they agreed to dissolve their existing, and their intended, relations, for ever and ever."

Grewgious saw a ghastly figure rise, open-mouthed, from the easy-chair, and lift its outspread hands towards its head.

"One of this young couple, and that one your nephew, fearful, however, that in the tenderness of your affection for him you would be bitterly disappointed by so wide a departure from his projected life, forbore to tell you the secret, for a few days, and left it to be disclosed by me, when I should come down to speak to you, and he

When John Jasper emerged from his trance, the room was filled with the scent of hot broth and the anxious presence of Mr. and Mrs. Tope. His visitor sat rigid in a chair, hands resting heavily on his knees, a statue of silent vigilance.

"You've rallied nicely, sir," Mrs. Tope murmured, her voice trembling with relief. "You were utterly drained. No wonder!"

"A man," Mr. Grewgious intoned, his tone carrying the weight of a lecturer delivering a final verdict, "cannot endure the shattering of rest, the torment of the mind, and the exhaustion of the body without being thoroughly spent."

"I fear I have frightened you?" Jasper whispered, accepting the help offered to guide him to an easy chair.

"Not at all," Mr. Grewgious replied, his expression unchanged.

"You are too kind."

"Not at all," the lawyer repeated, the phrase rolling off his tongue like a rehearsed line.

Mrs. Tope moved immediately to the table. "You must drink wine, sir, and eat the jelly I prepared. You refused it at noon, though I warned you of the consequences. And you must have a wing of that roast fowl, which has been reheated twenty times if it has been once. It will be served in five minutes, and this gentleman will likely stay to ensure you eat."

The gentleman responded with a sharp snort—a sound ambiguous enough to mean yes, no, or silence—which Mrs. Tope ignored as she arranged the plates.

"Will you join me?" Jasper asked as the table was set.

"I cannot swallow a morsel, thank you," Mr. Grewgious answered flatly.

Jasper ate and drank with a voracious hunger that bordered on desperation. He consumed the food not for pleasure, but as fuel to stave off another collapse of spirit. Beside him, Mr. Grewgious remained upright, his face a mask of impassive politeness, radiating a refusal to engage in any conversation whatsoever.

"Do you know," Jasper said after pushing his plate away, his eyes fixed on the empty space before him, "that I find a fragment of comfort in what you have told me?"

"Do you?" Mr. Grewgious asked, his voice dry, implying the unspoken *I do not*.

"After the shock of learning that my beloved boy has vanished, destroying every plan I had built for him... yes."

"I shall be glad to hear your reasoning," Mr. Grewgious said.

"Is there not, or is there—if I deceive myself, correct me—hope that, realizing the heavy burden of explanation this new situation places upon him, he chose to flee rather than face the scrutiny of the idle world?"

"Such a thing is possible," Mr. Grewgious mused.

"It has happened," Jasper insisted, his voice gaining strength. "People have vanished to avoid a 'seven days' wonder,' leaving no trace for years."

"I believe such things occur," Mr. Grewgious conceded.

"When I had no suspicion that my boy withheld anything from me," Jasper continued, seizing the thread of hope, "what light pierced the darkness? I assumed his bride was here, his wedding imminent. How could I conceive he would leave voluntarily, in such a capricious and cruel manner? But now, knowing your information, is there not a crack through which daylight enters? If he departed of his own volition, is his absence less cruel to her? The fact that he had just parted from your ward provides a motive. It does not lessen the cruelty to me, but it spares her."

Mr. Grewgious could not deny this logic.

"And even regarding me," Jasper pressed, his face brightening with a fragile optimism, "he knew you were coming to tell me this. If your words have sparked this new thought in my mind, it follows he may have anticipated my conclusions. Grant that he foresaw them; then the cruelty to me—John Jasper, Music Master—vanishes!"

Mr. Grewgious assented again.

"I have harbored terrible doubts," Jasper admitted. "But your disclosure, though overwhelming, kindles a hope. You do not extinguish it when I speak it; you admit it is reasonable. I begin to believe: that he may have left of his own accord, and that he may yet be alive."

At that moment, Mr. Crisparkle entered. Jasper repeated his theory to him. The Minor Canon, already preparing his mind to defend his pupil, found the argument compelling. He recalled the immediate embarrassment Edwin Drood had faced regarding his secret engagement, a circumstance that could indeed drive a man to flight.

"I told Mr. Sapsea," Jasper explained, "that there was no quarrel between the two boys at their last meeting. Though their first encounter was hostile, their final meeting at my house was peaceful. Yet, Edwin was depressed. Now that I know the cause of his depression, I realize it may explain his absence."

"Heaven grant it is so!" Crisparkle cried.

"I pray to Heaven it is so!" Jasper echoed. He then addressed the gravity of his own bias. "You know, and Mr. Grewgious should know, that I held a deep prejudice against Mr. Neville Landless following his violent behavior on that first occasion. I feared for my nephew's life. I even recorded my dark forebodings in my diary. Mr. Grewgious must understand that my current hope exists despite my previous conviction of Landless's guilt."

This admission troubled Crisparkle deeply. He realized he had been withholding the truth of Neville's jealous outbursts and threats. He feared that revealing these facts now would seem like constructing a lie to protect his pupil. Yet, seeing Jasper's model of honesty, he resolved to speak. He testified to Jasper's integrity and declared his absolute confidence in Edwin's innocence, despite knowing Neville's fiery temper and romantic obsession with the girl.

Jasper's hopeful reaction was so intense it turned him pale. He vowed to cling to the possibility that Edwin had fled of his own free will.

Leaving the room, Crisparkle walked uneasily to Cloisterham Weir. The moonlight illuminated the falling water, a familiar sound that suddenly seemed ominous. He reasoned with himself, searching for the source of his unease, but found none. He returned at dawn, his eyes scanning the timbers of the weir.

There, caught in the crevices of the wood, glinting in the frosty air, was a gold watch. He dove into the icy water, retrieving the watch engraved with *E. D.* After a fruitless search for a body, he found only a shirt-pin stuck in the mud.

Returning to town, Crisparkle took Neville Landless to the Mayor. The evidence—the watch, the pin, the blood on Neville's clothes, the destroyed papers in his room, and the jeweler's testimony that the watch had not been wound since Edwin left Jasper's house at midnight—coalesced into a damning narrative. Neville had been seen wandering in a distracted state; he had threatened the missing boy; he had prepared to leave early in the morning.

Suspicion mounted until Neville was detained. The public outcry was fierce, fueled by Neville's known violent nature and history of threats. Yet, as the investigation pressed on, the case against him weakened. The girl from whom Edwin had parted claimed he had planned to wait for Mr. Grewgious, yet he vanished before the lawyer arrived. The watch, found at the weir, suggested it had been discarded shortly after Edwin left Jasper's house, implying a struggle or a hurried departure, but not necessarily murder.

Despite the lack of definitive proof of death, the weight of suspicion forced Neville's release. But the town would not let him go. The Dean intervened, stating that while human justice could err, it must act on available evidence. Sanctuary was no longer an option. Neville was ordered to leave Cloisterham, his reputation blighted by the lingering shadow of suspicion.

Only then did John Jasper return to his place in the choir. His haggard face, red with fever, betrayed the death of his hope. A few days later, while undressing, he pulled a diary from his coat pocket. With a solemn, terrifying expression, he handed the open book to Mr. Crisparkle.

"My dear boy is murdered," Jasper wrote, his voice barely a whisper. "The discovery of the watch and shirt-pin convinces me he was killed that night, his jewelry stolen to prevent identification. All my delusive hopes perish. I swear, and record this oath on this page: I will never discuss this mystery with any human being until I hold the clue in my hand. I will not relax my secrecy or my search. I will fasten the crime of this murder upon the murderer. And I devote myself to his destruction."

Half a year had passed since the tragedy at Cloisterham, and Mr. Crisparkle found himself seated in a waiting room within the London headquarters of the Haven of Philanthropy. He waited for an audience with Mr. Honeythunder, the society's leading figure.

As he waited, Crisparkle observed the atmosphere of the office with a critical eye. He recalled his own university days, spent among professors of the "Noble Art" of boxing. He noted with amusement that the philanthropists currently bustling about the room possessed a striking physical resemblance to those pugilists. Their heads, viewed from behind, displayed the same prominent development of the organs associated with aggression and the urge to "pitch into" others. Several of these men moved with an aggressive readiness, akin to boxers waiting for a sparring match. The office was preparing for a moral crusade on the rural circuit, and the philanthropists were enthusiastically backing various speakers, much like sports fans backing a heavyweight champion.

Crisparkle recognized the official manager of these displays, a man in a black suit who reminded him of a deceased benefactor known as "Frosty-faced Fogo." However, Crisparkle noted three significant differences between these philanthropists and the boxers he knew. First, the philanthropists were in terrible physical condition; they were too fleshy, resembling "Suet Pudding" rather than athletes. Second, unlike the boxers who maintained a certain good temper, these men used abusive language. Third, their code of conduct was dangerously flawed. While boxers followed rules, these philanthropists seemed empowered to bore their opponents to distraction, strike them when they were down, kick them, and maul them mercilessly behind their backs. In these specific acts of brutality, Crisparkle ironically concluded, the philanthropists were far less noble than the boxers.

Lost in these comparisons, Crisparkle watched the crowd. Everyone seemed to be arriving with the intent to snatch something from someone else, offering nothing in return. Before he could fully process the scene, his name was called. A shabby, underpaid clerk led him to Mr. Honeythunder's office.

Inside, Mr. Honeythunder commanded Crisparkle to sit down with a voice like a schoolmaster addressing a recalcitrant pupil. After signing a stack of circulars demanding money from the poor, Honeythunder turned his attention to Crisparkle.

"Now, Mr. Crisparkle," Honeythunder began, his arms squared and hands resting on his knees, his brow furrowed in a threatening manner. "We entertain different views, you and I, regarding the sanctity of human life."

"Do we?" Crisparkle asked calmly.

"We do, sir."

"May I ask what your views are on that subject?"

"That human life is sacred, sir."

"And what do you suppose are my views?"

"They are best known to yourself," Honeythunder retorted, frowning.

"Admitted," Crisparkle replied. "But you stated we held different views. Therefore, you must have attributed some views to me. What views have you set up as mine?"

Honeythunder gestured dramatically. "Here is a man—and a young man—swept off the face of the earth by a deed of violence. What do you call that?"

"Murder," Crisparkle answered.

"And the doer of that deed?"

"A murderer," Crisparkle confirmed.

"I am glad to hear you admit so much," Honeythunder said, lowering his voice menacingly. "I didn't expect it."

"Please explain why those expressions are unjustifiable," Crisparkle requested.

"I don't sit here to be browbeaten!" Honeythunder roared.

"As the only other person present, no one knows that better than I do," Crisparkle replied quietly. "But I must interrupt your explanation."

"Murder!" Honeythunder continued, adopting a boisterous, theatrical tone. "Bloodshed! Abel! Cain! I hold no terms with Cain. I repudiate the red hand when it is offered."

Instead of cheering, Crisparkle merely crossed his legs and said mildly, "Don't let me interrupt your explanation when you begin it."

"The Commandments say, no murder. NO murder, sir!" Honeythunder bellowed, as if Crisparkle had suggested that murder was permissible in moderation.

"And they also say, you shall bear no false witness," Crisparkle observed.

"E-enough!" Honeythunder shouted with severe solemnity. "My late wards are now of age, and I am released from a trust I cannot contemplate without horror. There are accounts you have undertaken to accept, and a statement of the balance you cannot receive too soon. Let me tell you, sir, I wish that, as a man and a Minor Canon, you were better employed." He nodded emphatically three times, driving home the point with theatrical emphasis.

Crisparkle rose, his face slightly flushed but his composure intact. "Mr. Honeythunder," he said, picking up the papers, "whether I am better or worse employed is a matter of taste. You might think I would be better employed enrolling myself as a member of your Society."

"Ay, indeed!" Honeythunder retorted, shaking his head threateningly. "It would have been better for you if you had done that long ago!"

"I think otherwise."

"Or," Honeythunder continued, "I might think one of your profession better employed in discovering and punishing guilt than in leaving that duty to a layman."

"I may regard my profession as having its first duty toward those in necessity and tribulation," Crisparkle said. "However, as I have satisfied myself that it is not my profession to make professions, I say no more of that. But I owe it to Mr. Neville, and to Mr. Neville's sister, to tell you that I know I was in full possession of Mr. Neville's mind and heart at the time of this occurrence. Without concealing what was to be deplored in him, I feel certain his tale is true. Feeling that certainty, I befriend him. As long as that certainty lasts, I will befriend him. If any consideration could shake me in this resolve, I should be so ashamed of my meanness that no man's or woman's good opinion could compensate me for the loss of my own."

Honeythunder stared at him. "Then who do you make out did the deed?"

"Heaven forbid," Crisparkle said, "that in my desire to clear one man I should lightly criminate another! I accuse no one."

"Tcha!" ejaculated Honeythunder with disgust. "And, sir, you are not a disinterested witness."

"How am I an interested one?" Crisparkle asked, smiling innocently.

"There was a certain stipend paid to you for your pupil, which may have warped your judgment," Honeythunder said coarsely.

"Perhaps I expect to retain it still?" Crisparkle replied, enlightened. "Do you mean that too?"

"Well, sir," Honeythunder stood up, thrusting his hands into his pockets. "I don't go about measuring people for caps. If people find I have any about me that fit 'em, they can put 'em on. That's their lookout: not mine."

Crisparkle looked at him with just indignation. "Mr. Honeythunder, I hoped when I came in here that I might be under no necessity of commenting on the introduction of platform manners into private life. But you have given me such a specimen of both that I should be a fit subject for them if I remained silent. They are detestable."

"They don't suit *you*, I dare say, sir."

"They are," Crisparkle repeated, ignoring the interruption, "detestable. They violate equally the justice that should belong to Christians and the restraints that should belong to gentlemen. You assume a great crime has been committed by one whom I, acquainted with the attendant circumstances, devoutly believe to be innocent. Because I differ from you on that vital point, what is your platform resource? Instantly to turn upon me, charging that I have no sense of the enormity of the crime itself, but am its aider and abettor! Another time, taking me as representing your opponent, you set up a platform credulity in some ridiculous delusion. I decline to believe it, and you fall back on proclaiming that I believe nothing; that because I will not bow down to a false God of your making, I deny the true God! Another time, you discover that War is a calamity and propose to abolish it with twisted resolutions tossed into the air like a kite's tail. I do not admit the discovery, and I have no faith in your remedy. Again, you represent me as revelling in the horrors of a battlefield like a fiend. Another time, you propose to punish the sober for the drunken, and then proclaim that I have a depraved desire to turn Heaven's creatures into swine! In all such cases, your movers and seconders run amuck like mad Malays, habitually attributing the lowest motives with recklessness and quoting figures as wilfully one-sided as a statement showing only debt or only credit. Therefore, Mr. Honeythunder, I consider the platform a sufficiently bad example in public life; but carried into private life, it becomes an unendurable nuisance."

"These are strong words, sir!" Honeythunder exclaimed.

"I hope so," Crisparkle said. "Good morning."

He walked out of the Haven at a brisk pace, soon falling into his regular stride. A smile appeared on his face as he wondered what the china shepherdess would have said if she had seen him "pounding" Mr. Honeythunder in their recent verbal skirmish. Crisparkle had just enough harmless vanity to hope he had hit hard, glowing with the belief that he had trimmed the Philanthropic Jacket handsomely.

He took himself to Staple Inn, but not to P. J. T. and Mr. Grewgious. He climbed many creaking stairs before reaching some attic rooms in a corner, the unbolted door leading to the chambers of Neville Landless.

An air of retreat and solitude hung about the rooms and their inhabitant. Neville was much worn, as were the rooms themselves. The sloping ceilings, rusty locks, grates, and heavy wooden beams slowly mouldering gave the place a prison-like look, and Neville had the haggard face of a prisoner. Yet sunlight shone in at the ugly garret-window, which had a penthouse thrust out among the tiles. On the cracked, smoke-blackened parapet beyond, some deluded sparrows hopped rheumatically, like little feathered cripples who had left their crutches in their nests. There was a play of living leaves nearby that changed the air, creating an imperfect sort of music that would have been melody in the country.

The rooms were sparely furnished but contained a good store of books. Everything expressed the abode of a poor student. Crisparkle's friendly beam of eyes upon them as he entered suggested he had been the chooser, lender, or donor of the books, or perhaps all three.

"How goes it, Neville?" Crisparkle asked.

"I am in good heart, Mr. Crisparkle, and working away."

"I wish your eyes were not quite so large and not quite so bright," the Minor Canon said slowly, releasing the hand he had taken in his.

"They brighten at the sight of you," Neville returned. "If you were to fall away from me, they would soon be dull enough."

"Rally, rally!" urged Crisparkle in a stimulating tone. "Fight for it, Neville!"

"If I were dying, I feel as if a word from you would rally me; if my pulse had stopped, I feel as if your touch would make it beat again," Neville said. "But I *have* rallied, and am doing famously."

Crisparkle turned him slightly more toward the light. "I want to see a ruddier touch here, Neville," he said, indicating his own healthy cheek as a pattern. "I want more sun to shine upon you."

Neville drooped suddenly, replying in a lowered voice: "I am not hardy enough for that, yet. I may become so, but I cannot bear it yet. If you had gone through those Cloisterham streets as I did; if you had seen, as I did, those averted eyes, and the better sort of people silently giving me too much room to pass, that I might not touch them or come near them, you wouldn't think it quite unreasonable that I cannot go about in the daylight."

"My poor fellow!" Crisparkle said in a purely sympathetic tone. "I never said it was unreasonable; never thought so. But I should like you to do it."

"And that would give me the strongest motive to do it. But I cannot yet. I cannot persuade myself that the eyes of even the stream of strangers I pass in this vast city look at me without suspicion. I feel marked and tainted, even when I go out—as I do only—at night. But the darkness covers me then, and I take courage from it."

Crisparkle laid a hand upon his shoulder and stood looking down at him. "If I could have changed my name," Neville said, "I would have done so. But as you wisely pointed out, I can't do that, for it would look like guilt. If I could have gone to some distant place, I might have found relief, but the thing is not to be thought of for the same reason. Hiding and escaping would be the construction in either case. It seems a little hard to be so tied to a stake, and innocent; but I don't complain."

"And you must expect no miracle to help you, Neville," Crisparkle said compassionately.

"No, sir, I know that. The ordinary fulness of time and circumstances is all I have to trust to."

"It will right you at last, Neville."

"So I believe, and I hope I may live to know it."

Perceiving that the despondent mood into which he was falling cast a shadow on Crisparkle,

At this juncture, a stranger materialized in Cloisterham. He was a figure of considerable age, distinguished by a head of snow-white hair and eyebrows of stark black. Clad in a tight-fitting blue surcoat, a buff waistcoat, and grey trousers, he possessed a distinct military bearing. Yet, upon announcing his arrival at the Crozier—the city's orthodox hotel, where he deposited a portmanteau—he declared himself an idle dog subsisting entirely upon his means. Furthermore, he proclaimed his intention to secure lodging within the picturesque old city for a month or two, with the ultimate aim of settling down permanently. Both declarations were broadcast from the coffee-room of the Crozier, to all whom it might or might not concern, by the stranger as he stood with his back to the empty fireplace, patiently awaiting his fried sole, veal cutlet, and pint of sherry. The waiter, business being chronically slack at the establishment, represented "all whom it might or might not concern" and absorbed the entirety of the information.

This gentleman's white head was unusually large, and his shock of white hair was unusually thick and ample. "I suppose," he remarked, shaking his mane with the vigor of a Newfoundland dog preparing to sit for dinner, "that a fair lodging for a single buffer might be found in these parts, eh?"

The waiter harbored no doubt regarding this possibility.

"Something old," said the gentleman. "Take my hat down for a moment from that peg, will you? No, I do not wish it; look inside. What inscription bears witness there?"

The waiter read aloud: "Datchery."

"Now you know my name," said the gentleman; "Dick Datchery. Hang it up again. I was saying that something old is what I should prefer; something odd and out of the way; something venerable, architectural, and inconvenient."

"We possess a good selection of inconvenient lodgings in the town, sir, I believe," replied the waiter, displaying modest confidence in the municipality's resources in that regard; "indeed, I have no doubt we could accommodate you in that respect, however particular you might be. But an architectural lodging!" That notion seemed to trouble the waiter's brow, and he shook his head.

"Anything Cathedral-like, now," Mr. Datchery suggested.

"Mr. Tope," said the waiter, brightening as he rubbed his chin with his hand, "would be the likeliest party to inform you in that line."

"Who is Mr. Tope?" inquired Dick Datchery.

The waiter explained that he served as the Verger, and that Mrs. Tope had indeed, at one time, let lodgings or offered to do so; but since no one had ever accepted, Mrs. Tope's window-bill, long a Cloisterham institution, had vanished; presumably, it had fallen one day and never been replaced.

"I shall call upon Mrs. Tope," said Mr. Datchery, "after dinner."

Thus, having finished his repast, he was duly directed to the location and sallied forth. However, the Crozier being an hotel of a most retiring disposition, and the waiter's directions being fatally precise, he soon became bewildered. He wandered bogglingly about the Cathedral Tower, whenever he could catch a glimpse of it, carrying a general impression that Mrs. Tope's residence lay somewhere very near it, and that, like the children in the game of hot boiled beans and very good butter, he was warm in his search when he saw the Tower, and cold when he did not.

He was growing very cold indeed when he stumbled upon a fragment of burial-ground where an unhappy sheep was grazing. It was unhappy because a hideous small boy was stoning it through the railings; he had already lamed the creature in one leg and was much excited by the benevolent, sportsmanlike purpose of breaking its other three legs and bringing it down.

"'Tis him again!" cried the boy as the poor beast leaped; "and made a dint in his wool."

"Let him be!" said Mr. Datchery. "Do you not see you have lamed him?"

"Yer lie," returned the sportsman. "'E went and lamed isself. I see 'im do it, and I giv' 'im a shy as a Widdy-warning to 'im not to go a-bruisin' 'is master's mutton any more."

"Come here."

"I won't; I'll come when yer can ketch me."

"Stay there then, and show me which is Mr. Tope's."

"Ow can I stay here and show you which is Topeseses, when Topeseses is t'other side the Kinfreederal, and over the crossings, and round ever so many comers? Stoo-pid! Ya-a-ah!"

"Show me where it is, and I'll give you something."

"Come on, then."

This brisk dialogue concluded, the boy led the way and, by-and-by, stopped at some distance from an arched passage, pointing.

"Lookie yonder. You see that there winder and door?"

"That's Tope's?"

"Yer lie; it ain't. That's Jarsper's."

"Indeed?" said Mr. Datchery, with a second look of some interest.

"Yes, and I ain't a-goin' no nearer 'IM, I tell yer."

"Why not?"

"'Cos I ain't a-goin' to be lifted off my legs and 'ave my braces bust and be choked; not if I knows it, and not by 'Im. Wait till I set a jolly good flint a-flyin' at the back o' 'is jolly old 'ed some day! Now look t'other side the harch; not the side where Jarsper's door is; t'other side."

"I see."

"A little way in, o' that side, there's a low door, down two steps. That's Topeseses with 'is name on a hoval plate."

"Good. See here," said Mr. Datchery, producing a shilling. "You owe me half of this."

"Yer lie! I don't owe yer nothing; I never seen yer."

"I tell you you owe me half of this, because I have no sixpence in my pocket. So the next time you meet me you shall do something else for me, to pay me."

"All right, give us 'old."

"What is your name, and where do you live?"

"Deputy. Travellers' Twopenny, 'cross the green."

The boy instantly darted off with the shilling, lest Mr. Datchery should repent, but stopped at a safe distance, on the happy chance of his being uneasy in his mind about it, to goad him with a demon dance expressive of its irrevocability.

Mr. Datchery, taking off his hat to give that shock of white hair another shake, seemed quite resigned and betook himself whither he had been directed.

Mr. Tope's official dwelling, communicating by an upper stair with Mr. Jasper's (hence Mrs. Tope's attendance on that gentleman), was of very modest proportions and partook of the character of a cool dungeon. Its ancient walls were massive, and its rooms rather seemed to have been dug out of them than designed beforehand with any reference to them. The main door opened at once onto a chamber of no describable shape, with a groined roof, which in its turn opened onto another chamber of no describable shape, with another groined roof: their windows small and situated in the thickness of the walls. These two chambers, close as to their atmosphere and swarthy as to their illumination by natural light, were the apartments which Mrs. Tope had so long offered to an unappreciative city. Mr. Datchery, however, was more appreciative. He found that if he sat with the main door open he would enjoy the passing society of all comers to and fro by the gateway and have sufficient light. He found that if Mr. and Mrs. Tope, living overhead, used for their own egress and ingress a little side stair that came plump into the Precincts by a door opening outward—to the surprise and inconvenience of a limited public of pedestrians in a narrow way—he would be alone, as in a separate residence. He found the rent moderate, and everything as quaintly inconvenient as he could desire. He agreed, therefore, to take the lodging then and there, paying money down, with possession to be had the next evening, on condition that reference was permitted him to Mr. Jasper as occupying the gatehouse, of which, on the other side of the gateway, the Verger's hole-in-the-wall was an appanage or subsidiary part.

The poor dear gentleman was very solitary and very sad, Mrs. Tope said, but she had no doubt he would "speak for her." Perhaps Mr. Datchery had heard something of what had occurred there last winter?

Mr. Datchery possessed as confused a knowledge of the event in question, on trying to recall it, as he well could have. He begged Mrs. Tope's pardon when she found it incumbent on her to correct him in every detail of his summary of the facts, but pleaded that he was merely a single buffer getting through life upon his means as idly as he could, and that so many people were so constantly making away with so many other people, as to render it difficult for a buffer of an easy temper to preserve the circumstances of the several cases unmixed in his mind.

Mr. Jasper proving willing to speak for Mrs. Tope, Mr. Datchery, who had sent up his card, was invited to ascend the postern staircase. The Mayor was there, Mr. Tope said; but he was not to be regarded in the light of company, as he and Mr. Jasper were great friends.

"I beg pardon," said Mr. Datchery, making a leg with his hat under his arm as he addressed himself equally to both gentlemen; "a selfish precaution on my part, and not personally interesting to anybody but myself. But as a buffer living on his means, and having an idea of doing it in this lovely place in peace and quiet for the remaining span of my life, I beg to ask if the Tope family are quite respectable?"

Mr. Jasper could answer that without the slightest hesitation.

"That is enough, sir," said Mr. Datchery.

"My friend the Mayor," added Mr. Jasper, presenting Mr. Datchery with a courtly motion of his hand toward that potentate; "whose recommendation is actually much more important to a stranger than that of an obscure person like myself, will testify in their behalf, I am sure."

"The Worshipful the Mayor," said Mr. Datchery, with a low bow, "places me under an infinite obligation."

"Very good people, sir, Mr. and Mrs. Tope," said Mr. Sapsea, with condescension. "Very good opinions. Very well behaved. Very respectful. Much approved by the Dean and Chapter."

"The Worshipful the Mayor gives them a character," said Mr. Datchery, "of which they may indeed be proud. I would ask His Honour (if I might be permitted) whether there are not many objects of great interest in the city which is under his beneficent sway?"

"We are, sir," returned Mr. Sapsea, "an ancient city, and an ecclesiastical city. We are a constitutional city, as it becomes such a city to be, and we uphold and maintain our glorious privileges."

"His Honour," said Mr. Datchery, bowing, "inspires me with a desire to know more of the city, and confirms me in my inclination to end my days in the city."

"Retired from the Army, sir?" suggested Mr. Sapsea.

"His Honour the Mayor does me too much credit," returned Mr. Datchery.

"Navy, sir?" suggested Mr. Sapsea.

"Again," repeated Mr. Datchery, "His Honour the Mayor does me too much credit."

"Diplomacy is a fine profession," said Mr. Sapsea, as a general remark.

"There, I confess, His Honour the Mayor is too many for me," said Mr. Datchery, with an ingenious smile and bow; "even a diplomatic bird must fall to such a gun."

Now this was very soothing. Here was a gentleman of a great, not to say a grand, address, accustomed to rank and dignity, really setting a fine example of how to behave to a Mayor. There was something in that third-person style of being spoken to that Mr. Sapsea found particularly recognizant of his merits and position.

"But I crave pardon," said Mr. Datchery. "His Honour the Mayor will bear with me, if for a moment I have been deluded into occupying his time, and have forgotten the humble claims upon my own, of my hotel, the Crozier."

"Not at all, sir," said Mr. Sapsea. "I am returning home, and if you would like to take the exterior of our Cathedral in your way, I shall be glad to point it out."

"His Honour the Mayor," said Mr. Datchery, "is more than kind and gracious."

As Mr. Datchery, when he had made his acknowledgments to Mr. Jasper, could not be induced to go out of the room before the Worshipful, the Worshipful led the way downstairs; Mr. Datchery following with his hat under his arm and his shock of white hair streaming in the evening breeze.

"Might I ask His Honour," said Mr. Datchery, "whether that gentleman we have just left is the gentleman of whom I have heard in the neighbourhood as being much afflicted by the loss of a nephew, and concentrating his life on avenging the loss?"

"That is the gentleman. John Jasper, sir."

"Would His Honour allow me to inquire whether there are strong suspicions of any one?"

"More than suspicions, sir," returned Mr. Sapsea; "all but certainties."

"Only think now!" cried Mr. Datchery.

"But proof, sir, proof must be built up stone by stone

Once more Miss Twinkleton had delivered her farewell address, accompanied by white wine and pound cake, and once more the young ladies had dispersed to their respective homes. Helena Landless had departed the Nuns' House to attend to her brother's affairs, leaving pretty Rosa alone in the quiet of the cloisters.

Cloisterham burned with a brilliant summer sun, rendering the Cathedral and the monastery ruins so luminous that their massive walls seemed transparent. A soft, internal glow appeared to emanate from within them rather than reflecting from the outside, lending them a mellowness as they gazed upon the hot cornfields and the smoking roads that wound distantly through the landscape. The gardens of Cloisterham blushed with ripening fruit. In times past, travel-stained pilgrims had ridden in clattering parties through the city's welcoming shades; now, wayfarers living a gypsy existence between haymaking and harvest, appearing as if forged from the very dust of the earth, lounged on cool doorsteps. They attempted to mend their irreparable shoes or surrendered them to the city kennels as hopeless cases, searching for others in their bundles alongside their unused sickles swathed in straw. At the public pumps, there was much cooling of bare feet and the bubbling, gurgling sound of drinkers bringing their hands to the spouts; the Cloisterham police watched these intruders with suspicion and impatience, wishing they would depart the civic bounds and fry themselves once more on the simmering high roads.

On such a bright afternoon, after the final Cathedral service, when the side of the High Street where the Nuns' House stood lay in grateful shade—save where its quaint old garden opened to the west between tree branches—a servant informed Rosa, to her terror, that Mr. Jasper desired to see her.

If he had chosen a time to find her at a disadvantage, he could not have done better. Perhaps he had chosen it deliberately. Helena Landless was gone, Mrs. Tisher was absent on leave, and Miss Twinkleton, in her amateur state of existence, had contributed herself and a veal pie to a picnic.

"Oh, why, why, why did you say I was at home!" cried Rosa, helplessly.

The maid replied that Mr. Jasper had never asked the question. He had simply stated he knew she was at home and requested that she be told he wished to see her.

"What shall I do! What shall I do!" Rosa thought, clasping her hands.

Driven by a kind of desperation, she added immediately that she would meet Mr. Jasper in the garden. She shuddered at the thought of being shut up with him inside the house; yet many of its windows commanded the garden, allowing her to be seen as well as heard. There, she could shriek into the free air and run away. Such was the wild idea fluttering through her mind.

She had never seen him since the fatal night, except when she was questioned before the Mayor, at which time he had been present in gloomy watchfulness, representing his lost nephew and burning to avenge him. Hanging her garden-hat on her arm, she stepped outside. The moment she saw him from the porch, leaning on the sun-dial, the old horrible feeling of being compelled by him asserted its hold upon her. She felt that she would even then go back, yet he drew her feet toward him. She could not resist and sat down, head bent, on the garden-seat beside the sun-dial. She could not look up at him for abhorrence, though she perceived he was dressed in deep mourning. So was she. It had not been so at first; but the lost had long been given up and mourned as dead.

He intended to begin by touching her hand. She felt the intention and drew her hand back. His eyes were then fixed upon her, she knew, though her own saw nothing but the grass.

"I have been waiting," he began, "for some time to be summoned back to my duty near you."

After forming her lips several times into the shape of hesitating replies and then into none, she answered: "Duty, sir?"

"The duty of teaching you, serving you as your faithful music-master."

"I have left off that study."

"Not left off, I think. Discontinued. I was told by your guardian that you discontinued it under the shock that we have all felt so acutely. When will you resume?"

"Never, sir."

"Never? You could have done no more if you had loved my dear boy."

"I did love him!" cried Rosa, with a flash of anger.

"Yes; but not quite—not quite in the right way, shall I say? Not in the intended and expected way. Much as my dear boy was, unhappily, too self-conscious and self-satisfied (I'll draw no parallel between him and you in that respect) to love as he should have loved, or as anyone in his place would have loved—must have loved!"

She sat in the same still attitude, shrinking a little more.

"Then, to be told that you discontinued your study with me, was to be politely told that you abandoned it altogether?" he suggested.

"Yes," said Rosa, with sudden spirit, "The politeness was my guardian's, not mine. I told him that I was resolved to leave off, and that I was determined to stand by my resolution."

"And you still are?"

"I still am, sir. And I beg not to be questioned any more about it. At all events, I will not answer any more; I have that in my power."

She was so conscious of his looking at her with a gloating admiration of the touch of anger on her, and the fire and animation it brought with it, that even as her spirit rose, it fell again, and she struggled with a sense of shame, affront, and fear, much as she had that night at the piano.

"I will not question you any more, since you object to it so much; I will confess—"

"I do not wish to hear you, sir," cried Rosa, rising.

This time he touched her with his outstretched hand. In shrinking from it, she sank back into her seat again.

"We must sometimes act in opposition to our wishes," he told her in a low voice. "You must do so now, or do more harm to others than you can ever set right."

"What harm?"

"Presently, presently. You question *me*, you see, and surely that's not fair when you forbid me to question you. Nevertheless, I will answer the question presently. Dearest Rosa! Charming Rosa!"

She started up again.

This time he did not touch her. But his face looked so wicked and menacing, as he stood leaning against the sun-dial-setting, as it were, his black mark upon the very face of day—that her flight was arrested by horror as she looked at him.

"I do not forget how many windows command a view of us," he said, glancing toward them. "I will not touch you again; I will come no nearer to you than I am. Sit down, and there will be no mighty wonder in your music-master's leaning idly against a pedestal and speaking with you, remembering all that has happened, and our shares in it. Sit down, my beloved."

She would have gone once more—was all but gone—and once more his face, darkly threatening what would follow if she went, stopped her. Looking at him with the expression of the instant frozen on her face, she sat down on the seat again.

"Rosa, even when my dear boy was affianced to you, I loved you madly; even when I thought his happiness in having you for his wife was certain, I loved you madly; even when I strove to make him more ardently devoted to you, I loved you madly; even when he gave me the picture of your lovely face so carelessly traduced by him, which I feigned to hang always in my sight for his sake, but worshipped in torment for years, I loved you madly; in the distasteful work of the day, in the wakeful misery of the night, girded by sordid realities, or wandering through Paradises and Hells of visions into which I rushed, carrying your image in my arms, I loved you madly."

If anything could make his words more hideous to her than they were in themselves, it would be the contrast between the violence of his look and delivery and the composure of his assumed attitude.

"I endured it all in silence. So long as you were his, or so long as I supposed you to be his, I hid my secret loyally. Did I not?"

This lie, so gross, while the mere words in which it was told were so true, was more than Rosa could endure. She answered with kindling indignation: "You were as false throughout, sir, as you are now. You were false to him, daily and hourly. You know that you made my life unhappy by your pursuit of me. You know that you made me afraid to open his generous eyes, and that you forced me, for his own trusting, good, good sake, to keep the truth from him, that you were a bad, bad man!"

His preservation of his easy attitude rendering his working features and his convulsive hands absolutely diabolical, he returned, with a fierce extreme of admiration:

"How beautiful you are! You are more beautiful in anger than in repose. I don't ask you for your love; give me yourself and your hatred; give me yourself and that pretty rage; give me yourself and that enchanting scorn; it will be enough for me."

Impatient tears rose to the eyes of the trembling little beauty, and her face flamed; but as she again rose to leave him in indignation and seek protection within the house, he stretched out his hand toward the porch, as though inviting her to enter it.

"I told you, you rare charmer, you sweet witch, that you must stay and hear me, or do more harm than can ever be undone. You asked me what harm. Stay, and I will tell you. Go, and I will do it!"

Again Rosa quailed before his threatening face, though innocent of its meaning, and she remained. Her panting breathing came and went as if it would choke her; but with a repressive hand upon her bosom, she stayed.

"I have made my confession that my love is mad. It is so mad, that had the ties between me and my dear lost boy been one silken thread less strong, I might have swept even him from your side, when you favored him."

A film came over the eyes she raised for an instant, as though he had turned her faint.

"Even him," he repeated. "Yes, even him! Rosa, you see me and you hear me. Judge for yourself whether any other admirer shall love you and live, whose life is in my hand."

"What do you mean, sir?"

"I mean to show you how mad my love is. It was hawked through the late inquiries by Mr. Crisparkle that young Landless had confessed to him that he was a rival of my lost boy. That is an inexpiable offense in my eyes. The same Mr. Crisparkle knows under my hand that I have devoted myself to the murderer's discovery and destruction, be he whom he might, and that I determined to discuss the mystery with no one until I should hold the clue in which to entangle the murderer as in a net. I have since worked patiently to wind and wind it round him; and it is slowly winding as I speak."

[Illustration: Jasper's sacrifices]

"Your belief, if you believe in the criminality of Mr. Landless, is not Mr. Crisparkle's belief, and he is a good man," Rosa retorted.

"My belief is my own; and I reserve it, worshipped of my soul! Circumstances may accumulate so strongly *even against an innocent man*, that directed, sharpened, and pointed, they may slay him. One wanting link discovered by perseverance against a guilty man, proves his guilt, however slight its evidence before, and he dies. Young Landless stands in deadly peril either way."

"If you really suppose," Rosa pleaded with him, turning paler, "that I favor Mr. Landless, or that Mr. Landless has ever in any way addressed himself to me, you are wrong."

He put that aside with a slighting action of his hand and a curled lip.

"I was going to show you how madly I love you. More madly now than ever, for I am willing to renounce the second object that has arisen in my life to divide it with you; and henceforth to have no object in existence but you only. Miss Landless has become your bosom friend. You care for her peace of mind?"

"I love her dearly."

"You care for her good name?"

"I have said, sir, I love her dearly."

"I am unconsciously," he observed with a smile, as he folded his hands upon the sun-dial and leaned his chin upon them, so that his talk would seem from the windows (faces occasionally coming and going there) to be of the airiest and playfulest—"I am unconsciously giving offense by questioning again. I will simply make statements, therefore, and not put questions. You do care for your bosom friend's good name, and you do care for her peace of mind. Then remove the shadow of the gallows from her, dear one!"

"You dare propose to me to—"

"Darling, I dare propose to you. Stop there. If it be bad to idolize you, I am the worst of men; if it be good, I am the best. My love for you is above all other love, and my truth to you is above all other truth. Let me have hope and favor, and I am a forsworn man for your sake."

Rosa put her hands to her temples, and, pushing back her hair, looked wildly and abhorrently at him, as though she were trying to piece together what it was his deep purpose to present to her only in fragments.

"Reckon up nothing at this moment, angel, but the sacrifices that I lay at those dear feet, which I could fall down among the vilest ashes and kiss, and put upon my head as a poor savage might. There

Rosa's return to consciousness was instantaneous, leaving no gap for oblivion to hide the horror of the encounter. The image of Jasper's face, twisted in that terrible intensity, burned behind her eyelids as if the shock had merely paused the scene rather than ended it. Panic seized her, a cold, paralyzing dread that screamed a single command: *Fly.* She must escape this man before he could strike again.

But flight requires a destination, and her mind offered none. She had confided in no living soul save Helena, and the mere act of seeking Helena's counsel felt like handing Jasper the key to her destruction. His threats echoed in her mind—he possessed both the power and the will to unleash irreparable mischief upon Helena's brother. Every hesitation, every wrong turn, could set his malice loose.

For six months, Rosa's mind had been a storm-tossed sea, haunted by a suspicion she dared not name. Jasper's obsession with his nephew, his relentless investigation into the boy's death, had created a vacuum where no one suspected foul play. She had questioned her own wickedness, wondering if her revulsion stemmed from a guilty conscience or a baseless instinct. She had tried to rationalize his motives, ashamed to admit that the only reason he might kill was to possess *her*. The thought was a crime in itself, a vanity so petty it bordered on the absurd.

Yet, as she replayed his words by the sun-dial, the logic crumbled. He insisted on treating the disappearance as murder, aligning with his public persona since finding the watch and shirt-pin. If he feared the truth, why not encourage the idea of a voluntary vanishing? He had spoken of sweeping "even him" away, of laying his six months of labor at her feet as a sacrifice of fidelity to a dead boy. Was this performance, or was it the raw, desperate truth of a man consumed by grief and rage? To a mind untrained in the dark architecture of criminal intellect, the evidence pointed only to one terrifying conclusion: he was a monster, and she must flee.

She had been Helena's shield, assuring her of Neville's innocence while hiding her own terror. Now, the weight of that silence pressed down. She resolved to seek her guardian, Miss Twinkleton, immediately. The memory of the convent's walls failing to keep his "ghostly following" at bay drove her to action. As she dressed, the sight of the sun-dial in the garden turned her blood to ice; it seemed charged with his very essence, a focal point of his power.

She scribbled a frantic note to Miss Twinkleton, claiming urgent business and asking for no alarm, then stuffed a few trivial items into a small bag. Leaving the note in plain sight, she slipped out, closing the gate softly behind her.

It was the first time Rosa had traversed Cloisterham High Street alone. Knowing its winding paths, she hurried to the corner where the omnibus waited. Just as the vehicle pulled away, she hailed it.

"Stop and take me, if you please, Joe. I am obliged to go to London."

Within minutes, she was on her way to the railway station, protected by Joe. He waited for her arrival, carrying her small bag with the exaggerated care of a porter handling a heavy trunk, ensuring she remained seated until the train arrived.

"Can you go round when you get back, and tell Miss Twinkleton that you saw me safely off, Joe?"

"It shall be done, Miss."

"With my love, please, Joe."

"Yes, Miss—and I wouldn't mind having it myself!" Joe thought, though he kept the sentiment silent.

As the train whirled away toward London, Rosa's fear momentarily subsided, replaced by the indignation that Jasper's declaration had stained her honor. She believed only the honest and true could cleanse her. But as the city loomed larger and the darkness deepened, doubt crept in. Was this rashness? How would Mr. Grewgious react? What if he was absent? Alone in a strange, crowded metropolis, her resolve wavered. A multitude of anxious questions swirled in her mind, growing louder as the train rattled over the rooftops and descended into the gritty, gas-lit streets below.

"Hiram Grewgious, Esquire, Staple Inn, London." That was her destination. She hired a cab, navigating through desolate, cobblestoned thoroughfares where crowds gathered for air, their footsteps shuffling on the hot stones. Music drifted from somewhere—a barrel organ, a drum—but it offered no solace, only echoing off brick walls and stirring up dust. The flat wind instruments seemed to weep for the countryside.

The cab halted before a fast-closed gateway, guarded by a watchman terrified of burglars. Rosa paid and knocked timidly.

"Does Mr. Grewgious live here?"

"He lives there, Miss," the watchman indicated, pointing deeper into the shadows.

Rosa followed, ascending the stairs until she reached P. J. T.'s doorstep, wondering where the street door had vanished. Guided by a painted sign, she found Mr. Grewgious's door. It opened easily. Inside, in the twilight of the room, he sat by an open window, a shaded lamp casting a dim glow.

Rosa approached, and he whispered, "Good Heaven!"

She threw herself upon his neck, sobbing. He embraced her, his voice trembling with relief.

"My child, my child! I thought you were your mother!—But what, what, what," he soothed, "has happened? My dear, what has brought you here? Who has brought you here?"

"No one. I came alone."

"Lord bless me!" he exclaimed. "Came alone! Why didn't you write to me to come and fetch you?"

"I had no time. I took a sudden resolution. Poor, poor Eddy!"

"Ah, poor fellow, poor fellow!"

"His uncle has made love to me. I cannot bear it," Rosa burst out, stamping her foot in horror. "I shudder with terror of him, and I have come to you to protect me and all of us from him, if you will?"

"I will!" Mr. Grewgious cried, his energy surging with sudden, fierce determination. "Damn him!

'Confound his politics!
Frustrate his knavish tricks!
On Thee his hopes to fix?
Damn him again!'"

After this explosive outburst, Mr. Grewgious paced the room, torn between loyal fervor and combative rage. Wiping his face, he suddenly calmed.

"I beg your pardon, my dear, but you will be glad to know I feel better. Tell me no more just now, or I might do it again. You must be refreshed and cheered. What did you take last? Was it breakfast, lunch, dinner, tea, or supper? And what will you take next? Shall it be breakfast, lunch, dinner, tea, or supper?"

With chivalrous tenderness, he knelt before her to remove her hat and untangle her hair, a gesture that belied his usual solitary demeanor.

"Your rest too must be provided for," he continued. "You shall have the prettiest chamber in Furnival's. Your toilet must be attended to, and you shall have everything an unlimited head chambermaid can procure." He eyed her tiny bag. "Is that a bag? And is it your property, my dear?"

"Yes, sir. I brought it with me."

"It is not an extensive bag," he admitted candidly, "though admirably calculated to contain a day's provision for a canary-bird. Perhaps you brought a canary-bird?"

Rosa smiled and shook her head.

"If you had, he should have been made welcome," Mr. Grewgious said, "and I think he would have been pleased to be hung upon a nail outside and pit himself against our Staple sparrows; whose execution must be admitted to be not quite equal to their intention. Which is the case with so many of us! You didn't say what meal, my dear. Have a nice jumble of all meals."

Rosa declined, offering only tea. Mr. Grewgious scurried in and out, ordering marmalade, eggs, watercress, salted fish, and frizzled ham. Soon, the board was spread.

"Lord bless my soul," he cried, placing the lamp on the table and sitting opposite Rosa, "what a new sensation for a poor old Angular bachelor, to be sure!"

Rosa's eyebrows arched in curiosity.

"The sensation of having a sweet young presence in the place, that whitewashes it, paints it, papers it, decorates it with gilding, and makes it Glorious!" Mr. Grewgious sighed mournfully.

Touched by his emotion, Rosa touched his hand with hers.

"Thank you, my dear," he said. "Ahem! Let's talk!"

"Do you always live here, sir?" Rosa asked.

"Yes, my dear."

"And always alone?"

"Always alone; except that I have daily company in a gentleman by the name of Bazzard, my clerk."

"He doesn't live here?"

"No, he goes his way, after office hours. In fact, he is off duty here, altogether, just at present; and a firm down-stairs, with which I have business relations, lend me a substitute. But it would be extremely difficult to replace Mr. Bazzard."

"He must be very fond of you," Rosa observed.

"He bears up against it with commendable fortitude if he is," Mr. Grewgious replied, considering the matter. "But I doubt if he is. Not particularly so. You see, he is discontented, poor fellow."

"Why isn't he contented?"

"Misplaced," Mr. Grewgious said mysteriously.

"So misplaced," he elaborated, "that I feel constantly apologetic towards him. And he feels (though he doesn't mention it) that I have reason to be."

Suddenly, Mr. Grewgious jerked himself awake from the mystery.

"Let's talk. We were speaking of Mr. Bazzard. It's a secret, and moreover it is Mr. Bazzard's secret; but the sweet presence at my table makes me so unusually expansive, that I feel I must impart it in inviolable confidence. What do you think Mr. Bazzard has done?"

"Oh dear!" Rosa cried, leaning closer, her mind drifting back to Jasper. "Nothing dreadful, I hope?"

"He has written a play," Mr. Grewgious whispered solemnly. "A tragedy."

Rosa seemed relieved.

"And nobody," Mr. Grewgious pursued, "will hear, on any account whatever, of bringing it out."

Rosa nodded reflectively.

"Now, you know," Mr. Grewgious said, "I couldn't write a play."

"Not a bad one, sir?" Rosa asked innocently.

"No. If I was under sentence of decapitation, and was about to be instantly decapitated, and an express arrived with a pardon for the condemned convict Grewgious if he wrote a play, I should be under the necessity of resuming the block, and begging the executioner to proceed to extremities,—meaning," he said, stroking his chin, "the singular number, and this extremity."

Rosa pondered the hypothetical.

"Consequently," Mr. Grewgious said, "Mr. Bazzard would have a sense of my inferiority to himself under any circumstances; but when I am his master, you know, the case is greatly aggravated."

He shook his head seriously.

"How came you to be his master, sir?" Rosa asked.

"A question that naturally follows," Mr. Grewgious said. "Mr. Bazzard's father, being a Norfolk farmer, would have furiously laid about him with a flail, a pitch-fork, and every agricultural implement available for assaulting purposes, on the slightest hint of his son's having written a play. So the son, bringing to me the father's rent (which I receive), imparted his secret, and pointed out that he was determined to pursue his genius, and that it would put him in peril of starvation, and that he was not formed for it."

"For pursuing his genius, sir?"

"No, my dear," Mr. Grewgious corrected, "for starvation. It was impossible to deny the position, that Mr. Bazzard was not formed to be starved, and Mr. Bazzard then pointed out that it was desirable that I should stand between him and a fate so perfectly unsuited to his formation. In that way Mr. Bazzard became my clerk, and he feels it very much."

"I am glad he is grateful," Rosa said.

"I didn't quite mean that, my dear. I mean, that he feels the degradation. There are some other geniuses that Mr. Bazzard has become acquainted with, who have also written tragedies, which likewise nobody will on any account whatever hear of bringing out, and these choice spirits dedicate their plays to one another in a highly panegyrical manner. Mr. Bazzard has been the subject of one of these dedications. Now, you know, I never had a play dedicated to _me_!"

Rosa looked at him as if she wished to bestow a thousand dedications upon him.

"Which again, naturally, rubs against the grain of Mr. Bazzard," Mr. Grewgious said. "He is very short with me sometimes, and then I feel that he is meditating, 'This blockhead is my master! A fellow who couldn't write a tragedy on pain of death, and who will never have one dedicated to him with the most complimentary congratulations on the high position he has taken in the eyes of posterity!' Very trying, very trying. However, in giving him directions, I reflect beforehand: 'Perhaps he may not like this,' or 'He might take it ill if I asked that;' and so we get on very well. Indeed, better than I could have expected."

"Is the tragedy named, sir?" Rosa asked.

"Strictly between ourselves," Mr. Grew

The night passed without incident, leaving the weary bird of the night refreshed by dawn. By ten o'clock, Mr. Crisparkle arrived at the office, bursting through the door as if he had leaped straight from the river at Cloisterham.

"Miss Twinkleton was in a state of such agitation, Miss Rosa," he explained breathlessly, "that she followed your note to my home. To calm her, I volunteered to come immediately on the first train. I confess, at the time, I wished you had come to me; but now, I believe it was best that you stayed with your guardian."

"I considered coming to you," Rosa replied, "but Minor Canon Corner was so close to him—"

"I understand. It was entirely natural."

"I have informed Mr. Crisparkle of everything you told me last night, my dear," Mr. Grewgious interjected smoothly. "Naturally, I intended to write to him instantly, but his arrival was fortuitous. It was particularly kind of him to come, considering he had just departed."

"Have you decided," Rosa asked, turning to both men, "what course of action to take regarding Helena and her brother?"

"Why, truly," Mr. Crisparkle admitted, looking perplexed, "I am at a loss. Even Mr. Grewgious, whose intellect surpasses mine and who has been contemplating this matter all night, remains undecided. What hope do I have?"

Just then, The Unlimited appeared in the doorway, having knocked and received permission to enter. She announced that a gentleman wished to speak with Mr. Crisparkle, if such a person were present. If not, she offered her apologies for the mistake.

"Such a gentleman is here," Mr. Crisparkle confirmed, "though he is currently occupied."

"Is he a dark gentleman?" Rosa asked, stepping back toward Mr. Grewgious.

"No, Miss. More of a brown complexion."

"Are you certain he does not have black hair?" Rosa ventured, gathering courage.

"Absolutely certain, Miss. Brown hair and blue eyes."

"Perhaps," Mr. Grewgious suggested with his characteristic caution, "it would be wise to admit him, Reverend Sir, if you do not object. When one faces difficulty, one never knows from which direction a solution might emerge. My business principle is never to close off any avenue, but to observe every path that presents itself. I could recount an anecdote relevant to this, but it would be premature."

"If Miss Rosa permits, then? Let the gentleman enter," Mr. Crisparkle agreed.

The man entered, apologizing with a frank yet modest grace for not finding Mr. Crisparkle alone. He turned to Mr. Crisparkle and, with a smile, posed the unexpected question: "Who am I?"

"You are the gentleman I saw smoking beneath the trees at Staple Inn a few moments ago."

"Indeed. There I saw you. But who else am I?"

Mr. Crisparkle focused his gaze on a handsome, sunburned face, and a faint, ghostly image of a departed boy seemed to materialize in the room. The visitor noticed the flicker of memory in the Minor Canon's features and smiled again. "What shall we have for breakfast this morning? You appear to be out of jam."

"Wait!" cried Mr. Crisparkle, raising his hand. "Give me a moment! Tartar!"

The two men embraced with immense warmth, going so far—as Englishmen rarely do—as to place their hands on each other's shoulders and gaze joyfully into one another's eyes.

"My old fag!" Mr. Crisparkle exclaimed.

"My old master!" Mr. Tartar responded.

"You saved me from drowning!" Mr. Crisparkle declared.

"After which you took to swimming yourself, you know!" Mr. Tartar retorted.

"God bless my soul!" Mr. Crisparkle gasped.

"Amen!" Mr. Tartar answered.

They resumed shaking hands vigorously.

"Imagine," Mr. Crisparkle cried, his eyes shining, "Miss Rosa Bud and Mr. Grewgious, imagine Mr. Tartar, when he was the smallest of juniors, diving for me, seizing me—a large, heavy senior—by the hair of my head, and striking out for the shore with me like a water-giant!"

"I can imagine my not letting him sink, as I was his fag," Mr. Tartar said. "But the truth is, he was my best protector and friend, doing me more good than all my masters combined. An irrational impulse seized me to pick him up, or go down with him."

"Hem! Permit me, sir, to offer my congratulations," Mr. Grewgious said, advancing with an outstretched hand. "It is an honor I truly esteem. I hope you did not catch a chill. I hope you were not inconvenienced by swallowing too much water. How have you been since?"

It was unclear whether Mr. Grewgious actually knew what he was saying, though it was evident he intended to convey high friendship and appreciation.

"If Heaven had bestowed such courage and skill upon my poor mother's aid!" Rosa thought. "And he was so slight and young then!"

"I do not wish to be complimented upon it, thank you," Mr. Grewgious announced after pacing a few steps across the room in a manner so unexpected and unaccountable that everyone stared, unsure if he was choking or had the cramp. "I _think_ I have an idea. I believe I have seen Mr. Tartar's name listed as a tenant in the top set of the house next to the top set in the corner?"

"Yes, sir," Mr. Tartar confirmed. "You are correct so far."

"I am correct so far," Mr. Grewgious continued, ticking the fact off mentally with his thumb against his palm. "Might you happen to know the name of your neighbor in the top set on the other side of the party wall?" He leaned in close to Mr. Tartar, ensuring he missed nothing of his expression, despite his short-sightedness.

"Landless."

"Tick that off," Mr. Grewgious said, pacing again before returning. "Do you have any personal knowledge of him, sir?"

"Slight, but some."

"Tick that off," Mr. Grewgious noted, pacing once more. "What is the nature of this knowledge, Mr. Tartar?"

"I thought he seemed to be a young fellow in a poor way. I asked his leave—only within a day or so—to share my flowers up there with him; that is to say, to extend my flower-garden to his windows."

"Would you have the kindness to take seats?" Mr. Grewgious requested. "_I_ have an idea!"

They complied; Mr. Tartar did so readily, being somewhat disoriented, while Mr. Grewgious sat in the center with his hands on his knees. Thus, he stated his idea with his usual memorized delivery.

"I cannot yet decide whether it is prudent to maintain open communication under current circumstances, specifically between the fair member of this company and either Mr. Neville or Miss Helena. I have reason to believe a local friend of ours—one upon whom I beg to bestow a passing but hearty malediction, with the kind permission of my reverend friend—sneaks to and fro, dodging up and down. When not doing so himself, he may have an informant skulking about, perhaps a watchman, porter, or similar hanger-on of Staple. On the other hand, Miss Rosa naturally wishes to see her friend Miss Helena, and it seems vital that at least Miss Helena (if not her brother too, through her) should privately learn from Miss Rosa's lips what has occurred and what has been threatened. Am I agreed with generally in these views?"

"I entirely coincide with them," Mr. Crisparkle said, having listened attentively.

"As I have no doubt I should," added Mr. Tartar, smiling, "if I understood them."

"Fair and softly, sir," Mr. Grewgious cautioned. "We shall fully confide in you directly if you will grant us your permission. Now, if our local friend has any informant on the spot, it is reasonably clear that such an informant can only be tasked with watching the chambers occupied by Mr. Neville. Reporting to our local friend, who moves in and out there, our local friend would deduce the identities of the parties from his own previous knowledge. No one can be set to watch all of Staple, or to concern themselves with comers and goers to other sets of chambers: unless, indeed, mine."

"I begin to understand to what you tend," Mr. Crisparkle said, "and I highly approve of your caution."

"I need not repeat that I know nothing yet of the why and wherefore," Mr. Tartar added. "But I also understand to what you tend, so let me say at once that my chambers are freely at your disposal."

"There!" Mr. Grewgious cried, smoothing his head triumphantly. "Now we all have the idea. You have it, my dear?"

"I think I have," Rosa said, blushing slightly as Mr. Tartar glanced quickly toward her.

"You see," Mr. Grewgious explained, "you go over to Staple with Mr. Crisparkle and Mr. Tartar. I shall go in and out, and out and in, in my usual manner. You go up with those gentlemen to Mr. Tartar's rooms; you inspect Mr. Tartar's flower-garden; you wait for Miss Helena's appearance there, or signal to her that you are nearby; and you communicate with her freely, and no spy can be the wiser."

"I am very much afraid I shall be—"

"Be what, my dear?" Mr. Grewgious asked as she hesitated. "Not frightened?"

"No, not that," Rosa said shyly. "In Mr. Tartar's way. We seem to be appropriating Mr. Tartar's residence so very coolly."

"I protest to you," the gentleman returned, "that I shall think the better of it for evermore if your voice sounds in it only once."

Rosa, unsure what to say to that, cast down her eyes and turned to Mr. Grewgious, dutifully asking if she should put on her hat. Mr. Grewgious being of the opinion that she could do no better, she withdrew for that purpose. Mr. Crisparkle took the opportunity to give Mr. Tartar a summary of the distresses facing Neville and his sister; the delay was quite sufficient, as the hat required a little extra fitting.

Mr. Tartar offered his arm to Rosa, while Mr. Crisparkle walked ahead, detached.

"Poor, poor Eddy!" Rosa thought as they walked along.

Mr. Tartar waved his right hand as he bent his head down over Rosa, speaking animatedly.

"It was not so powerful or so sun-browned when it saved Mr. Crisparkle," Rosa thought, glancing at it. "But it must have been very steady and determined even then."

Mr. Tartar revealed he had been a sailor, roaming everywhere for years.

"When are you going to sea again?" Rosa asked.

"Never!"

Rosa wondered what the girls would say if they could see her crossing the wide street on the sailor's arm. She fancied that passers-by must think her very small and helpless, contrasted with the strong figure capable of lifting her up and carrying her out of any danger, miles and miles without resting.

She reflected further that his far-seeing blue eyes seemed accustomed to watching danger from afar, observing it without flinching, drawing nearer and nearer. When she raised her own eyes, she found he seemed to be thinking about _them_.

This slightly confused Rosebud and may explain why she never afterwards quite knew how she ascended (with his help) to his garden in the air, seeming to enter a marvelous country that bloomed suddenly like the land atop the magic beanstalk. May it flourish forever!

Mr. Tartar's chambers were the neatest, cleanest, and best-ordered rooms ever seen under the sun, moon, and stars. The floors were scrubbed to such an extent that one might have supposed the London blacks had been emancipated forever and banished from the land. Every inch of brass-work in Mr. Tartar's possession was polished and burnished until it shone like a brazen mirror. No speck, spot, or spatter soiled the purity of any of Mr. Tartar's household gods, large, small, or middle-sized. His sitting-room resembled an admiral's cabin; his bathroom was like a dairy; his sleeping-chamber, fitted with lockers and drawers, was like a seedsman's shop; and his nicely-balanced cot just stirred in the midst as if it breathed.

Everything belonging to Mr. Tartar had quarters of its own assigned to it: his maps and charts had their quarters; his books had theirs; his brushes had theirs; his boots had theirs; his clothes had theirs; his case-bottles had theirs; his telescopes and other instruments had theirs. Everything was readily accessible. Shelf, bracket, locker, hook, and drawer were equally within reach, contrived to avoid waste of room and provide snug inches of stowage for something that would have fitted nowhere else. His gleaming little service of plate was arranged upon his sideboard so that a slack salt-spoon would have instantly betrayed itself; his toilet implements were arranged upon his dressing-table so that a toothpick of slovenly deportment could have been reported at a glance. So with the curiosities he had brought home from various voyages—stuffed, dried, repolished, or otherwise preserved, according to their kind: birds, fishes, reptiles, arms, articles of dress, shells, seaweeds, grasses, or memorials of coral reef. Each was displayed in its especial place, and each could have been displayed in no better place. Paint and varnish seemed to be kept somewhere out of sight, in constant readiness to obliterate stray finger-marks wherever any might become perceptible. No man-of-war was ever kept more spick and span from careless touch. On this bright summer day, a neat awning was rigged over Mr. Tartar's flower-garden as only a sailor can rig it, and there was a sea-going air upon the whole effect, so delightfully complete that the flower-garden might have appertained to stern-windows afloat, and the whole concern might have bowled away gallantly with all on board, if Mr. Tartar had only clapped to his lips the speaking-trumpet that was slung in a corner and given hoarse orders to heave the anchor up, look alive there, men, and get all sail upon her!

Mr. Tartar doing the honours of this gallant craft was of a piece with the rest. When a man rides an amiable hobby that shies at nothing and kicks nobody, it is only agreeable to find him riding it with a humorous sense of the droll side of the creature. When the man is a cordial and an earnest man by nature, and withal is perfectly fresh and genuine, it may be doubted whether he is ever seen to greater advantage than at such a time. So Rosa would have naturally thought—even if she hadn't been conducted over the ship with all the homage due to the First Lady of the Admiralty, or First Fairy of the Sea—that it was charming to see and hear Mr. Tartar half laughing at, and half rejoicing in, his various contrivances. So Rosa would have naturally thought, anyhow, that the sunburnt sailor showed to great advantage when, the inspection finished, he delicately withdrew out of his admiral's cabin, beseeching her to consider herself its Queen, and waving her free of his flower-garden with the hand that had had Mr. Crisparkle's life in it.

"Helena! Helena Landless! Are you there?"

"Who speaks to me? Not Rosa?" Then a second handsome face appeared.

"Yes, my darling!"

"Why, how did you come here, dearest?"

"I—I don't quite know," said Rosa with a blush; "unless I am dreaming!"

Why with a blush? For their two faces were alone with the other flowers. Are blushes among the fruits of the country of the magic bean-stalk?

"I am not dreaming," said Helena, smiling. "I should take more for granted if I were. How do we come together—or so near together—so very unexpectedly?"

Unexpectedly indeed, among the dingy gables and chimneypots of P. J. T.'s connection, and the flowers that had sprung from the salt sea. But Rosa, waking, told in a hurry how they came to be together, and all the why and wherefore of that matter.

"And Mr. Crisparkle is here," said Rosa, in rapid conclusion; "and, could you believe it? long ago he saved his life!"

"I could believe any such thing of Mr. Crisparkle," returned Helena, with a mantling face.

(More blushes in the bean-stalk country!)

"Yes, but it wasn't Crisparkle," said Rosa, quickly putting in the correction.

"I don't understand, love."

"It was very nice of Mr. Crisparkle to be saved," said Rosa, "and he couldn't have shown his high opinion of Mr. Tartar more expressively. But it was Mr. Tartar who saved him."

Helena's dark eyes looked very earnestly at the bright face among the leaves, and she asked, in a slower and more thoughtful tone:

"Is Mr. Tartar with you now, dear?"

"No; because he has given up his rooms to me—to us, I mean. It is such a beautiful place!"

"Is it?"

"It is like the inside of the most exquisite ship that ever sailed. It is like—it is like—"

"Like a dream?" suggested Helena.

Rosa answered with a little nod, and smelled the flowers.

Helena resumed, after a short pause of silence, during which she seemed (or it was Rosa's fancy) to compassionate somebody: "My poor Neville is reading in his own room, the sun being so very bright on this side just now. I think he had better not know that you are so near."

"Oh, I think so too!" cried Rosa very readily.

"I suppose," pursued Helena, doubtfully, "that he must know by-and-by all you have told me; but I am not sure. Ask Mr. Crisparkle's advice, my darling. Ask him whether I may tell Neville as much or as little of what you have told me as I think best."

Rosa subsided into her state-cabin and propounded the question. The Minor Canon was for the free exercise of Helena's judgment.

"I thank him very much," said Helena, when Rosa emerged again with her report. "Ask him whether it would be best to wait until any more maligning and pursuing of Neville on the part of this wretch shall disclose itself, or to try to anticipate it: I mean, so far as to find out whether any such goes on darkly about us?"

The Minor Canon found this point so difficult to give a confident opinion on that, after two or three attempts and failures, he suggested a reference to Mr. Grewgious. Helena acquiescing, he betook himself (with a most unsuccessful assumption of lounging indifference) across the quadrangle to P. J. T.'s and stated it. Mr. Grewgious held decidedly to the general principle that if you could steal a march upon a brigand or a wild beast, you had better do it; and he also held decidedly to the special case that John Jasper was a brigand and a wild beast in combination.

Thus advised, Mr. Crisparkle came back again and reported to Rosa, who in her turn reported to Helena. She now steadily pursuing her train of thought at her window, considered thereupon.

"We may count on Mr. Tartar's readiness to help us, Rosa?" she inquired.

Oh yes! Rosa shyly thought so. Oh yes, Rosa shyly believed she could almost answer for it. But should she ask Mr. Crisparkle? "I think your authority on the point as good as his, my dear," said Helena, sedately, "and you needn't disappear again for that." Odd of Helena!

"You see, Neville," Helena pursued after more reflection, "knows no one else here: he has not so much as exchanged a word with any one else here. If Mr. Tartar would call to see him openly and often; if he would spare a minute for the purpose, frequently; if he would even do so, almost daily; something might come of it."

"Something might come of it, dear?" repeated Rosa, surveying her friend's beauty with a highly perplexed face. "Something might?"

"If Neville's movements are really watched, and if the purpose really is to isolate him from all friends and acquaintance and wear his daily life out grain by grain (which would seem to be the threat to you), does it not appear likely," said Helena, "that his enemy would in some way communicate with Mr. Tartar to warn him off from Neville? In which case, we might not only know the fact, but might know from Mr. Tartar what the terms of the communication were."

"I see!" cried Rosa. And immediately darted into her state-cabin again.

Presently her pretty face reappeared, with a greatly heightened colour, and she said that she had told Mr. Crisparkle, and that Mr. Crisparkle had fetched in Mr. Tartar, and that Mr. Tartar—who was waiting now, in case you want him, added Rosa, with a half look back, and in not a little confusion between the inside of the state-cabin and out—had declared his readiness to act as she had suggested, and to enter on his task that very day.

"I thank him from my heart," said Helena. "Pray tell him so."

Again not a little confused between the Flower-garden and the Cabin, Rosa dipped in with her message, and dipped out again with more assurances from Mr. Tartar, and stood wavering in a divided state between Helena and him, which proved that confusion is not always necessarily awkward, but may sometimes present a very pleasant appearance.

"And now, darling," said Helena, "we will be mindful of the caution that has restricted us to this interview for the present, and will part. I hear Neville moving too. Are you going back?"

"To Miss Twinkleton's?" asked Rosa.

"Yes."

"Oh, I could never go there any more. I couldn't indeed, after that dreadful interview!" said Rosa.

"Then where _are_ you going, pretty one?"

"Now I come to think of it, I don't know," said Rosa. "I have settled nothing at all yet, but my guardian will take care of me. Don't be uneasy, dear. I shall be sure to be somewhere."

(It did seem likely.)

"And I shall hear of my Rosebud from Mr. Tartar?" inquired Helena.

"Yes, I suppose so; from—" Rosa looked back again in a flutter, instead of supplying the name. "But tell me one thing before we part, dearest Helena. Tell me—that you are sure, sure, sure, I couldn't help it."

"Help it, love?"

"Help making him malicious and revengeful. I couldn't hold any terms with him, could I?"

"You know how I love you, darling," answered Helena, with indignation; "but I would sooner see you dead at his wicked feet."

"That's a great comfort to me! And you will tell your poor brother so, won't you? And you will give him my remembrance and my sympathy? And you will ask him not to hate me?"

With a mournful shake of the head, as if that would be quite a superfluous entreaty, Helena lovingly kissed her two hands to her friend, and her friend's two hands were kissed to her; and then she saw a third hand (a brown one) appear among the flowers and leaves, and help her friend out of sight.

The reflection that Mr. Tartar produced in the Admiral's Cabin by merely touching the spring knob of a locker and the handle of a drawer was a dazzling enchanted repast. Wonderful macaroons, glittering liqueurs, magically-preserved tropical spices, and jellies of celestial tropical fruits, displayed themselves profusely at an instant's notice. But Mr. Tartar could not make time stand still; and time, with his hard-hearted fleetness, strode on so fast that Rosa was obliged to come down from the bean-stalk country to earth and her guardian's chambers.

"And now, my dear," said Mr. Grewgious, "what is to be done next? To put the same thought in another form; what is to be done with you?"

Rosa could only look apologetically sensible of being very much in her own way and in everybody else's. Some passing idea of living, fireproof, up a good many stairs in Furnival's Inn for the rest of her life, was the only thing in the nature of a plan that occurred to her.

"It has come into my thoughts," said Mr. Grewgious, "that as the respected lady, Miss Twinkleton, occasionally repairs to London in the recess, with the view of extending her connection, and being available for interviews with metropolitan parents, if any—whether, until we have time in which to turn ourselves round, we might invite Miss Twinkleton to come and stay with you for a month?"

"Stay where, sir?"

"Whether," explained Mr. Grewgious, "we might take a furnished lodging in town for a month, and invite Miss Twinkleton to assume the charge of you in it for that period?"

"And afterwards?" hinted Rosa.

"And afterwards," said Mr. Grewgious, "we should be no worse off than we are now."

"I think that might smooth the way," assented Rosa.

"Then let us," said Mr. Grewgious, rising, "go and look for a furnished lodging. Nothing could be more acceptable to me

Though Mr. Crisparkle and John Jasper encountered one another daily beneath the vaulted roof of the Cathedral, the air between them remained thick with unspoken tension. Since the half-year mark when Jasper had silently shown the Minor Canon the final entries of his diary regarding Edwin Drood, no direct conversation concerning the missing young man had ever occurred. It was unlikely they ever would. Each man viewed the other as a perplexing enigma; Jasper, the relentless pursuer of Neville Landless, and Crisparkle, his steadfast defender, stood in such ideological opposition that speculating on the other's hidden motives felt like walking into a trap. Yet, neither dared to break the silence.

False pretense was not in the Minor Canon's nature; he would have openly invited discussion if Jasper had allowed it. But Jasper's reticence was absolute. Impassive, moody, and resolutely solitary, he was so consumed by a single, fixed purpose that he shared nothing of his spirit with any fellow creature. While his art allowed him to move in mechanical harmony with others, his inner self remained morally isolated from the world around him—a state he had once confessed to his lost nephew before his current inflexibility hardened.

Jasper undoubtedly knew of Rosa's abrupt departure and guessed its cause. Whether he believed he had terrified her into silence or suspected she had confided in Crisparkle remained a mystery to the Minor Canon. As a just man, Crisparkle admitted that loving Rosa was no crime, nor was offering love above revenge. The dreadful suspicion that Jasper harbored—that he might have murdered his nephew—found no harbor in Crisparkle's mind. Even Mr. Grewgious, who detested Jasper, never voiced such a thought aloud, though he privately recalled a specific evening when he had warmed his hands at the gatehouse fire, staring down at a heap of torn, muddy clothes on the floor.

Cloisterham, drowsy and indifferent, oscillated between theories: had the nephew been killed by a treacherous rival, slain in open struggle, or spirited away for his own ends? The town would lift its head to note that the grieving Jasper remained devoted to discovery and revenge, only to doze off again. This was the state of affairs when the narrative resumes.

The Cathedral doors had closed for the night. The Choir-master, granted a brief leave of absence, turned his face toward London. He traveled by the same means Rosa had, arriving on a hot, dusty evening at a hybrid establishment in a small square behind Aldersgate Street, near the General Post Office. It was a lodging-house that advertised itself as a novel enterprise, timidly suggesting that travelers might have their boots blacked instead of their stomachs for a fixed charge. Many true Britons, observing such leveling times, deduced that the era was changing, save for the high roads which were destined to vanish soon.

Crisparkle ate without appetite and soon ventured forth again, walking eastward through stale streets until he reached a miserable court, the most wretched of many such. He climbed a broken staircase, opened a door, and peered into a dark, stifling room. "Are you alone here?" he asked.

"Alone, deary; worse luck for me, and better for you," replied a croaking voice. "Come in, whoever you be. I can't see you till I light a match, yet I seem to know the sound of your speaking. I'm acquainted with you, ain't I?"

"Light your match, and try."

"So I will, deary... but my hand shakes, and I cough so that my matches jump and start like live things. Are you off a voyage, deary?"

"No."

"Not seafaring?"

"No."

"Well, there's land customers and water customers. I'm a mother to both... Here's a match, and now where's the candle?"

She found the candle and lit it, but the cough seized her instantly. She sat rocking herself, gasping, "O, my lungs is awful bad! my lungs is wore away to cabbage-nets!" Until the fit passed, she had no power of sight. As it left her, she strained her eyes and stared.

"Why, it's you!"

"Are you so surprised to see me?"

"I thought I never should have seen you again, deary. I thought you was dead, and gone to Heaven."

"Why?"

"I didn't suppose you could have kept away, alive, so long, from the poor old soul with the real receipt for mixing it. And you are in mourning too! Why didn't you come and have a pipe or two of comfort? Did they leave you money, perhaps, and so you didn't want comfort?"

"No."

"Who was they as died, deary?"

"A relative."

"Died of what, lovey?"

"Probably, Death."

"We are short to-night!" cried the woman, laughing propitiatorily. "Short and snappish we are! But we're out of sorts for want of a smoke. We've got the all-overs, haven't us, deary? But this is the place to cure 'em in; this is the place where the all-overs is smoked off."

"You may make ready, then," replied the visitor, "as soon as you like."

He removed his shoes, loosened his cravat, and lay across the foot of the squalid bed, his head resting on his left hand.

"Now you begin to look like yourself," said the woman approvingly. "Now I begin to know my old customer indeed! Been trying to mix for yourself this long time, poppet?"

"I have been taking it now and then in my own way."

"Never take it your own way. It ain't good for trade, and it ain't good for you. Where's my ink-bottle, and where's my thimble, and where's my little spoon? He's going to take it in an artful form now, my deary dear!"

As she began her process, bubbling and blowing at the faint spark in the hollow of her hands, she spoke in a tone of snuffling satisfaction. When he spoke, he did so without looking at her, his thoughts already roaming away by anticipation.

"I've got a pretty many smokes ready for you, first and last, haven't I, chuckey?"

"A good many."

"When you first come, you was quite new to it; warn't ye?"

"Yes, I was easily disposed of, then."

"But you got on in the world, and was able by-and-by to take your pipe with the best of 'em, warn't ye?"

"Ah; and the worst."

"It's just ready for you. What a sweet singer you was when you first come! Used to drop your head, and sing yourself off like a bird! It's ready for you now, deary."

He took the pipe with great care and put the mouthpiece to his lips. She seated herself beside him, ready to refill it. After inhaling a few whiffs in silence, he doubtingly accosted her.

"Is it as potent as it used to be?"

"What do you speak of, deary?"

"What should I speak of, but what I have in my mouth?"

"It's just the same. Always the identical same."

"It doesn't taste so. And it's slower."

"You've got more used to it, you see."

"That may be the cause, certainly. Look here." He stopped, becoming dreamy, and seemed to forget that he had invited her attention. She bent over him, speaking in his ear.

"I'm attending to you. Says you just now, Look here. Says I now, I'm attending to ye. We was talking just before of your being used to it."

"I know all that. I was only thinking. Look here. Suppose you had something in your mind; something you were going to do."

"Yes, deary; something I was going to do?"

"But had not quite determined to do."

"Yes, deary."

"Might or might not do, you understand."

"Yes." With the point of a needle she stirred the contents of the bowl.

"Should you do it in your fancy, when you were lying here doing this?"

She nodded. "Over and over again."

"Just like me! I did it over and over again. I have done it hundreds of thousands of times in this room."

"It's to be hoped it was pleasant to do, deary."

"It _was_ pleasant to do!"

He said this with a savage air and a spring or start at her. Unmoved, she retouched and replenished the bowl with her little spatula. Seeing her intent upon the occupation, he sank into his former attitude.

"It was a journey, a difficult and dangerous journey. That was the subject in my mind. A hazardous and perilous journey, over abysses where a slip would be destruction. Look down, look down! You see what lies at the bottom there?"

He darted forward to point at the ground as though at some imaginary object far beneath. The woman looked at him, as his spasmodic face approached close to hers, not at his pointing. She seemed to know the influence of her perfect quietude; if so, she had not miscalculated it, for he subsided again.

"Well; I have told you I did it here hundreds of thousands of times. What do I say? I did it millions and billions of times. I did it so often, and through such vast expanses of time, that when it was really done, it seemed not worth the doing, it was done so soon."

"That's the journey you have been away upon," she quietly remarked.

He glared at her as he smoked; then, his eyes becoming filmy, answered: "That's the journey."

Silence ensued. His eyes were sometimes closed and sometimes open. The woman sat beside him, very attentive to the pipe, which was all the while at his lips.

"I'll warrant," she observed, when he had been looking fixedly at her for some consecutive moments, with a singular appearance in his eyes of seeming to see her a long way off, instead of so near him: "I'll warrant you made the journey in a many ways, when you made it so often?"

"No, always in one way."

"Always in the same way?"

"Ay."

"In the way in which it was really made at last?"

"Ay."

"And always took the same pleasure in harping on it?"

"Ay."

For the time he appeared unequal to any other reply than this lazy monosyllabic assent. Probably to assure herself that it was not the assent of a mere automaton, she reversed the form of her next sentence.

"Did you never get tired of it, deary, and try to call up something else for a change?"

He struggled into a sitting posture and retorted upon her: "What do you mean? What did I want? What did I come for?"

She gently laid him back again, and before returning him the instrument he had dropped, revived the fire in it with her own breath; then said to him, coaxingly:

"Sure, sure, sure! Yes, yes, yes! Now I go along with you. You was too quick for me. I see now. You come o' purpose to take the journey. Why, I might have known it, through its standing by you so."

He answered first with a laugh, and then with a passionate setting of his teeth: "Yes, I came on purpose. When I could not bear my life, I came to get the relief, and I got it. It WAS one! It WAS one!" This repetition with extraordinary vehemence, and the snarl of a wolf.

She observed him very cautiously, as though mentally feeling her way to her next remark. It was: "There was a fellow-traveller, deary."

"Ha, ha, ha!" He broke into a ringing laugh, or rather yell.

"To think," he cried, "how often fellow-traveller, and yet not know it! To think how many times he went the journey, and never saw the road!"

The woman knelt upon the floor, with her arms crossed on the coverlet of the bed, close by him, and her chin upon them. In this crouching attitude she watched him. The pipe was falling from his mouth. She put it back, and laying her hand upon his chest, moved him slightly from side to side. Upon that he spoke, as if she had spoken.

"Yes! I always made the journey first, before the changes of colours and the great landscapes and glittering processions began. They couldn't begin till it was off my mind. I had no room till then for anything else."

Once more he lapsed into silence. Once more she laid her hand upon his chest, and moved him slightly to and fro, as a cat might stimulate a half-slain mouse. Once more he spoke, as if she had spoken.

[Illustration: Sleeping it off]

"What? I told you so. When it comes to be real at last, it is so short that it seems unreal for the first time. Hark!"

"Yes, deary. I'm listening."

"Time and place are both at hand."

He was on his feet, speaking in a whisper, and as if in the dark.

"Time, place, and fellow-traveller," she suggested, adopting his tone, and holding him softly by the arm.

"How could the time be at hand unless the fellow-traveller was? Hush! The journey's made. It's over."

"So soon?"

"That's what I said to you. So soon. Wait a little. This is a vision. I shall sleep it off. It has been too short and easy. I must have a better vision than this; this is the poorest of all. No struggle, no consciousness of peril, no entreaty—and yet I never saw _that_ before." With a start.

"Saw what, deary?"

"Look at it! Look what a poor, mean, miserable thing it is! _That_ must be real. It's over."

He had accompanied this incoherence with some wild unmeaning gestures; but they trailed off into the progressive inaction of stup
