I had the pony-chaise standing ready, anticipating that Mr. Franklin might finally decide to depart by the train that very night. Yet, the arrival of the luggage, trailed by Mr. Franklin himself, confirmed that for once in his life, he had stood firm in his resolve.

"So you have truly made up your mind, sir?" I asked as we met in the hall. "Why not wait a day or two longer, and grant Miss Rachel another chance?"

The foreign polish seemed to have completely worn off Mr. Franklin now that the moment of departure had arrived. Instead of offering a verbal reply, he placed the letter addressed to him by her ladyship into my hand. Much of its content reiterated what I had already read in his previous correspondence, but the final paragraph regarding Miss Rachel revealed the depth of his determination.

"You will wonder, I dare say," her ladyship wrote, "at my allowing my own daughter to keep me perfectly in the dark. A Diamond worth twenty thousand pounds has been lost—and I am left to infer that the mystery of its disappearance is no mystery to Rachel, and that some incomprehensible obligation of silence has been laid on her, by some person or persons utterly unknown to me, with some object in view at which I cannot even guess. Is it conceivable that I should allow myself to be trifled with in this way? It is quite conceivable, in Rachel's present state. She is in a condition of nervous agitation pitiable to see. I dare not approach the subject of the Moonstone again until time has done something to quiet her. To help this end, I have not hesitated to dismiss the police-officer. The mystery which baffles us, baffles him too. This is not a matter in which any stranger can help us. He adds to what I have to suffer; and he maddens Rachel if she only hears his name.

"My plans for the future are as well settled as they can be. My present idea is to take Rachel to London—partly to relieve her mind by a complete change, partly to try what may be done by consulting the best medical advice. Can I ask you to meet us in town? My dear Franklin, you, in your way, must imitate my patience, and wait, as I do, for a fitter time. The valuable assistance which you rendered to the inquiry after the lost jewel is still an unpardoned offence, in the present dreadful state of Rachel's mind. Moving blindfold in this matter, you have added to the burden of anxiety which she has had to bear, by innocently threatening her secret with discovery, through your exertions. It is impossible for me to excuse the perversity that holds you responsible for consequences which neither you nor I could imagine or foresee. She is not to be reasoned with—she can only be pitied. I am grieved to have to say it, but for the present, you and Rachel are better apart. The only advice I can offer you is, to give her time."

I handed the letter back, feeling a profound sorrow for Mr. Franklin, for I knew how deeply he cherished my young lady; and I saw that her mother's assessment had struck him to the heart. "You know the proverb, sir," I said to him. "When things are at the worst, they're sure to mend. Things can't be much worse, Mr. Franklin, than they are now."

Mr. Franklin folded up his aunt's letter, showing little comfort in my remark.

"When I came here from London with that horrible Diamond," he said, "I don't believe there was a happier household in England than this. Look at the household now! Scattered, disunited—the very air of the place poisoned with mystery and suspicion! Do you remember that morning at the Shivering Sand, when we talked about my uncle Herncastle, and his birthday gift? The Moonstone has served the Colonel's vengeance, Betteredge, by means which the Colonel himself never dreamt of!"

With that, he shook my hand and stepped out to the pony-chaise.

I followed him down the steps. It was terribly sad to witness him leaving the old place, where he had spent his happiest years, in such a manner. Penelope, visibly shaken by the turmoil in the house, came running to bid him farewell, tears in her eyes. Mr. Franklin kissed her. I waved my hand, intending to convey, "You are heartily welcome, sir." Several of the other female servants appeared, peering after him around the corner. He was one of those men whom the women invariably liked. At the last moment, I stopped the pony-chaise and begged as a favor that he would let us hear from him by letter. He seemed to ignore my request—he was looking around from one thing to another, taking a sort of farewell of the old house and grounds. "Tell us where you are going to, sir!" I said, holding onto the chaise, trying to glean his future plans. Mr. Franklin pulled his hat down suddenly over his eyes. "Going?" he said, echoing the word. "I am going to the devil!" The pony startled at the word, as if it had sensed a Christian horror in it. "God bless you, sir, go where you may!" was all I had time to say before he vanished from sight and hearing. A sweet and pleasant gentleman! With all his faults and follies, a sweet and pleasant gentleman! He left a sad void behind him when he departed my lady's house.

The long summer evening closed in on that Saturday night, bringing with it a dull and dreary atmosphere.

I kept my spirits from sinking by clinging to my pipe and my copy of *Robinson Crusoe*. The women (excepting Penelope) passed the time discussing Rosanna's suicide. They were all stubbornly convinced that the poor girl had stolen the Moonstone and had destroyed herself in terror of being discovered. My daughter, of course, privately held fast to what she had always asserted. Her notion of the motive behind the suicide failed, oddly enough, just where my young lady's assertion of her innocence failed also. It left Rosanna's secret journey to Frizinghall and her actions regarding the nightgown entirely unexplained. There was no use pointing this out to Penelope; the objection made as much impression on her as a shower of rain on a waterproof coat. The truth is, my daughter inherits my superiority to reason—and, in respect to that accomplishment, has gotten far ahead of her own father.

On the following day (Sunday), the close carriage, which had been kept at Mr. Ablewhite's, returned empty. The coachman delivered a message for me, along with written instructions for my lady's maid and Penelope.

The message informed me that my mistress had decided to take Miss Rachel to her house in London on Monday. The written instructions detailed the clothing required and directed the two maids to meet their mistresses in town at a specific hour. Most of the other servants were to follow. My lady had found Miss Rachel so unwilling to return to the house after the events there that she had resolved to travel to London directly from Frizinghall. I was to remain in the country until further orders to manage affairs indoors and out. The servants staying behind were to be paid in full.

Reminded by all this of Mr. Franklin's words about our household being scattered and disunited, my thoughts naturally turned to him. The more I considered his future, the more uneasy I became. It ended with me writing, via Sunday's post, to his father's valet, Mr. Jeffco (whom I had known in former years), begging him to inform me of whatever Mr. Franklin had settled upon doing upon arriving in London.

The Sunday evening proved, if possible, even duller than Saturday's. We ended the day of rest, as hundreds of thousands of people do regularly once a week in these islands—that is, we all anticipated bedtime and fell asleep in our chairs.

How Monday affected the rest of the household I do not know. Monday gave *me* a good shake-up. The first of Sergeant Cuff's prophecies—that I would hear from the Yollands—came true on that day.

I had seen Penelope and my lady's maid off in the railway with the luggage for London, and was pottering about the grounds when I heard my name called. Turning round, I found myself face-to-face with the fisherman's daughter, Limping Lucy. Bating her lame foot and her leanness (the latter a horrid drawback to a woman, in my opinion), the girl possessed some pleasing qualities in the eye of a man. A dark, keen, clever face, a nice clear voice, and a beautiful brown head of hair counted among her merits. A crutch appeared in the list of her misfortunes. And a temper reckoned high in the sum total of her defects.

"Well, my dear," I said, "what do you want with me?"

"Where's the man you call Franklin Blake?" the girl asked, fixing me with a fierce look as she rested herself on her crutch.

"That is not a respectful way to speak of any gentleman," I answered. "If you wish to inquire for my lady's nephew, you will please to mention him as Mr. Franklin Blake."

She limped a step nearer to me and looked as if she could have eaten me alive. "_Mr._ Franklin Blake?" she repeated. "Murderer Franklin Blake would be a fitter name for him."

My practice with the late Mrs. Betteredge came in handy here. Whenever a woman tries to put *you* out of temper, turn the tables and put *her* out of temper instead. They are generally prepared for every effort you can make in your own defense, but that. One word does it as well as a hundred; and one word did it with Limping Lucy. I looked her pleasantly in the face and said—"Pooh!"

The girl's temper flared immediately. She poised herself on her sound foot and beat her crutch furiously three times on the ground. "He's a murderer! he's a murderer! he's a murderer! He has been the death of Rosanna Spearman!" she screamed at the top of her voice. One or two of the people working in the grounds nearby looked up, recognized Limping Lucy, knew what to expect from that quarter, and looked away again.

"He has been the death of Rosanna Spearman?" I repeated. "What makes you say that, Lucy?"

"What do you care? What does any man care? Oh! if she had only thought of the men as I think, she might have been living now!"

"She always thought kindly of *me*, poor soul," I said; "and, to the best of my ability, I always tried to act kindly by *her*."

I spoke those words in as comforting a manner as I could. The truth is, I hadn't the heart to irritate the girl with another of my sharp retorts. I had only noticed her temper at first. I noticed her wretchedness now—and wretchedness is not uncommonly insolent, you will find, in humble life. My answer melted Limping Lucy. She bent her head down and laid it on the top of her crutch.

"I loved her," the girl said softly. "She had lived a miserable life, Mr. Betteredge—vile people had ill-treated her and led her wrong—and it hadn't spoiled her sweet temper. She was an angel. She might have been happy with me. I had a plan for our going to London together like sisters, and living by our needles. That man came here, and spoilt it all. He bewitched her. Don't tell me he didn't mean it, and didn't know it. He ought to have known it. He ought to have taken pity on her. 'I can't live without him—and, oh, Lucy, he never even looks at me.' That's what she said. Cruel, cruel, cruel. I said, 'No man is worth fretting for in that way.' And she said, 'There are men worth dying for, Lucy, and he is one of them.' I had saved up a little money. I had settled things with father and mother. I meant to take her away from the mortification she was suffering here. We should have had a little lodging in London, and lived together like sisters. She had a good education, sir, as you know, and she wrote a good hand. She was quick at her needle. I have a good education, and I write a good hand. I am not as quick at my needle as she was—but I could have done. We might have got our living nicely. And, oh! what happens this morning? what happens this morning? Her letter comes and tells me that she has done with the burden of her life. Her letter comes, and bids me good-bye for ever. Where is he?" cries the girl, lifting her head from the crutch and flaring out again through her tears. "Where's this gentleman that I mustn't speak of, except with respect? Ha, Mr. Betteredge, the day is not far off when the poor will rise against the rich. I pray Heaven they may begin with *him*. I pray Heaven they may begin with *him*."

Here was another of your average good Christians, and here was the usual breakdown consequent on that same average Christianity being pushed too far! The parson himself (though I own this is saying a great deal) could hardly have lectured the girl in the state she was in now. All I ventured to do was to keep her to the point—in the hope of something turning up which might be worth hearing.

"What do you want with Mr. Franklin Blake?" I asked.

"I want to see him."

"For anything particular?"

"I have got a letter to give him."

"From Rosanna Spearman?"

"Yes."

"Sent to you in your own letter?"

"Yes."

Was the darkness going to lift? Were all the discoveries I was dying to make coming and offering themselves to me of their own accord? I was obliged to wait a moment. Sergeant Cuff had left his infection behind him. Certain signs and tokens, personal to myself, warned me that the detective-fever was beginning to set in again.

"You can't see Mr. Franklin," I said.

"I must, and will, see him."

"He went to London last night."

Limping Lucy looked me hard in the face and saw that I was speaking the truth. Without a word more, she turned about instantly towards Cobb's Hole.
