My hand slipped from the curtain rod, but let us not mistake the physical sensation for the mental state. My mind was not clouded by the sheer, dreadful embarrassment of my hiding place; rather, it was consumed by a fervent, sisterly concern for Mr. Godfrey. Why, I wondered, was he not at the concert? The thought of his absence was secondary to the terrifying words he had spoken moments ago. *He would do it today.* Those were the words, heavy with a terrible resolution. What could "it" be? Was he about to apostatize from his faith? Was he abandoning the Mothers'-Small-Clothes? Had the angelic smile vanished from the committee-room? Had the unrivaled eloquence of Exeter Hall come to a final, tragic halt? The mere possibility of such degradation in such a man was so overwhelming that I believed I would have burst forth from my concealment, begging the Ladies' Committees of London to force an explanation.

But then, another voice cut through the fabric of the room. It was loud, bold, and utterly devoid of feminine charm. It was the voice of Rachel Verinder.

"Why have you come up here, Godfrey?" she demanded. "Why didn't you go into the library?"

He laughed softly. "Miss Clack is in the library."

"Clack in the library!" She immediately settled onto the ottoman in the back drawing-room. "You are quite right, Godfrey. We had much better stop here."

A moment ago, I had been burning with feverish anxiety, unsure of my next move. Now, I was ice-cold, my doubts evaporating into absolute certainty. To reveal myself after overhearing this was impossible. To retreat anywhere but the fireplace was equally futile. A martyrdom awaited me. With a spirit reminiscent of a primitive Christian, I quietly adjusted the curtains to ensure I could both see and hear everything. Then, I prepared to endure my trial.

"Don't sit on the ottoman," the young lady continued. "Bring a chair, Godfrey. I like people to be opposite to me when I talk to them."

He took the nearest seat, a low chair that was many sizes too small for his towering frame. I had never seen his legs so exposed, so disadvantageous.

"Well?" she pressed. "What did you say to them?"

"Just what you said, dear Rachel, to me."

"That mamma was not at all well today? And that I didn't quite like leaving her to go to the concert?"

"Those were the exact words. They were grieved to lose you, but they quite understood. All sent their love and expressed a cheering belief that Lady Verinder's indisposition would soon pass."

"You don't think it's serious, do you, Godfrey?"

"Far from it! In a few days, I feel quite sure, all will be well again."

"I think so, too. I was frightened at first, but I do think so. It was very kind to go and make my excuses for me to people who are almost strangers to you. But why not have gone with them to the concert? It seems very hard that you should miss the music too."

"Don't say that, Rachel! If you only knew how much happier I am—here, with you!"

He clasped his hands and looked at her. In that posture, he turned slightly toward my hiding spot. I felt a wave of sickness wash over me when I noticed the exact same pathetic expression on his face—the one that had once charmed me as he pleaded for destitute millions at Exeter Hall.

"It's hard to get over one's bad habits, Godfrey. But do try to get over the habit of paying compliments—do, to please me."

"I never paid *you* a compliment, Rachel, in my life. Successful love may sometimes use the language of flattery, I admit. But hopeless love, dearest, always speaks the truth."

He drew his chair close and took her hand as he uttered those words. A momentary silence fell. He, who thrilled crowds, had undoubtedly thrilled her. I finally understood the words he had dropped when alone in the drawing-room: *I'll do it today.* Alas, the most rigid propriety could hardly fail to discover that he was doing it now.

"Have you forgotten what we agreed on, Godfrey, when you spoke to me in the country? We agreed that we were to be cousins, and nothing more."

"I break the agreement, Rachel, every time I see you."

"Then don't see me."

"Quite useless! I break the agreement every time I think of you. Oh, Rachel! how kindly you told me, only the other day, that my place in your estimation was a higher place than it had ever been yet! Am I mad to build the hopes I do on those dear words? Am I mad to dream of some future day when your heart may soften to me? Don't tell me so, if I am! Leave me my delusion, dearest! I must have *that* to cherish, and to comfort me, if I have nothing else!"

His voice trembled, and he pressed a white handkerchief to his eyes. Exeter Hall again! Nothing was needed to complete the parallel but the audience, the cheers, and the glass of water.

Even her obdurate nature was touched. I saw her lean closer, hearing a new tone of interest in her voice.

"Are you really sure, Godfrey, that you are so fond of me as that?"

"Sure! You know what I was, Rachel. Let me tell you what I am. I have lost every interest in life, but my interest in you. A transformation has come over me which I can't account for. Would you believe it? My charitable business is an unendurable nuisance to me; and when I see a Ladies' Committee now, I wish myself at the uttermost ends of the earth!"

If the annals of apostasy contain anything comparable to such a declaration, I can only say it is not producible from the stores of my reading. I thought of the Mothers'-Small-Clothes, the Sunday-Sweetheart-Supervision, and the other societies too numerous to mention, all built up on this man as a tower of strength. I thought of the struggling Female Boards who drew the breath of their business-life through the nostrils of Mr. Godfrey—of that same Mr. Godfrey who had just reviled our good work as a "nuisance" and declared he wished to be elsewhere when found in our company! My young female friends will feel encouraged to persevere when I mention that it tried even my discipline before I could devour my righteous indignation in silence. Yet, I did not lose a syllable of the conversation.

"You have made your confession," she said. "I wonder whether it would cure you of your unhappy attachment to me, if I made mine?"

He started. I confess I started too. We both thought she was about to divulge the mystery of the Moonstone.

"Would you think, to look at me," she went on, "that I am the wretchedest girl living? It's true, Godfrey. What greater wretchedness can there be than to live degraded in your own estimation? That is my life now."

"My dear Rachel! it's impossible you can have any reason to speak of yourself in that way!"

"How do you know I have no reason?"

"Can you ask me the question! I know it, because I know *you*. Your silence, dearest, has never lowered you in the estimation of your true friends. The disappearance of your precious birthday gift may seem strange; your unexplained connection with that event may seem stranger still——"

"Are you speaking of the Moonstone, Godfrey?"

"I certainly thought that you referred——"

"I referred to nothing of the sort. I can hear of the loss of the Moonstone, let who will speak of it, without feeling degraded in my own estimation. If the story of the Diamond ever comes to light, it will be known that I accepted a dreadful responsibility; it will be known that I involved myself in the keeping of a miserable secret—but it will be as clear as the sun at noon-day that I did nothing mean! You have misunderstood me, Godfrey. It's my fault for not speaking more plainly. Cost me what it may, I will be plainer now. Suppose you were not in love with me? Suppose you were in love with some other woman?"

"Yes?"

"Suppose you discovered that woman to be utterly unworthy of you? Suppose you were quite convinced that it was a disgrace to you to waste another thought on her? Suppose the bare idea of ever marrying such a person made your face burn, only with thinking of it?"

"Yes?"

"And, suppose, in spite of all that—you couldn't tear her from your heart? Suppose the feeling she had roused in you (in the time when you believed in her) was not a feeling to be hidden? Suppose the love this wretch had inspired in you——? Oh, how can I find words to say it in! How can I make a *man* understand that a feeling which horrifies me at myself, can be a feeling that fascinates me at the same time? It's the breath of my life, Godfrey, and it's the poison that kills me—both in one! Go away! I must be out of my mind to talk as I am talking now. No! you mustn't leave me—you mustn't carry away a wrong impression. I must say what is to be said in my own defence. Mind this! *He* doesn't know—he never will know, what I have told *you*. I will never see him—I don't care what happens—I will never, never, never see him again! Don't ask me his name! Don't ask me any more! Let's change the subject. Are you doctor enough, Godfrey, to tell me why I feel as if I was stifling for want of breath? Is there a form of hysterics that bursts into words instead of tears? I dare say! What does it matter? You will get over any trouble I have caused you, easily enough now. I have dropped to my right place in your estimation, haven't I? Don't notice me! Don't pity me! For God's sake, go away!"

She turned round suddenly and beat her hands wildly on the back of the ottoman. Her head dropped on the cushions, and she burst out crying. Before I had time to feel shocked, I was horror-struck by an entirely unexpected proceeding on the part of Mr. Godfrey. Will it be credited that he fell on his knees at her feet?—on *both* knees, I solemnly declare! May modesty mention that he put his arms round her next? And may reluctant admiration acknowledge that he electrified her with two words?

"Noble creature!"

No more than that! But he said it with one of the bursts which have made his fame as a public speaker. She sat, either quite thunderstruck or quite fascinated—I don't know which—without even making an effort to push his arms back where they ought to have been. As for me, my sense of propriety was completely bewildered. I was so painfully uncertain whether it was my first duty to close my eyes or to stop my ears that I did neither. I attribute my ability to hold the curtain in the right position for looking and listening entirely to suppressed hysterics. In suppressed hysterics, it is admitted, even by doctors, that one must hold something.

"Yes," he said, with all the fascination of his evangelical voice and manner, "you are a noble creature! A woman who can speak the truth, for the truth's own sake—a woman who will sacrifice her pride, rather than sacrifice an honest man who loves her—is the most priceless of all treasures. When such a woman marries, if her husband only wins her esteem and regard, he wins enough to ennoble his whole life. You have spoken, dearest, of your place in my estimation. Judge what that place is—when I implore you on my knees, to let the cure of your poor wounded heart be my care. Rachel! will you honour me, will you bless me, by being my wife?"

By this time, I should certainly have decided to stop my ears if Rachel had not encouraged me to keep them open by answering him in the first sensible words I had ever heard fall from her lips.

"Godfrey!" she said, "you must be mad!"

"I never spoke more reasonably, dearest—in your interests, as well as in mine. Look for a moment to the future. Is your happiness to be sacrificed to a man who has never known how you feel towards him, and whom you are resolved never to see again? Is it not your duty to yourself to forget this ill-fated attachment? and is forgetfulness to be found in the life you are leading now? You have tried that life, and you are wearying of it already. Surround yourself with nobler interests than the wretched interests of the world. A heart that loves and honours you; a home whose peaceful claims and happy duties win gently on you day by day—try the consolation, Rachel, which is to be found *there!* I don't ask for your love—I will be content with your affection and regard. Let the rest be left, confidently left, to your husband's devotion, and to Time that heals even wounds as deep as yours."

She began to yield already. Oh, what a bringing-up she must have had! Oh, how differently I should have acted in her place!

"Don't tempt me, Godfrey," she said; "I am wretched enough and reckless enough as it is. Don't tempt me to be more wretched and more reckless still!"

"One question, Rachel. Have you any personal objection to me?"

"I! I always liked you. After what you have just said to me, I should be insensible indeed if I didn't respect and admire you as well."

"Do you know many wives, my dear Rachel, who respect and admire their husbands? And yet they and their husbands get on very well. How many brides go to the altar with hearts that would bear inspection by the men who take them there? And yet it doesn't end unhappily—somehow or other the nuptial establishment jogs on. The truth is, that women try marriage as a Refuge, far more numerously than they are willing to admit; and,
