The letters preceding this account suffice to explain why I shall pass over Lady Verinder's death with a simple statement of fact, concluding my fifth chapter.

Restricting myself strictly to my own personal experience, I must relate that a full month elapsed between my aunt's decease and the day Rachel Verinder and I met again. That reunion became the occasion for my spending several days under the same roof as her. During this visit, an event occurred concerning her engagement to Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite that demands special notice in these pages. Once this final, painful circumstance of the family history is disclosed, my task will be complete; for I shall then have recounted everything I know as an actual, though most unwilling, witness to these events.

Lady Verinder's remains were removed from London and interred in the small cemetery attached to the church in her own park. I was invited to the funeral alongside the rest of the family. Yet, it was impossible for me, given my religious convictions, to summon the strength to rise from the shock this death had caused me within such a brief span. Furthermore, I was informed that the rector of Frizinghall was to conduct the service. Having previously witnessed this clerical castaway playing whist at Lady Verinder's table, I doubted—even if I had been physically fit to travel—whether I would feel justified in attending the ceremony.

Lady Verinder's passing left her daughter under the guardianship of her brother-in-law, Mr. Ablewhite the elder. Appointed guardian by the will until his niece married or reached majority, Mr. Godfrey presumably informed his father of this new relationship. Within ten days of my aunt's death, the secret of the engagement was no longer a secret within the family circle. The pressing question for Mr. Ablewhite senior—another confirmed castaway!—became how to render himself and his authority most agreeable to the wealthy young lady destined to marry his son.

Rachel gave him some initial trouble regarding the choice of residence. The house in Montagu Square was tainted by the calamity of her mother's death; the Yorkshire estate was haunted by the scandal of the lost Moonstone. Her guardian's own home at Frizinghall faced neither objection, yet Rachel's presence there, following her recent bereavement, acted as a check on the gaieties of her cousins, the Miss Ablewhites. She herself requested that her visit be deferred to a more favorable opportunity. This culminated in a proposal from old Mr. Ablewhite to rent a furnished house at Brighton. His wife, an invalid daughter, and Rachel were to inhabit it together, expecting him to join them later in the season. They would see little society save a few old friends, and they would have his son Godfrey traveling back and forth by the London train, always at their disposal.

I describe this aimless wandering from one residence to another—this insatiable restlessness of body and appalling stagnation of soul—merely to arrive at the result. The event which, under Providence, proved the means of bringing Rachel Verinder and myself together again was nothing less than the hiring of the house at Brighton.

My Aunt Ablewhite is a large, silent woman of fair complexion, possessing one noteworthy trait in her character: from the hour of her birth, she has never been known to do anything for herself. She has gone through life accepting everyone's help and adopting everyone's opinions. A more hopeless person, spiritually, I have never met; there is absolutely, in this perplexing case, no obstructive material upon which to work. Aunt Ablewhite would listen to the Grand Lama of Tibet exactly as she listens to me, reflecting his views quite as readily as mine. She found the furnished house at Brighton by staying at a London hotel, composing herself on a sofa, and summoning her son. She discovered the necessary servants by breakfasting in bed one morning (still at the hotel) and granting her maid a holiday on the condition that the girl "would begin enjoying herself by fetching Miss Clack." I found her placidly fanning herself in her dressing-gown at eleven o'clock. "Drusilla, dear, I want some servants. You are so clever—please get them for me." I looked around the untidy room. The church bells were tolling for a weekday service, suggesting a word of affectionate remonstrance on my part. "Oh, aunt!" I said sadly. "Is _this_ worthy of a Christian Englishwoman? Is the passage from time to eternity to be made in _this_ manner?" My aunt answered, "I'll put on my gown, Drusilla, if you will be kind enough to help me." What was there to say after that? I have done wonders with murderesses; I have never advanced an inch with Aunt Ablewhite. "Where is the list," I asked, "of the servants whom you require?" My aunt shook her head; she lacked even the energy to keep the list. "Rachel has got it, dear," she said, "in the next room." I went into the next room and saw Rachel again for the first time since we parted in Montagu Square.

She looked pitiably small and thin in her deep mourning. If I attached any serious importance to such a perishable trifle as personal appearance, I might be inclined to add that hers was one of those unfortunate complexions which always suffer when not relieved by a border of white next the skin. But what are our complexions and our looks? Hindrances and pitfalls, dear girls, which beset us on our way to higher things! To my great surprise, Rachel rose when I entered the room and came forward to meet me with an outstretched hand.

"I am glad to see you," she said. "Drusilla, I have been in the habit of speaking very foolishly and very rudely to you on former occasions. I beg your pardon. I hope you will forgive me."

My face, I suppose, betrayed the astonishment I felt at this. She colored for a moment and then proceeded to explain herself.

"In my poor mother's lifetime," she continued, "her friends were not always my friends, too. Now that I have lost her, my heart turns for comfort to the people she liked. She liked you. Try to be friends with me, Drusilla, if you can."

To any rightly constituted mind, the motive thus acknowledged was simply shocking. Here in Christian England was a young woman in a state of bereavement, with so little idea of where to look for true comfort, that she actually expected to find it among her mother's friends! Here was a relative of mine, awakened to a sense of her shortcomings towards others, under the influence, not of conviction and duty, but of sentiment and impulse! Most deplorable to think of—but, still, suggestive of something hopeful to a person of my experience in plying the good work. There could be no harm, I thought, in ascertaining the extent of the change the loss of her mother had wrought in Rachel's character. I decided, as a useful test, to probe her on the subject of her marriage engagement to Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite.

Having first met her advances with all possible cordiality, I sat by her on the sofa at her own request. We discussed family affairs and future plans—always excepting that one future plan which was to end in her marriage. Try as I might to turn the conversation that way, she resolutely declined to take the hint. Any open reference to the question on my part would have been premature at this early stage of our reconciliation. Besides, I had discovered all I wanted to know. She was no longer the reckless, defiant creature whom I had heard and seen on the occasion of my martyrdom in Montagu Square. This was, of itself, enough to encourage me to take her future conversion in hand—beginning with a few words of earnest warning directed against the hasty formation of the marriage tie, and so getting on to higher things. Looking at her now with this new interest—and recalling the headlong suddenness with which she had met Mr. Godfrey's matrimonial views—I felt the solemn duty of interfering with a fervor which assured me that I should achieve no common results. Rapidity of proceeding was, as I believed, of importance in this case. I returned at once to the question of the servants wanted for the furnished house.

"Where is the list, dear?"

Rachel produced it.

"Cook, kitchen-maid, housemaid, and footman," I read. "My dear Rachel, these servants are only wanted for a term—the term during which your guardian has taken the house. We shall have great difficulty in finding persons of character and capacity to accept a temporary engagement of that sort if we try in London. Has the house in Brighton been found yet?"

"Yes. Godfrey has taken it; and persons in the house wanted him to hire them as servants. He thought they would hardly do for us, and came back having settled nothing."

"And you have no experience yourself in these matters, Rachel?"

"None whatever."

"And Aunt Ablewhite won't exert herself?"

"No, poor dear. Don't blame her, Drusilla. I think she is the only really happy woman I have ever met with."

"There are degrees in happiness, darling. We must have a little talk, some day, on that subject. In the meantime, I will undertake to meet the difficulty about the servants. Your aunt will write a letter to the people of the house——"

"She will sign a letter, if I write it for her, which comes to the same thing."

"Quite the same thing. I shall get the letter, and I will go to Brighton tomorrow."

"How extremely kind of you! We will join you as soon as you are ready for us. And you will stay, I hope, as _my_ guest. Brighton is so lively; you are sure to enjoy it."

In those words the invitation was given, and the glorious prospect of interference was opened before me.

It was then the middle of the week. By Saturday afternoon the house was ready for them. In that short interval I had sifted, not only the characters but the religious views as well, of all the disengaged servants who applied to me, and had succeeded in making a selection which my conscience approved. I also discovered and called upon two serious friends of mine, residents in the town, to whom I knew I could confide the pious object which had brought me to Brighton. One of them—a clerical friend—kindly helped me to take sittings for our little party in the church in which he himself ministered. The other—a single lady, like myself—placed the resources of her library (composed throughout of precious publications) entirely at my disposal. I borrowed half-a-dozen works, all carefully chosen with a view to Rachel. When these had been judiciously distributed in the various rooms she would likely occupy, I considered that my preparations were complete. Sound doctrine in the servants who waited on her; sound doctrine in the minister who preached to her; sound doctrine in the books that lay on her table—such was the treble welcome which my zeal had prepared for the motherless girl! A heavenly composure filled my mind on that Saturday afternoon as I sat at the window waiting for the arrival of my relatives. The giddy throng passed and repassed before my eyes. Alas! how many of them felt my exquisite sense of duty done? An awful question. Let us not pursue it.

Between six and seven the travelers arrived. To my indescribable surprise, they were escorted, not by Mr. Godfrey (as I had anticipated), but by the lawyer, Mr. Bruff.

"How do you do, Miss Clack?" he said. "I mean to stay this time."

That reference to the occasion on which I had obliged him to postpone his business to mine, when we were both visiting in Montagu Square, satisfied me that the old worldling had come to Brighton with some object of his own in view. I had prepared quite a little Paradise for my beloved Rachel—and here was the Serpent already!

"Godfrey was very much vexed, Drusilla, not to be able to come with us," said my Aunt Ablewhite. "There was something in the way which kept him in town. Mr. Bruff volunteered to take his place, and make a holiday of it till Monday morning. By-the-by, Mr. Bruff, I'm ordered to take exercise, and I don't like it. That," added Aunt Ablewhite, pointing out of the window to an invalid going by in a chair on wheels, drawn by a man, "is my idea of exercise. If it's air you want, you get it in your chair. And if it's fatigue you want, I am sure it's fatigue enough to look at the man."

Rachel stood silent, at a window by herself, with her eyes fixed on the sea.

"Tired, love?" I inquired.

"No. Only a little out of spirits," she answered. "I have often seen the sea, on our Yorkshire coast, with that light on it. And I was thinking, Drusilla, of the days that can never come again."

Mr. Bruff remained to dinner and stayed through the evening. The more I saw of him, the more certain I felt that he had some private end to serve in coming to Brighton. I watched him carefully. He maintained the same appearance of ease and talked the same godless gossip, hour after hour, until it was time to take leave. As he shook hands with Rachel, I caught his hard and cunning eyes resting on her for a moment with a peculiar interest and attention. She was plainly concerned in the object that he had in view. He said nothing out of the common to her or to anyone on leaving. He invited himself to luncheon the next day, and then he went away to his hotel.

It was impossible the next morning to get my Aunt Ablewhite out of her dressing-gown in time for church. Her invalid daughter (suffering from nothing, in my opinion, but incurable laziness, inherited from her mother) announced that she meant to remain in bed for the day. Rachel and I went alone together to church. A magnificent sermon was preached by my gifted friend on the heathen indifference of the world to the sinfulness of little sins. For more than an hour his eloquence (assisted by his glorious voice) thundered through the sacred edifice. I said to Rachel, when we came out, "Has it found its way to your heart, dear?" And she answered, "No; it has only made my head ache." This might have been
