The rain lashed against the windowpanes of the Brighton villa, mirroring the turmoil within the drawing room. Mr. Godfrey stood before me, his magnificent head bowed low, his shoulders slumped in a posture of profound defeat.

"I have lost a beautiful girl, an excellent social position, and a handsome income," he began, his voice thick with a despair that seemed to drain the color from the room. "And I have submitted to it without a struggle. What can be the motive for such extraordinary conduct? My precious friend, there is no motive."

"No motive?" I repeated, my pen pausing over my journal.

"Let me appeal to your experience of children, Miss Clack," he continued, his eyes pleading with a mixture of confusion and shame. "A child pursues a certain course of conduct. You are struck by it, and you attempt to discern the reason. But the dear little thing is incapable of telling you its motive. You might as well ask the grass why it grows or the birds why they sing. Well! In this matter, I am like the child—like the grass—like the birds. I don't know why I proposed to Miss Verinder. I don't know why I have neglected my Ladies. I don't know why I have abandoned the Mothers' Small-Clothes. You ask the child, 'Why have you been naughty?' And the little angel puts its finger in its mouth and knows nothing. My case is exactly that, Miss Clack! I couldn't confess it to anyone else. I feel impelled to confess it to *you*!"

I began to recover my composure. A mental problem was presented here, and I am deeply interested in such puzzles, possessing, I believe, a certain skill in their resolution.

"Best of friends, exert your intellect and help me," he urged. "Tell me—why does a time come when these matrimonial proceedings begin to look like a dream? Why does it suddenly occur to me that my true happiness lies in helping my dear Ladies, in my modest rounds of useful work, in speaking my few earnest words when called upon by my Chairman? What do I want with a position? I have one! What do I want with an income? I can afford my bread, cheese, lodging, and two coats a year. What do I want with Miss Verinder? She has told me with her own lips that she loves another man, and that her only idea in marrying me is to try and put that other man out of her head. What a horrid union is this! Oh, dear me, what a horrid union! Such are my reflections on my way to Brighton. I approach Rachel with the feeling of a criminal awaiting his sentence. When I found she had changed her mind, when I heard her propose to break the engagement, I experienced a most overpowering sense of relief. A month ago I was pressing her rapturously to my bosom. An hour ago, the happiness of knowing I shall never press her again intoxicates me like strong liquor. The thing seems impossible—and yet there are the facts. I have lost a beautiful girl, an excellent social position, and a handsome income; and I have submitted to it without a struggle. Can *you* account for it, dear friend? It's quite beyond *me*."

His head sank further onto his breast, and he surrendered his own mental problem to despair.

I was deeply touched. To the spiritual physician, the case was now plain. It is no uncommon event in the experience of us all to see the possessors of exalted ability occasionally humbled to the level of the most poorly-gifted people around them. The object, no doubt, in the wise economy of Providence, is to remind greatness that it is mortal and that the power which confers it can also take it away. It was now easy to discern one of these salutary humiliations in Mr. Godfrey's deplorable proceedings, of which I had been the unseen witness. Equally easy was it to recognize the welcome reappearance of his finer nature in the horror with which he recoiled from the idea of a marriage with Rachel, and in the charming eagerness he showed to return to his Ladies and the Poor.

I put this view before him in a few simple, sisterly words. His joy was beautiful to see. He compared himself, as I spoke, to a lost man emerging from darkness into light. When I assured him of a loving reception at the Mothers' Small-Clothes, the grateful heart of our Christian Hero overflowed. He pressed my hands alternately to his lips. Overwhelmed by the exquisite triumph of having reclaimed him, I let him do what he liked with my hands. I closed my eyes. I felt my head, in an ecstasy of spiritual self-forgetfulness, sinking on his shoulder. In a moment more I should certainly have swooned away in his arms, but for an interruption from the outer world which brought me back to reality. A horrid rattling of knives and forks sounded outside the door, and the footman entered to lay the table for luncheon.

Mr. Godfrey started up, glancing at the clock on the mantelpiece.

"How time flies with *you*!" he exclaimed. "I shall barely catch the train."

I ventured to ask why he was in such a hurry to return to town. His answer reminded me of family difficulties yet to be reconciled and disagreements yet to come.

"I have heard from my father," he said. "Business obliges him to leave Frizinghall for London today, and he proposes coming here, either this evening or tomorrow. I must tell him what has happened between Rachel and me. His heart is set on our marriage—there will be great difficulty, I fear, in reconciling him to the breaking-off of the engagement. I must stop him, for all our sakes, from coming here until he *is* reconciled. Best and dearest of friends, we shall meet again!"

With those words, he hurried out. In equal haste, I ran upstairs to compose myself in my own room before meeting Aunt Ablewhite and Rachel at the luncheon table.

I am well aware that the all-profaning opinion of the world has charged Mr. Godfrey with having his own private reasons for releasing Rachel at the first opportunity she gave him. It has also reached my ears that his anxiety to recover my estimation has been attributed in certain quarters to a mercenary eagerness to make his peace, through me, with a venerable committee-woman at the Mothers' Small-Clothes, abundantly blessed with the goods of this world and a beloved friend of my own. I only notice these odious slanders to declare that they never had a moment's influence on my mind. In obedience to my instructions, I have exhibited the fluctuations in my opinion of our Christian Hero exactly as recorded in my diary. In justice to myself, let me add that, once reinstated in his place in my estimation, my gifted friend never lost that place again. I write with tears in my eyes, burning to say more. But no—I am cruelly limited to my actual experience of persons and things. In less than a month from the time of which I am now writing, events in the money-market (which diminished even my miserable little income) forced me into foreign exile, leaving me with nothing but a loving remembrance of Mr. Godfrey which the slander of the world has assailed, and assailed in vain.

Let me dry my eyes and return to my narrative.

I went downstairs to luncheon, naturally anxious to see how Rachel was affected by her release from her marriage engagement. It appeared to me—that I own I am a poor authority in such matters—that the recovery of her freedom had set her thinking again of that other man whom she loved, and that she was furious with herself for not being able to control a revulsion of feeling of which she was secretly ashamed. Who was the man? I had my suspicions—but it was needless to waste time in idle speculation. When I had converted her, she would, as a matter of course, have no concealments from me. I should hear all about the man; I should hear all about the Moonstone. If I had had no higher object in stirring her up to a sense of spiritual things, the motive of relieving her mind of its guilty secrets would have been enough to encourage me to proceed.

In the afternoon, Aunt Ablewhite took her exercise in an invalid chair, accompanied by Rachel. "I wish I could drag the chair," she broke out recklessly. "I wish I could fatigue myself till I was ready to drop."

She was in the same humor in the evening. I discovered in one of my friend's precious publications—the *Life, Letters, and Labours of Miss Jane Ann Stamper*, forty-fourth edition—passages which bore with a marvelous appropriateness on Rachel's present position. Upon my proposing to read them, she went to the piano. Conceive how little she must have known of serious people if she supposed that my patience was to be exhausted in that way! I kept Miss Jane Ann Stamper by me, waiting for events with the most unfaltering trust in the future.

Old Mr. Ablewhite never made his appearance that night. But I knew the importance which his worldly greed attached to his son's marriage with Miss Verinder, and I felt a positive conviction that we should see him the next day. With his interference, the storm on which I had counted would certainly come, and the salutary exhaustion of Rachel's resisting powers would as certainly follow. I am not ignorant that old Mr. Ablewhite has the reputation generally (especially among his inferiors) of being a remarkably good-natured man. According to my observation of him, he deserves his reputation as long as he has his own way, and not a moment longer.

The next day, exactly as I had foreseen, Aunt Ablewhite was as near to being astonished as her nature would permit by the sudden appearance of her husband. He had barely been a minute in the house before he was followed, to my astonishment this time, by an unexpected complication in the shape of Mr. Bruff.

I never remember feeling the presence of the lawyer to be more unwelcome than I felt it at that moment. He looked ready for anything in the way of an obstructive proceeding—capable even of keeping the peace with Rachel for one of the combatants!

"This is a pleasant surprise, sir," said Mr. Ablewhite, addressing himself with his deceptive cordiality to Mr. Bruff. "When I left your office yesterday, I didn't expect to have the honor of seeing you at Brighton today."

"I turned over our conversation in my mind after you had gone," replied Mr. Bruff. "And it occurred to me that I might perhaps be of some use on this occasion. I was just in time to catch the train, and I had no opportunity of discovering the carriage in which you were travelling."

Having given that explanation, he seated himself by Rachel. I retired modestly to a corner—with Miss Jane Ann Stamper on my lap, in case of emergency. My aunt sat at the window, placidly fanning herself as usual. Mr. Ablewhite stood up in the middle of the room, his bald head much pinker than I had ever seen it, and addressed himself in the most affectionate manner to his niece.

"Rachel, my dear," he said, "I have heard some very extraordinary news from Godfrey. And I am here to inquire about it. You have a sitting-room of your own in this house. Will you honor me by showing me the way to it?"

Rachel never moved. Whether she was determined to bring matters to a crisis or prompted by some private sign from Mr. Bruff, is more than I can tell. She declined doing old Mr. Ablewhite the honor of conducting him into her sitting-room.

"Whatever you wish to say to me," she answered, "can be said here—in the presence of my relatives, and in the presence" (she looked at Mr. Bruff) "of my mother's trusted old friend."

"Just as you please, my dear," said the amiable Mr. Ablewhite. He took a chair. The rest of them looked at his face—as if they expected it, after seventy years of worldly training, to speak the truth. I looked at the top of his bald head; having noticed on other occasions that the temper which was really in him had a habit of registering itself *there*.

"Some weeks ago," pursued the old gentleman, "my son informed me that Miss Verinder had done him the honor to engage herself to marry him. Is it possible, Rachel, that he can have misinterpreted—or presumed upon—what you really said to him?"

"Certainly not," she replied. "I did engage myself to marry him."

"Very frankly answered!" said Mr. Ablewhite. "And most satisfactory, my dear, so far. In respect to what happened some weeks since, Godfrey has made no mistake. The error is evidently in what he told me yesterday. I begin to see it now. You and he have had a lovers' quarrel—and my foolish son has interpreted it seriously. Ah! I should have known better than that at his age."

The fallen nature in Rachel—the mother Eve, so to speak—began to chafe at this.

"Pray let us understand each other, Mr. Ablewhite," she said. "Nothing in the least like a quarrel took place yesterday between your son and me. If he told you that I proposed breaking off our marriage engagement, and that he agreed on his side—he told you the truth."

The self-registering thermometer at the top of Mr. Ablewhite's bald head began to indicate a rise of temper. His face was more amiable than ever—but *there* was the pink at the top of his face, a shade deeper already!

"Come, come, my dear!" he said, in his most soothing manner, "now don't be angry, and don't be hard on poor Godfrey! He has evidently said some unfortunate thing. He was always clumsy from a child—but he means well, Rachel, he means well!"

"Mr. Ablewhite, I have either expressed myself very badly, or you are purposely mistaking me. Once for all, it is a settled thing between your son and myself that we remain, for the rest of our lives, cousins and nothing more. Is that plain enough?"

The tone in which she said those words made it impossible, even for old Mr. Ablewhite, to mistake her any longer. His thermometer went up another degree, and his voice when he next spoke
