No man possesses a claim to sympathy quite as potent as the combination of bravery, youth, beauty, and misfortune. Madam Esmond might have borne twenty sons, yet she possessed every right to admire her young soldier. Her devotion to Mr. Washington intensified; she raved of him and praised him in every assembly, pointing out his sterling virtues to her own children with fervor. She contrasted these qualities sharply with Harry's love of pleasure—whom she dismissed as "the wild boy!"—and George's listless musings over his books. George, however, was not disposed to warm to Mr. Washington any more readily because of his mother's extravagant eulogies. Instead, he coaxed the jealous demon within him until he became a pest to himself and all around him. He uttered jokes so profound that his simple mother remained bewildered, unable to grasp their meaning, while his moody, saturnine humor left her powerless to respond.

Meanwhile, public events were unfolding that would alter the fortunes of their humble family. The quarrel between the French and English North Americans had ceased to be merely provincial, swelling into a national conflict. Reinforcements from France had already arrived in Canada, and English troops were expected in Virginia. "Alas! my dear friend!" wrote Madame la Presidente de Mouchy from Quebec to her young correspondent, George Warrington. "How contrary is destiny to us! I see you quitting the embrace of an adored mother to precipitate yourself into the arms of Bellona. I see you pass wounded from combats. I hesitate almost to wish victory to our lilies when I behold you ranged under the banners of the Leopard. There are enmities which the heart does not recognize—ours assuredly remain at peace amidst the tumults. All here love and salute you, as well as Monsieur the Bear-hunter, your brother (that cold Hippolyte who preferred the chase to the soft conversation of our ladies!) Your friend, your enemy, the Chevalier de la Jabotiere, burns to meet on the field of Mars his generous rival. M. Du Quesne spoke of you last night at supper. M. Du Quesne, my husband, sends affectionate remembrances to their young friend, joined ever by those of your sincere Presidente de Mouchy."

Indeed, the banner of the Leopard was flung out to the winds, rallying a number of the King's soldiers. It was resolved to wrest from the French all conquests made upon British dominion. Two regiments were raised and paid by the King in America, and a fleet accompanied by two additional ships was dispatched from home under an experienced commander. In February, 1755, Commodore Keppel, aboard the famous ship *Centurion*—in which Anson had made his voyage round the world—anchored in Hampton Roads with two ships of war under his command, carrying on board General Braddock, his staff, and a portion of his troops. Mr. Braddock had been appointed by the Duke. A century prior, the Duke of Cumberland had been hailed as "The Duke par excellence" in England; though not so great a warrior as his party esteemed him, nor so villainous as his enemies painted him, he commanded respect. A fleet of transports swiftly followed, bringing stores, men, and money in abundance.

The General landed his troops at Alexandria on the Potomac River and repaired to Annapolis in Maryland, where he ordered the governors of the various colonies to meet him in council, urging each to call upon their respective provinces to aid the common cause in this strait.

The arrival of the General and his small army caused a mighty excitement throughout the provinces, nowhere greater than at Castlewood. Harry departed forthwith to see the troops under canvas at Alexandria. The sight of their lines delighted him, as did the inspiring music of their fifes and drums. He quickly made acquaintance with the officers of both regiments, longing to join the expedition upon which they were bound, and became a welcome guest at their mess.

Madam Esmond was pleased that her sons should have the opportunity of enjoying the society of gentlemen of good fashion from England. She had no doubt their company was improving, noting that these English gentlemen were vastly different from the horse-racing and cock-fighting Virginian squires with whom Master Harry associated, or the lawyers, pettifoggers, and toad-eaters at the lieutenant-governor's table. Madam Esmond possessed a keen eye for detecting flatterers in other households. Against the little knot of official people at Williamsburg, she was especially satirical, having no patience with their etiquettes and squabbles for precedence.

As for the company of the King's officers, Mr. Harry and his elder brother both smiled at their mother's compliments regarding the elegance and propriety of the gentlemen of the camp. If the good lady had but known all—if she could have heard their jokes and the songs they sang over their wine and punch, or seen the condition of many of them as they were carried away to their lodgings—she would scarce have been so ready to recommend their company to her sons. Men and officers swaggered the countryside, frightening the peaceful farm and village folk with their riot. The General raved and stormed against his troops for their disorder and against the provincials for their traitorous niggardliness. The soldiers took possession of the land almost as if it were a conquered country; they scorned the provincials and insulted the wives even of their Indian allies, who had come to join the English warriors upon their arrival in America to march against the French. The General was compelled to forbid Indian women from his camp. Amazed and outraged, their husbands retired, and but a few months later, their services were lost to him when their aid would have been most precious.

Some stories against the gentlemen of the camp Madam Esmond might have heard, but she would accept none of them. Soldiers were soldiers, everyone knew; those officers who came to Castlewood on her son's invitation were most polite gentlemen, and such indeed they were. The widow received them most graciously, providing them with the best sport the country afforded. Presently, the General himself sent polite messages to the mistress of Castlewood. His father had served with hers under the glorious Marlborough, and Colonel Esmond's name was still known and respected in England. With her ladyship's permission, General Braddock would have the honor of waiting upon her at Castlewood and paying his respects to the daughter of so meritorious an officer.

If she had known the cause of Mr. Braddock's politeness, perhaps his compliments would not have charmed Madam Esmond so much. The Commander-in-Chief held levees at Alexandria, and among the gentry of the country who paid him their respects were the twins of Castlewood. They mounted their best nags, took with them their last London suits, and, with their two negro-boys in smart liveries behind them, rode in state to wait upon the great man. He was sulky and angry with the provincial gentry and scarce took any notice of the young gentlemen, asking only, casually, of his aide-de-camp at dinner, who the young Squire Gawkeys were in blue and gold and red waistcoats?

Mr. Dinwiddie, the Lieutenant-Governor of Virginia, the Agent from Pennsylvania, and a few other gentlemen happened to be dining with his Excellency. "Oh!" said Mr. Dinwiddie, "those are the sons of the Princess Pocahontas." On this, with a tremendous oath, the General asked, "Who the deuce was she?"

Dinwiddie, who did not love her—having indeed undergone a hundred pertnesses from the imperious little lady—now gave a disrespectful and ridiculous account of Madam Esmond, making merry with her pomposity and immense pretensions, and entertaining General Braddock with anecdotes regarding her until his Excellency fell asleep.

When he awoke, Dinwiddie was gone, but the Philadelphia gentleman was still at table, deep in conversation with the officers present. The General took up the talk where it had been left and spoke of Madam Esmond in curt, disrespectful terms, such as soldiers were in the habit of using in those days, asking again what was the name of the old fool about whom Dinwiddie had been talking. He then broke into expressions of contempt and wrath against the gentry and the country in general.

Mr. Franklin of Philadelphia repeated the widow's name, taking quite a different view of her character from that Mr. Dinwiddie had given. He seemed to know a good deal about her, her father, and her estate—as indeed he did about every man or subject which came under discussion. He explained to the General that Madam Esmond had beefs, horses, and stores in plenty, which might be very useful at the present juncture, and recommended him to conciliate her by all means. The General had already made up his mind that Mr. Franklin was a very shrewd, intelligent person and graciously ordered an aide-de-camp to invite the two young men to the next day's dinner. When they appeared, he was very pleasant and good-natured; the gentlemen of the General's family made much of them. They behaved, as became persons of their name, with modesty and good-breeding. They returned home delighted with their entertainment, nor was their mother less pleased at the civilities which his Excellency had shown to her boys. In reply to Braddock's message, Madam Esmond penned a billet in her best style, acknowledging his politeness and begging his Excellency to fix the time when she might have the honor to receive him at Castlewood.

We may be sure that the arrival of the army and the approaching campaign formed the subject of continued conversation in the Castlewood family. To make the campaign was the dearest wish of Harry's life. He dreamed only of war and battle; he was forever with the officers at Williamsburg; he scoured, cleaned, and polished all the guns and swords in the house; he renewed the amusements of his childhood and had the negroes under arms. His mother, who had a gallant spirit, knew that the time had come when one of her boys must leave her to serve the King. She scarce dared to think on whom the lot should fall. She admired and respected the elder, but she felt that she loved the younger boy with all the passion of her heart.

Eager as Harry was to be a soldier, with all his thoughts bent on that glorious scheme, he too scarcely dared to touch on the subject nearest his heart. Once or twice when he ventured on it with George, the latter's countenance wore an ominous look. Harry had a feudal attachment for his elder brother, worshipping him with an extravagant regard and giving way to him in all things as the chief. So Harry saw, to his infinite terror, how George, too, in his grave way, was occupied with military matters. George had the wars of Eugene and Marlborough down from his bookshelves, all the military books of his grandfather, and the most warlike of Plutarch's lives. He and Dempster were practicing with the foils again. The old Scotchman was an adept in the military art, though somewhat shy of saying where he learned it.

Madam Esmond made her two boys the bearers of the letter in reply to his Excellency's message, accompanying her note with such large and handsome presents for the General's staff and the officers of the two Royal Regiments as caused the General more than once to thank Mr. Franklin for having been the means of bringing this welcome ally into the camp. "Would not one of the young gentlemen like to see the campaign?" the General asked. "A friend of theirs, who often spoke of them—Mr. Washington, who had been unlucky in the affair of last year—had already promised to join him as aide-de-camp, and his Excellency would gladly take another young Virginian gentleman into his family." Harry's eyes brightened and his face flushed at this offer. "He would like with all his heart to go!" he cried out. George said, looking hard at his younger brother, that one of them would be proud to attend his Excellency, whilst it would be the other's duty to take care of their mother at home. Harry allowed his senior to speak. His will was even still obedient to George's. However much he desired to go, he would not pronounce until George had declared himself. He longed so for the campaign that the actual wish made him timid. He dared not speak on the matter as he went home with George. They rode for miles in silence, or strove to talk upon indifferent subjects; each knowing what was passing in the other's mind and afraid to bring the awful question to an issue.

On their arrival at home, the boys told their mother of General Braddock's offer. "I knew it must happen," she said. "At such a crisis in the country our family must come forward. Have you—have you settled yet which of you is to leave me?" and she looked anxiously from one to another, dreading to hear either name.

"The youngest ought to go, mother; of course I ought to go!" cried Harry, turning very red.

"Of course he ought," said Mrs. Mountain, who was present at their talk.

"There! Mountain says so! I told you so!" cried Harry again, with a sidelong look at George.

"The head of the family ought to go, mother," said George, sadly.

"No! No! You are ill and have never recovered your fever. Ought he to go, Mountain?"

"You would make the best soldier, I know that, dearest Hal. You and George Washington are great friends, and could travel well together, and he does not care for me, nor I for him, however much he is admired in the family. But, you see, 'tis the law of Honour, my Harry." (He here spoke to his brother with a voice of extraordinary kindness and tenderness.) "The grief I have had in this matter has been that I must refuse thee. I must go. Had Fate given you the benefit of that extra half-hour of life which I have had before you, it would have been your lot, and you would have claimed your right to go first, you know you would."

"Yes, George," said poor Harry, "I own I should."

"You will stay at home and take care of Castlewood and our mother. If anything happens to me, you are here to fill my place. I would like to give
