His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief departed for Madam Esmond's residence with a splendor befitting the first personage in His Majesty's North American dominions. A guard of dragoons marched before him, greeted by the raucous, loyal shouts of a crowd that was predominantly Black. The General rode in his own heavy coach, attended at the door by Captain Talmadge, his Master of the Horse, who rode alongside during the journey from Williamsburg. Seated within the carriage were Major Danvers, the aide-de-camp, and the postmaster from Philadelphia, Mr. Franklin. Once a printer's boy, Franklin possessed a shrewdness and breadth of knowledge that impressed the General and the other gentlemen; he held a vast array of curious information regarding the colony and England, where he had previously resided. "It is extraordinary how a man of such humble origins acquired such varied learning and such polished breeding," His Excellency remarked graciously, tipping his hat to the postmaster.

Franklin bowed, attributing his refinement to the fortunate chance of associating with men of rank, which allowed him to study their manners and adapt himself accordingly. Regarding formal education, he confessed modesty, citing his father's straitened circumstances and the limited advantages of his native New England. "As for education," Mr. Braddock burst out laughing, "there are gentlemen in the army, by George, who cannot decide whether to spell 'bull' with two b's or one. I've heard the Duke of Marlborough was no special good penman. Though I did not serve under that noble commander—his Grace was before my time—I thrashed the French soundly, despite being no scholar."

Franklin acknowledged the facts. "Nor is my Duke a scholar," Mr. Braddock continued, noting Franklin's knowing wink. Franklin instantly withdrew the expression, offering a gaze as innocent as a child's. "He is no scholar, but he is a match for any French general that ever swallowed the English for fricassee de crapaud. He saved the crown for the best of kings, His Most Gracious Majesty King George." Off went Franklin's hat, and from his large buckled wig escaped a great halo of powder. "He is the soldier's best friend and the uncompromising enemy of all beggarly red-shanked Scotch rebels and intriguing Romish Jesuits who would strip us of our liberty and religion, by George. His Royal Highness, my gracious master, is not a scholar either, but he is one of the finest gentlemen in the world."

"I have seen His Royal Highness on horseback at a review of the Guards in Hyde Park," Franklin noted. "The Duke is indeed a very fine gentleman on horseback."

"You shall drink his health today, Postmaster. He is the best of masters, the best of friends, the best of sons to his royal old father; the best of gentlemen that ever wore an epaulet."

"Epaulets are quite out of my way, sir," Franklin laughed. "You know I live in a Quaker City."

"Of course they are out of your way, my good friend. Every man to his business. You, and gentlemen of your class, to your books, and welcome. We, to fight the enemy and govern the country. Hey, gentlemen? Lord, what roads you have in this colony, and how this confounded coach plunges! Who have we here, with the two negro boys in livery? He rides a good gelding."

"It is Mr. Washington," the aide-de-camp replied.

"I would like him for a corporal of the Horse Grenadiers," the General said. "He has a good figure on a horse. He knows the country too, Mr. Franklin."

"Yes, indeed."

"And is a monstrous genteel young man, considering the opportunities he has had. I should have thought he had the polish of Europe, by George, I should."

"He does his best," Franklin said, looking innocently at the stout chief, the exemplar of English elegance, who sat swagging from side to side of the carriage, his face as scarlet as his coat, swearing at every other word. Ignorant on every point off parade except the merits of a bottle and the looks of a woman; not of high birth, yet absurdly proud of his no-ancestry; brave as a bulldog; savage, lustful, prodigal, generous; gentle in soft moods; easy of love and laughter; dull of wit; utterly unread; believing his country the first in the world, and himself as good a gentleman as any in it. "Yes, he is mighty well for a provincial, upon my word. He was beat at Fort What-d'ye-call-um last year, down by the Thingamy river. What's the name on't, Talmadge?"

"The Lord knows, sir," Talmadge replied, "and I dare say the Postmaster, too, who is laughing at us both."

"Oh, Captain!"

"Was caught in a regular trap. He had only militia and Indians with him. Good day, Mr. Washington. A pretty nag, sir. That was your first affair, last year?"

"That at Fort Necessity? Yes, sir," the gentleman said gravely, saluting as he rode up, followed by a couple of natty negro grooms in smart livery-coats and velvet hunting-caps. "I began ill, sir, never having been in action until that unlucky day."

"You were all raw levies, my good fellow. You should have seen our militia run from the Scotch, and be cursed to them. You should have had some troops with you."

"Your Excellency knows 'tis my passionate desire to see and serve with them," Mr. Washington said.

"By George, we shall try and gratify you, sir," the General said, with one of his usual huge oaths. On the heavy carriage rolled towards Castlewood; Mr. Washington asking leave to gallop on ahead to announce his Excellency's speedy arrival to the lady there.

The progress of the Commander-in-Chief was so slow that several humbler persons invited to meet him came up with his carriage. Not wishing to pass the great man on the road, they formed quite a procession in the dusty wake of his wheels. First came Mr. Dinwiddie, the Lieutenant-Governor, attended by his negro servants, and in company of Parson Broadbent, the jolly Williamsburg chaplain. These were soon joined by little Mr. Dempster, the young gentlemen's schoolmaster, in his great Ramillies wig, kept for occasions of state. Anon appeared Mr. Laws, the judge of the court, with Madam Laws on a pillion behind him, and their negro man carrying a box containing her ladyship's cap, bestriding a mule. The procession looked so ludicrous that Major Danvers and Mr. Franklin, espying it, laughed outright, though not so loud as to disturb his Excellency, who was asleep by this time. They bade the whole of this queer rearguard move on, leaving the Commander-in-Chief and his escort of dragoons to follow at their leisure. There was room for all at Castlewood when they came. There was meat, drink, and the best tobacco for His Majesty's soldiers; laughing and jollity for the negroes; and a plenteous welcome for their masters.

The honest General required to be helped to most dishes at the table, and more than once, and was forever holding out his glass for drink. Nathan's sangaree he pronounced to be excellent, and had drunk largely of it on arriving before dinner. There was cider, ale, brandy, and plenty of good Bordeaux wine, some which Colonel Esmond himself had brought home with him to the colony, and which was fit for pontificis coenis, said little Mr. Dempster, with a wink to Mr. Broadbent, the clergyman of the adjoining parish. Mr. Broadbent returned the wink and nod, and drank the wine without caring about the Latin, as why should he, never having hitherto troubled himself about the language? Mr. Broadbent was a gambling, guzzling, cock-fighting divine who had passed much time in the Fleet Prison, at Newmarket, at Hockley-in-the-Hole; and having gone of all sorts of errands for his friend, Lord Cingbars, Lord Ringwood's son (my Lady Cingbars's waiting-woman being Mr. B.'s mother—I dare say the modern reader had best not be too particular regarding Mr. Broadbent's father's pedigree), had been of late sent out to a church-living in Virginia. He and young George had fought many a match of cocks together, taken many a roe in company, hauled in countless quantities of shad and salmon, slain wild geese and wild swans, pigeons and plovers, and destroyed myriads of canvas-backed ducks. It was said by the envious that Broadbent was the midnight poacher on whom Mr. Washington set his dogs, and whom he caned by the river-side at Mount Vernon. The fellow got away from his captor's grip, and scrambled to his boat in the dark; but Broadbent was laid up for two Sundays afterwards, and when he came abroad again had the evident remains of a black eye and a new collar to his coat. All the games at the cards had George Esmond and Parson Broadbent played together, besides hunting all the birds in the air, the beasts in the forest, and the fish of the sea. Indeed, when the boys rode together to get their reading with Mr. Dempster, I suspect that Harry stayed behind and took lessons from the other professor of European learning and accomplishments, George going his own way, reading his own books, and, of course, telling no tales of his younger brother.

All the birds of the Virginia air, and all the fish of the sea in season were here laid on Madam Esmond's board to feed his Excellency and the rest of the English and American gentlemen. The gumbo was declared to be perfection (young Mr. George's black servant was named after this dish, being discovered behind the door with his head in a bowl of this delicious hotch-potch, by the late Colonel, and grimly christened on the spot), the shad were rich and fresh, the stewed terrapins were worthy of London aldermen (before George, he would like the Duke himself to taste them, his Excellency deigned to say), and indeed, stewed terrapins are worthy of any duke or even emperor. The negro-women have a genius for cookery, and in Castlewood kitchens there were adepts in the art brought up under the keen eye of the late and the present Madam Esmond. Certain of the dishes, especially the sweets and flan, Madam Esmond prepared herself with great neatness and dexterity; carving several of the principal pieces, as the kindly cumbrous fashion of the day was, putting up the laced lappets of her sleeves, and showing the prettiest round arms and small hands and wrists as she performed this ancient rite of a hospitality not so languid as ours. The old law of the table was that the mistress was to press her guests with a decent eagerness, to watch and see whom she could encourage to further enjoyment, to know culinary anatomic secrets, and execute carving operations upon fowls, fish, game, joints of meat, and so forth; to cheer her guests to fresh efforts, to whisper her neighbour, Mr. Braddock "I have kept for your Excellency the jowl of this salmon.—I will take no denial! Mr. Franklin, you drink only water, sir, though our cellar has wholesome wine which gives no headaches.—Mr. Justice, you love woodcock pie?"

"Because I know who makes the pastry," says Mr. Laws, the judge, with a profound bow. "I wish, madam, we had such a happy knack of pastry at home as you have at Castlewood. I often say to my wife, 'My dear, I wish you had Madam Esmond's hand.'"

"It is a very pretty hand; I am sure others would like it too," says Mr. Postmaster of Boston, at which remark Mr. Esmond looks but half-pleased at the little gentleman.

"Such a hand for a light pie-crust," continues the Judge, "and my service to you, madam." And he thinks the widow cannot but be propitiated by this compliment. She says simply that she had lessons when she was at home in England for her education, and that there were certain dishes which her mother taught her to make, and which her father and sons both liked. She was very glad if they pleased her company. More such remarks follow: more dishes; ten times as much meat as is needful for the company. Mr. Washington does not embark in the general conversation much, but he and Mr. Talmadge, and Major Danvers, and the Postmaster, are deep in talk about roads, rivers, conveyances, sumpter-horses and artillery train; and the provincial militia Colonel has bits of bread laid at intervals on the table before him, and stations marked out, on which he has his finger, and regarding which he is talking to his brother aides-de-camp, till a negro servant, changing the courses, brushes off the Potomac with a napkin, and sweeps up the Ohio in a spoon.

At the end of dinner, Mr. Broadbent leaves his place and walks up behind the Lieutenant-Governor's chair, where he says grace, returning to his seat and resuming his knife and fork when this work of devotion is over. And now the sweets and puddings are come, of which I can give you a list, if you like; but what young lady cares for the puddings of to-day, much more for those which were eaten a hundred years ago, and which Madam Esmond had prepared for her guests with so much neatness and skill? Then, the table being cleared, Nathan, her chief manager, lays a glass to every person, and fills his mistress's. Bowing to the company, she says she drinks but one toast, but knows how heartily all the gentlemen present will join her. Then she calls, "His Majesty," bowing to Mr. Braddock, who with his aides-de-camp and the colonial gentlemen all loyally repeat the name of their beloved and gracious Sovereign. And hereupon
