The second day following Harry's arrival at Castlewood fell upon a Sunday. The chapel attached to the great house served as the parish church for the village. A private door from the mansion opened directly into a magnificent state pew reserved for the family, and at the appointed hour, they all took their places in strict order, while a respectable congregation from the village filled the benches below. High upon the church roof hung several ancient, dusty banners; Harry indulged himself in imagining that these had been carried by retainers of his own lineage during the Commonwealth wars, in which his ancestors had fought with such loyal distinction. Within the altar rails knelt the effigy of the Esmond of the time of King James the First, the common forefather of the assembly. Beside him, Madame de Bernstein, in her capacity as Bishop's widow, never failed her attendance. She conducted her devotions with a gravity almost as exemplary as that of the ancestor in his square beard and red gown, forever kneeling on his stone hassock before his marble desk and book, beneath his emblazoned shield of arms.

The clergyman, a tall, high-colored, and handsome young man, read the service in a lively, agreeable voice, imparting a dramatic flair to the chapters of Scripture. The music was excellent, performed by one of the young ladies of the family at the organ, though it was marred by an interruption—a burst of laughter rising from the servants' pew. This was occasioned by Mr. Warrington's lacquey, Gumbo. Knowing the air assigned for the psalm, the man began to sing it in a voice so exceedingly loud and sweet that the entire congregation turned toward the African warbler. The parson himself covered his mouth with his handkerchief, and the liveried gentlemen from London were thrown into a state of astonishment. Perhaps pleased with the sensation he had created, Mr. Gumbo continued his performance until it became almost a solo, silencing the voice of the clerk entirely. For the truth was, though Gumbo held onto the book alongside pretty Molly, the porter's daughter who had first welcomed the strangers to Castlewood, he sang and recited entirely by ear, unable to read a single syllable of the verses before him.

Once this choral performance concluded, a brief sermon followed, which Harry found rather too short. In a lively, familiar, and striking discourse, the clergyman described a scene he had witnessed the previous week: the execution of a horse-stealer after the Assizes. He painted the man's former good character, his loving family, and his agony at parting from them. He depicted the execution in a manner that was startling, terrible, and picturesque. Rather than employing the heavy Scripture phraseology Harry was accustomed to hearing from the somewhat Calvinistic preachers his mother favored, the divine spoke as one man of the world addressing other sinful souls who might profit from good advice. The unfortunate man had begun as a farmer of good prospects but had succumbed to the vices of the age—drinking, card-playing, horse-racing, and cock-fighting. Against these, the young clergyman was generously indignant. Then came poaching and horse-stealing, for which the man suffered. The divine rapidly drew striking and fearful pictures of these rustic crimes, startling his hearers by showing that the Eye of the Law watched the poacher at midnight and set traps to catch the criminal. He galloped the stolen horse over highway and common, from one county to another, yet showed Retribution ever galloping after, seizing the malefactor at the country fair, carrying him before the justice, and never unlocking his manacles until he dropped them at the foot of the gallows. "Heaven be pitiful to the sinner!" the clergyman cried, acting out the scene. He whispered in the criminal's ear at the cart; he dropped his handkerchief on the clerk's head. Harry started back as that handkerchief fell. The clergyman had been speaking for more than twenty minutes. Harry could have listened for an hour more and would not have felt it had been five. The gentlefolk in the great pew were thoroughly enlivened by the discourse. Once or twice, Harry, observing the pew where the house servants sat, noted their intense attention; especially Gumbo, his own man, who sat in an attitude of profound consternation. Yet the smockfrocks seemed to heed nothing, clamping out of church quite unconcerned. Gaffer Brown and Gammer Jones took the matter as it came, and the rosy-cheeked, red-cloaked village lasses sat under their broad hats entirely unmoved. My lord, from his pew, nodded slightly to the clergyman in the pulpit as the divine's head and wig surged up from the cushion.

"Sampson has been strong to-day," said his lordship. "He has assaulted the Philistines in great force."

"Beautiful, beautiful!" exclaimed Harry.

"Bet five to four it was his Assize sermon. He has been over to Winton to preach, and to see those dogs," cried William.

The organist had played the little congregation out into the sunshine. Only Sir Francis Esmond, temp. Jac. I., still knelt on his marble hassock before his prayer-book of stone. Mr. Sampson emerged from his vestry in his cassock and nodded to the gentlemen still lingering in the great pew.

"Come up, and tell us about those dogs," said Mr. William, and the divine nodded a laughing assent.

The gentlemen passed out of the church into the gallery of their house, which connected them with the sacred building. Mr. Sampson made his way through the court and presently joined them. He was introduced by my lord to the Virginian cousin of the family, Mr. Warrington. The chaplain bowed very profoundly and hoped Mr. Warrington would benefit by the virtuous example of his European kinsmen. Was he related to Sir Miles Warrington of Norfolk? Sir Miles was Mr. Warrington's father's elder brother. What a pity he had a son! 'Twas a pretty estate, and Mr. Warrington looked as if he would become a baronetcy, and a fine estate in Norfolk.

"Tell me about my uncle," cried Virginian Harry.

"Tell us about those dogs!" said English Will, in a breath.

"Two more jolly dogs, two more drunken dogs, saving your presence, Mr. Warrington, than Sir Miles and his son, I never saw. Sir Miles was a staunch friend and neighbor of Sir Robert's. He can drink down any man in the county, except his son and a few more. The other dogs about which Mr. William is anxious, for Heaven hath made him a prey to dogs and all kinds of birds, like the Greeks in the Iliad—"

"I know that line in the Iliad," said Harry, blushing. "I only know five more, but I know that one." And his head fell. He was thinking, "Ah, my dear brother George knew all the Iliad and all the Odyssey, and almost every book that was ever written besides!"

"What on earth" (only he mentioned a place under the earth) "are you talking about now?" asked Will of his reverence.

The chaplain reverted to the dogs and their performance. He thought Mr. William's dogs were more than a match for them. From dogs they went off to horses. Mr. William was very eager about the Six Year Old Plate at Huntingdon. "Have you brought any news of it, Parson?"

"The odds are five to four on Brilliant against the field," said the parson, gravely, "but, mind you, Jason is a good horse."

"Whose horse?" asked my lord.

"Duke of Ancaster's. By Cartouche out of Miss Langley," said the divine. "Have you horse-races in Virginia, Mr. Warrington?"

"Haven't we!" cried Harry; "but oh! I long to see a good English race!"

"Do you—do you—bet a little?" continued his reverence.

"I have done such a thing," replied Harry with a smile.

"I'll take Brilliant even against the field, for ponies with you, cousin!" shouted out Mr. William.

"I'll give or take three to one against Jason!" said the clergyman.

"I don't bet on horses I don't know," said Harry, wondering to hear the chaplain now, and remembering his sermon half an hour before.

"Hadn't you better write home, and ask your mother?" said Mr. William, with a sneer.

"Will, Will!" called out my lord, "our cousin Warrington is free to bet, or not, as he likes. Have a care how you venture on either of them, Harry Warrington. Will is an old file, in spite of his smooth face, and as for Parson Sampson, I defy our ghostly enemy to get the better of him."

"Him and all his works, my lord!" said Mr. Sampson, with a bow.

Harry was highly indignant at this allusion to his mother. "I'll tell you what, cousin Will," he said, "I am in the habit of managing my own affairs in my own way, without asking any lady to arrange them for me. And I'm used to make my own bets upon my own judgment, and don't need any relations to select them for me, thank you. But as I am your guest, and, no doubt, you want to show me hospitality, I'll take your bet—there. And so Done and Done."

"Done," said Will, looking askance.

"Of course it is the regular odds that's in the paper which you give me, cousin?"

"Well, no, it isn't," growled Will. "The odds are five to four, that's the fact, and you may have 'em, if you like."

"Nay, cousin, a bet is a bet; and I take you, too, Mr. Sampson."

"Three to one against Jason. I lay it. Very good," said Mr. Sampson.

"Is it to be ponies too, Mr. Chaplain?" asked Harry with a superb air, as if he had Lombard Street in his pocket.

"No, no. Thirty to ten. It is enough for a poor priest to win."

"Here goes a great slice out of my quarter's hundred," thought Harry. "Well, I shan't let these Englishmen fancy that I am afraid of them. I didn't begin, but for the honour of Old Virginia I won't go back."

These pecuniary transactions arranged, William Esmond went away scowling towards the stables, where he loved to take his pipe with the grooms; the brisk parson went off to pay his court to the ladies and partake of the Sunday dinner which would presently be served. Lord Castlewood and Harry remained for a while together. Since the Virginian's arrival, my lord had scarcely spoken with him. In his manners he was perfectly friendly, but so silent that he would often sit at the head of his table and leave it without uttering a word.

"I suppose yonder property of yours is a fine one by this time?" said my lord to Harry.

"I reckon it's almost as big as an English county," answered Harry, "and the land's as good, too, for many things." Harry would not have the Old Dominion, nor his share in it, underrated.

"Indeed!" said my lord, with a look of surprise. "When it belonged to my father it did not yield much."

"Pardon me, my lord. You know how it belonged to your father," cried the youth, with some spirit. "It was because my grandfather did not choose to claim his right." [This matter is discussed in the Author's previous work, *The Memoirs of Colonel Esmond*.]

"Of course, of course," said my lord, hastily.

"I mean, cousin, that we of the Virginian house owe you nothing but our own," continued Harry Warrington; "but our own, and the hospitality which you are now showing me."

"You are heartily welcome to both. You were hurt by the betting just now?"

"Well," replied the lad, "I am sort o' hurt. Your welcome, you see, is different to our welcome, and that's the fact. At home we are glad to see a man, hold out a hand to him, and give him of our best. Here you take us in, give us beef and claret enough, to be sure, and don't seem to care when we come, or when we go. That's the remark which I have been making since I have been in your lordship's house; I can't help telling it out, you see, now 'tis on my mind; and I think I am a little easier now I have said it." And with this, the excited young fellow knocked a billiard-ball across the table, and then laughed, and looked at his elder kinsman.

"A la bonne heure! We are cold to the stranger within and without our gates. We don't take Mr. Harry Warrington into our arms, and cry when we see our cousin. We don't cry when he goes away—but do we pretend?"

"No, you don't. But you try to get the better of him in a bet," said Harry, indignantly.

"Is there no such practice in Virginia, and don't sporting men there try to overreach one another? What was that story I heard you telling our aunt, of the British officers and Tom somebody of Spotsylvania!"

"That's fair!" cried Harry. "That is, it's usual practice, and a stranger must look out. I don't mind the parson; if he wins, he may have, and welcome. But a relation! To think that my own blood cousin wants money out of me!"

"A Newmarket man would get the better of his father. My brother has been on the turf since he rode over to it from Cambridge. If you play at cards with him—and he will if you will let him—he will beat you if he can."

"Well, I'm ready!" cried Harry. "I'll play any game with him that I know, or I'll jump with him, or I'll ride with him, or I'll row with him, or I'll wrestle with him, or
