Having extracted considerable sums from his cousin and the chaplain, our young Virginian felt a moral imperative to allow them a chance at recovery, though I suspect his mother and other upright moralists would have disapproved of his chosen method. He indulges in card games with excessive frequency. Beyond the daily whist or quadrille with the ladies, which commences shortly after dinner at three o'clock and concludes only at supper, there exist high-stakes contests involving fortunes, in which all the gentlemen, including my lord, participate. Following their Sunday conversations, his lordship had become notably more open and confiding with his kinsman, betting with him affably and engaging him in backgammon and piquet. Both Mr. William and the pious chaplain relished a touch of hazard; however, this diversion was pursued clandestinely, unknown to the ladies of the house, who had repeatedly extracted promises from Cousin Will that he would not lead the Virginian into mischief, nor would he himself partake. Thus, Will pledged as much as his aunt or mother demanded, swearing on his honor that he would never play—nay, never; and when the family retired, Mr. Will would stroll over with a dice-box and a bottle of rum to Cousin Harry's quarters, where he, Hal, and the reverend gentleman would gamble until dawn.

When Harry bestowed upon Lord Castlewood those glowing descriptions of the maternal estate in America, he harbored no intent to deceive, boast, or lie, for the lad possessed a nature of profound honesty; yet, in his domestic life, it must be acknowledged that the young fellow had associated with all manner of peculiar company—horse-jockeys, tavern loafers, gamblers, and sportsmen, of whom the colonies were replete. A landed aristocracy, supported by a population of negroes to till their fields and cultivate tobacco and corn, found little amusement other than the hunt or the card table and the punch-bowl. The hospitality of the province was boundless: every man's house was his neighbor's; and idle gentlemen rode from mansion to mansion, finding in each similar sport, welcome, and rough plenty. The Virginian squire often possessed a barefooted valet and a cobbled saddle; yet within the crumbling fences and behind the broken windows of the hall, there was ample corn for the horses and abundant drink and venison for the master. Harry had slept on countless straw mattresses and engaged in endless jovial nocturnal bouts over claret and punch in cracked bowls until morning broke and the hounds were followed. His poor brother was of a far more sober disposition, as the lad admitted with contrition. Thus does Nature fashion her folk; some cherish books and tea, while others prefer Burgundy and a gallop across the countryside. Harry's tastes were quickly evident to his friends in England. None favored the Puritan discipline, nor did they dislike Harry for lacking the demeanor of a milksop. Manners, you see, were far looser a century prior; tongues were vastly more free and easy; names were spoken, and deeds performed, which we would now shriek to hear mentioned. Yes, madam, we are not as our ancestors were. Should we not thank the Fates for improving our morals so prodigiously, rendering us so eminently virtuous?

Keeping a shrewd eye upon those around him, and correctly surmising that his cousins sought to probe him, Harry Warrington deemed it prudent to keep his own counsel regarding his affairs, proving himself quite a match for the three gentlemen into whose company he had fallen in all games of chance or sport. Even in the noble game of billiards, he could hold his own after a few days of play with his cousins and their revered pastor. His grandfather, who had imported one of the very few tables existing in His Majesty's province of Virginia from Europe, loved the game. Though Mr. William could defeat him initially, he could not secure undue odds from the young gambler. After their first wager, Harry was on his guard against Mr. William, and Cousin William admitted, with respect, that the American was his equal in most things and superior in many. Yet, though Harry played so well that he could best the parson and soon equal William—who, of course, could best both the girls—how came it that in contests with these, especially with one of them, Mr. Warrington frequently came second? He was profoundly courteous to every being who wore a petticoat; nor has that traditional politeness yet departed from his country. All the women of the Castlewood establishment adored the young gentleman. The grim housekeeper was mollified by him; the fat cook greeted him with boisterous smiles; the ladies' maids, whether French or English, smirked and giggled in his favor; the pretty porter's daughter at the lodge always replied kindly. Madame de Bernstein noted all these things, saying nothing, yet watching carefully the boy's disposition and behavior.

Who can say how old Lady Maria Esmond was? Books of the Peerage were scarce in those days compared to our blessed times, and I cannot tell to a few years, or even a lustre or two. When Will used to claim she was thirty-five, he was abusive and prone to exaggeration. Maria was Will's half-sister, daughter of the late Lord Castlewood's first wife, a German lady whom my lord married during Queen Anne's wars. Baron Bernstein, who married Maria's Aunt Beatrix, Bishop Tusher's widow, was also a German, a Hanoverian nobleman and relative of the first Lady Castlewood. If Lady Maria was born under George I., and His Majesty George II. had reigned for thirty years, how could she be twenty-seven, as she told Harry Warrington? "I am old, child," she would say. She used to call Harry "child" when they were alone. "I am a hundred years old. I am twenty-seven. I might be your mother almost." To which Harry would reply, "Your ladyship might be the mother of all the cupids, I am sure. You don't look twenty, on my word you do not!"

Lady Maria appeared any age one wished. She was a fair beauty with a dazzling white and red complexion, an abundance of fair hair flowing over her shoulders, and beautiful round arms which showed to uncommon advantage when she played billiards with Cousin Harry. When she had to stretch across the table to make a stroke, that youth caught glimpses of a little ankle, a little clocked stocking, and a little black satin slipper with a little red heel, which filled him with unutterable rapture, making him swear that there never was such a foot, ankle, clocked stocking, satin slipper in the world. And yet, oh, foolish Harry! your mother's foot was ever so much more slender, and half an inch shorter, than Lady Maria's. But somehow, boys do not gaze with rapture upon their mothers' slippers and ankles.

No doubt Lady Maria was very kind to Harry when they were alone. Before her sister, aunt, stepmother, she made light of him, calling him a simpleton, a chit, and various trivial names. Behind his back, and even before his face, she mimicked his accent, which smacked somewhat of his province. Harry blushed and corrected the faulty intonation under the guidance of his English monitresses. His aunt pronounced that they would soon make him a pretty fellow.

Lord Castlewood, we have said, became daily more familiar and friendly with his guest and relative. Until the crops were gathered, there was no sporting except an occasional cock-match at Winchester and bull-baiting at Hexton Fair. Harry and Will rode to many jolly fairs and races around the county, where the young Virginian was introduced to some of the county families—the Henleys of the Grange, the Crawleys of Queen's Crawley, the Redmaynes of Lionsden, and so forth. Neighbors arrived in their great heavy coaches, passing two or three days in country fashion. More would have come, but for the fear the entire Castlewood family held of offending Madame de Bernstein. She disliked country company; the rustic society and conversation annoyed her. "We shall be merrier when my aunt leaves us," the young folks admitted. "We have cause, as you may imagine, for being very civil to her. You know what a favorite she was with our papa? And with reason. She secured him his earldom, being very well indeed at Court at that time with the King and Queen. She commands here naturally, perhaps a little too much. We are all afraid of her: even my elder brother stands in awe of her, and my stepmother is much more obedient to her than she ever was to my papa, whom she ruled with a rod of iron. But Castlewood is merrier when our aunt is not here. At least we have much more company. You will come to us in our gay days, Harry, won't you? Of course you will: this is your home, sir. I was so pleased—oh, so pleased—when my brother said he considered it was your home!"

A soft hand was held out after this pretty speech, a pair of very well-preserved blue eyes looking exceedingly friendly. Harry grasped his cousin's hand with ardor. I do not know what privilege of cousinship he would not like to claim, only he was so timid. They call the English selfish and cold. He at first thought his relatives were so; but how mistaken he was! How kind and affectionate they were, especially the Earl—and dear, dear Maria! How he wished he could recall the letter he had written to Mrs. Mountain and his mother, in which he hinted that his welcome had been cold! The Earl, his cousin, was everything that was kind, promising to introduce him to London society, present him at Court, and at White's. He was to consider Castlewood his English home. He had been most hasty in his judgment regarding his relatives in Hampshire. All this, with many contrite expressions, he wrote in his second despatch to Virginia. And he added, for it hath been hinted that the young gentleman did not spell with especial accuracy at this early time, "My cousin, the Lady Maria, is a perfect Angle."

"Ille praeter omnes angulus ridet," muttered little Mr. Dempster, at home in Virginia.

"The child can't be falling in love with his angle, as he calls her!" cried out Mountain.

"Pooh, pooh! my niece Maria is forty!" said Madam Esmond. "I perfectly well recollect her when I was at home—a great, gawky, carroty creature, with a foot like a pair of bellows." Where is truth, forsooth, and who knoweth it? Is Beauty beautiful, or is it only our eyes that make it so? Does Venus squint? Has she got a splay-foot, red hair, and a crooked back? Anoint my eyes, good Fairy Puck, so that I may ever consider the Beloved Object a paragon! Above all, keep on anointing my mistress's dainty peepers with the very strongest ointment, so that my noddle may ever appear lovely to her, and that she may continue to crown my honest ears with fresh roses!

Now, not only was Harry Warrington a favorite in the drawing-room and among all the ladies of the servants' hall, but, like master, like man, his valet Gumbo was very much admired and respected by many of the domestic circle. Gumbo possessed a hundred accomplishments. He was famous as a fisherman, huntsman, and blacksmith. He could dress hair beautifully, improving himself in the art under my lord's own Swiss gentleman. He excelled at cooking many of his Virginian dishes, learning new culinary secrets from my lord's Frenchman. We have heard how exquisitely and melodiously he sang at church; he sang not only sacred but secular music, often inventing airs and composing rude words after the habit of his people. He played the fiddle so charmingly that he set all the girls dancing in Castlewood Hall, and was ever welcome to a gratis mug of ale at the Three Castles in the village, if he would but bring his fiddle. He was good-natured and loved to play for the village children; so that Mr. Warrington's negro was a universal favorite in all the Castlewood domain.

It was not difficult for the servants' hall folks to perceive that Mr. Gumbo was a liar, a fact undoubted in spite of all his good qualities. For instance, that day at church, when he pretended to read from Molly's psalm-book, he sang quite other words than those written in the book, of which he could not decipher a syllable. He pretended to understand music, whereupon the Swiss valet brought him some, and Master Gumbo turned the page upside down. These instances of long-bow practice occurred daily and were patent to all the Castlewood household. They knew Gumbo was a liar, perhaps not thinking the worse of him for this weakness; but they did not know how great a liar he was, and believed him much more than they had reason to do, and because, I suppose, they liked to believe him.

Whatever might be his feelings of wonder and envy upon first viewing the splendor and comforts of Castlewood, Mr. Gumbo kept his sentiments to himself, examining the place, park, appointments, and stables very coolly. "The horses," he said, "are very well, what there are of them; but at Castlewood in Virginia we have six times as many, and let me see, fourteen eighteen grooms to look after them." Madam Esmond's carriages were much finer than my lord's—great deal more gold on the panels. As for her gardens, they covered acres, growing every kind of flower and fruit under the sun. "Pineapples and peaches?" he remarked. "Pineapples and peaches were so common in my country, they were given to pigs." They had twenty forty gardeners, not white gardeners, all black gentlemen, like himself. In the house were twenty forty gentlemen in livery, besides women-servants—he could never remember how many women-servants, there were so many—"dere were fifty women-servants"—all Madam Esmond's property, worth ever so many hundred pieces of eight apiece. How much was a piece of eight? Bigger than a guinea, a piece of
