Young Harry Warrington's sudden revolt caught Madame de Bernstein completely off guard. Her only defense was the immediate flare of anger that had ended the previous scene. As she stormed out, she cast two piercing glares at Lady Fanny and her mother before disappearing. Meanwhile, Lady Maria remained oblivious to the storm, her attention fixed entirely on her tambour-frame. She barely lifted her head from her embroidery to watch her aunt retreat or to register the silent, venomous exchange of looks between the mother-in-law and her daughter.

"So, despite all our efforts, you have succeeded, madam?" the maternal gaze seemed to demand.

"Have what?" Lady Fanny's eyes queried, feigning confusion. Yet, innocence was not her forte. She looked puzzled rather than pure. Had she truly been guilty, she would have mastered the art of appearing innocent with far greater cunning, carefully composing a face ready to meet any accusation. Whatever expression she wore, her mother stared at her with such intensity that it felt as though she might tear the eyes from her head.

Lady Castlewood, however, lacked the immediate brutality of the stage monsters in *King Lear*. When her ladyship intended to destroy her daughter, she would instead retire with a smile, her arm affectionately around the child's waist, only to inflict her punishment in private.

"So you do not wish to accompany the old lady to Tunbridge Wells?" she asked Cousin Warrington, masking her displeasure with a perfectly practiced, well-bred smile.

"And small blame to our cousin!" Lord Castlewood interjected. "A young man cannot spend his entire existence idling and taking holidays. He must blend something useful with his pleasures. He can visit the fiddles and pump-rooms of Tunbridge or Bath later. Mr. Warrington is destined to manage a vast estate in America; let him observe how our estates here in England are run. Will has already shown him the kennels and stables, and the fashionable games, which I believe, cousin, you play as well as your tutors. After the harvest, we will introduce him to English fowling and shooting; in winter, we will take him hunting. Although there has been a cooling of relations between us and our kinswoman in Virginia, we share the same blood. Before sending our cousin back to his mother, let us demonstrate what the life of an English gentleman entails at home. I have been urging him to stay and keep me company, partly for sport, but also to read with him."

Lord Castlewood spoke with such unfeigned frankness that his mother-in-law, half-brother, and sister were left bewildered, unable to decipher his true intent. These three often engaged in quiet conspiracies, plotting against the head of the household. When he adopted this open tone, his meaning remained opaque, often taking months to unravel. He did not simply state a fact; he commanded that his statement be accepted as truth within the family. Consequently, it became the prevailing notion that Lord Castlewood possessed a noble desire to cultivate domestic affections and to educate, amuse, and improve his young relative, having developed a genuine fondness for the lad and wishing for Harry to remain near him for some time.

"What is Castlewood's game now?" William whispered to his mother and sister as they slipped away into the corridors. "Wait! By George, I have it!"

"What, William?"

"He intends to get him involved in gambling and win the Virginia estate back from him. That is his plan!"

"But the lad has no Virginia estate to lose if he fails," his mother remarked.

"If my brother has no scheme in mind, may I be damned."

"Hush! Of course he has a scheme. But what is it?"

"He can't mean Maria—Maria is as old as Harry's mother," Mr. William mused.

"Pooh! With her aged face, sandy hair, and freckled skin! Impossible!" Lady Fanny cried, letting out a small sigh.

"Of course, your ladyship fancied the Iroquois, too!" his mother retorted.

"I trust I know my station and duty better, madam! If I had liked him, that is no reason to marry him. Your ladyship has taught me that much."

"My Lady Fanny!"

"I am sure you married our father without loving him. You have told me so a thousand times!"

"And if you did not love our father before marriage, you certainly did not fall in love with him afterwards," Mr. William laughed. "Fan and I remember how our honored parents used to fight. Don't we, Fan? And our brother Esmond kept the peace."

"Do not recall those dreadful, low scenes, William!" his mother cried. "When your father drank too much, he was like a madman; his conduct should be a warning to you, sir, who are fond of the same horrid practice."

"I am sure, madam, you were not much happier for marrying the man you did not like, and your ladyship's title has brought very little along with it," Lady Fanny whimpered. "What is the use of a coronet with the jointure of a tradesman's wife? How many of them are richer than we are? Recently, a grocer's widow from London Bridge moved into our square at Kensington. Her daughters have three gowns where I have one; and though they are served by only a man and two maids, I know they eat and drink a thousand times better than we do with our scraps of cold meat and our great, flaunting, impudent, lazy lackeys!"

"He! He! Glad I dine at the palace and not at home!" Mr. Will remarked. Through his aunt's influence with Count Puffendorff, Groom of the Royal Powder-Closet, he held one of the many minor court positions as Deputy Powder.

"Why should I not be happy without any title except my own?" Lady Frances continued. "Many people are. I dare say they are even happy in America."

"Yes—with a mother-in-law who is a perfect Turk and Tartar, for all I hear, with Indian war-whoops howling all around you, and with the constant danger of losing your scalp or being eaten by a wild beast every time you go to church."

"I wouldn't go to church," Lady Fanny declared.

"You'd go with anyone who asked you, Fan!" Mr. Will roared. "And so would old Maria, and so would any woman, that's the fact." He laughed at his own wit.

"Pray, good folks, what is all your merriment about?" Madame Bernstein asked, peering in from the tapestried door leading to the gallery where they conversed.

Will explained that his mother and sister had been fighting—a novelty only in appearance, as Madame Bernstein knew well—because Fanny desired to marry their cousin, the wild Indian, and my lady Countess would not allow it. Fanny immediately protested this fabrication. Since the day her mother forbade her to speak to the young gentleman, she had scarcely exchanged two words with him. She knew her station better. She did not wish to be scalped by wild Indians or eaten by bears.

Madame de Bernstein looked puzzled. "If he is not staying for you, for whom is he staying?" she asked. "At the houses to which he has been taken, you have ensured no woman is shown to him who is not either a fright or confined to the nursery; and I think the boy is too proud to fall in love with a dairymaid, Will."

"Humph! That is a matter of taste, ma'am," Mr. William shrugged.

"Of Mr. William Esmond's taste, as you say; but not of yonder boy's. The Esmonds of his grandfather's nurture would not go courting in the kitchen."

"Well, ma'am, every man to his taste, I say again. A fellow might go farther and fare worse than my brother's servants' hall, and besides Fan, there's only the maids or old Maria to choose from."

"Maria! Impossible!" Yet, as she spoke the words, a sudden thought crossed Madame Bernstein's mind. This elderly Calypso might have captivated her young Telemachus. She recalled half a dozen instances in her own experience of young men infatuated by older women. She remembered how frequent Harry Warrington's absences had become lately—absences she had attributed to his love for field sports. She recalled how often, when Harry was away, Maria Esmond was also absent. Walks in cool avenues, whispers in garden temples, behind clipped hedges, casual squeezes of the hand in twilight corridors, or sweet glances and ogles in meetings on the stairs—all these possibilities and chances suggested themselves to Madame de Bernstein just as she was dismissing them as impossible.

"Impossible, ma'am! I don't know," Will continued. "My mother warned Fan off him."

"Oh, your mother did warn Fanny off?"

"Certainly, my dear Baroness!"

"Didn't she? Didn't she pinch Fanny's arm black-and-blue? Didn't they fight about it?"

"Nonsense, William! For shame, William!" both implicated ladies cried in unison.

"And now, since we have heard how rich he is, perhaps it is sour grapes, that is all. And now, since he is warned off the young bird, perhaps he is hunting the old one, that's all. Impossible? Why impossible? You know old Lady Suffolk, ma'am?"

"William, how can you speak about Lady Suffolk to your aunt?"

A grin spread across the young gentleman's face. "Because Lady Suffolk was a special favorite at Court? Well, other folks have succeeded her."

"Sir!" Madame Bernstein cried, perhaps having reasons to take offense.

"So they have, I say; or who, pray, is my Lady Yarmouth now? And didn't old Lady Suffolk go and fall in love with George Berkeley, and marry him when she was ever so old? Nay, ma'am, if I remember right—and we hear a deal of town-talk at our table—Harry Estridge went mad about your ladyship when you were somewhat rising twenty; and would have changed your name a third time if you would but have let him."

This allusion to an adventure of her own later days, which was indeed notorious to all the world, did not anger Madame de Bernstein like Will's earlier hint about his aunt's favor at George II's Court. Instead, it put her in good humor.

"Au fait," she said, musing as she played a pretty little hand on the table, no doubt thinking about mad young Harry Estridge; "'tis not impossible, William, that old folks, and young folks, too, should play the fool."

"But I can't understand a young fellow being in love with Maria," Mr. William continued, "however he might be with you, ma'am. That's *oter shose*, as our French tutor used to say. You remember the Count, ma'am? He! He!--and so does Maria!"

"William!"

"And I dare say the Count remembers the bastinado Castlewood gave him. A confounded French dancing-master calling himself a count, and daring to fall in love in our family! Whenever I want to make myself uncommonly agreeable to old Maria, I just say a few words of *parly voo* to her. She knows what I mean."

"Have you abused her to your cousin, Harry Warrington?" Madame Bernstein asked.

"Well—I know she is always abusing me—and I have said my mind about her," Will admitted.

"Oh, you idiot!" the old lady cried. "Who but a gaby ever spoke ill of a woman to her sweetheart? He will tell her everything, and they both will hate you."

"The very thing, ma'am!" Will burst out laughing. "I had a sort of a suspicion, you see, and two days ago, as we were riding together, I told Harry Warrington a bit of my mind about Maria;—why shouldn't I, I say? She is always abusing me, ain't she, Fan? And your favorite turned as red as my plush waistcoat, wondering how a gentleman could malign his own flesh and blood, and, trembling all over with rage, said I was no true Esmond."

"Why didn't you chastise him, sir, as my lord did the dancing-master?" Lady Castlewood cried.

"Well, mother—you see that at quarter-staff there are two sticks used," Mr. William replied. "My opinion is, that Harry Warrington can guard his own head uncommonly well. Perhaps that is one of the reasons why I did not offer to treat my cousin to a caning. And now you say so, ma'am, I know he has told Maria. She has been looking battle, murder, and sudden death at me ever since. All which shows—" and here he turned to his aunt.

"All which shows what?"

"That I think we are on the right scent; and that we've found Maria—the old fox!" The ingenuous youth clapped his hand to his mouth and gave a loud halloo.

How far had this pretty intrigue gone? That was the question. Mr. Will said that at her age, Maria would conduct matters as rapidly as possible, having little time to lose. There was not much love lost between Will and his half-sister.

"Who would sift the matter to the bottom? Scolding one party or the other was of no avail. Threats only serve to aggravate people in such cases. I never was in danger but once, young people," Madame de Bernstein said, "and I think that was because my poor mother contradicted me. If this boy is like others of his family, the more we oppose him, the more *entêté* he will be; and we shall never get him out of his scrape."

"Faith, ma'am, suppose we leave him in it?" Will grumbled. "Old Maria and I don't love each other too much, I grant you; but an English earl's daughter is good enough for an American tobacco-planter, when all is said and done."

Here his mother and sister broke out in protest. They would not hear of such a union. To which Will answered, "You are like the dog in the manger. You don't want the man yourself, Fanny."

"I want him, indeed!" Lady Fanny cried, tossing her head.

"Then why grudge him to
