The next morning, when the household gathered for breakfast, the air was thick with a sudden, inexplicable warmth. Madame de Bernstein's face, usually a map of sharp grievances, was smooth and serene. Her manner toward the entire company, Harry included, was nothing short of radiant. She praised the cook effusively, declaring the fricassee superior to anything found in the Castlewood moats, and dismissed any suggestion that the wine was corked as an absurdity fit only for a useless old woman like herself. When the new vintage was poured, she raised her glass to toast Madam Esmond Warrington of Virginia, hoping earnestly that Harry had secured his mother's permission to bring an English bride home. Harry, caught off guard, forgot to recall his grandmother; instead, he found himself listening to the Baroness's tales of her own mother—a woman of such striking beauty and goodness, whose happiness with her second husband, despite the age gap, was celebrated throughout the countryside. To see them together was, she claimed, a delight that silenced all talk of marital disparity. My Lady Castlewood and her two children sat in respectful silence while Madame Bernstein prattled, but Harry felt his heart swell with enchantment, while Maria watched with a mixture of surprise and apprehension. Lord Castlewood, puzzled by his aunt's sudden transformation, maintained a mask of perfect satisfaction, hiding any trace of doubt.

The Baroness's good humor was infectious, sweeping across the table like a gentle tide. When Mr. Will, an artless youth, expressed his astonishment at her behavior, she turned to him with frank sincerity. "Complimentary, my dear!" she exclaimed. "Of course I am. I wish to make amends for my excessive rudeness this morning. When I was a child, living in this very house, I adopted exactly the same conduct. If I had been naughty in the morning, I would coax my parents at night. I remember doing so right here, at this very table—oh, centuries ago!—coaxing my father, my mother, and your grandfather, Harry Warrington. There were eels for supper then, just as there are tonight, and that dish of collared eels brought the memory rushing back. I was as wayward at seven as I am today at seventy, so I confess my sins and ask forgiveness, like a good girl."

"I absolve your ladyship!" cried the chaplain, joining the party.

"But your reverence knows not how cross and ill-tempered I truly was," she continued, her eyes glistening. "I scolded my sister, Castlewood; I scolded her children; I boxed Harry Warrington's ears—all because he refused to ride with me to Tunbridge Wells."

"But I will go, madam! I will ride with you with all the pleasure in life," Mr. Warrington promised eagerly.

"You see, Mr. Chaplain, what dutiful children they all are. It was I alone who was peevish. Oh, it was cruel of me to treat them so! Maria, I ask your pardon, my dear."

"Sure, madam, you have done me no wrong," Maria replied humbly.

"Indeed I have, a very great wrong, child! Because I was weary of myself, I told you your company would be wearisome. You offered to come to Tunbridge, and I rudely refused you."

"Nay, ma'am, if you were sick and my presence annoyed you..."

"But it will not annoy me! You were most kind to say you would come. I beg, pray, entreat, implore, command that you will come."

Lord Castlewood filled his glass and sipped it, his expression utterly unconscious of the comedy unfolding. This, then, was the meaning of the previous farce.

"Anything which can give my aunt pleasure will surely delight me," Maria said, striving to appear as happy as possible.

"You must come and stay with me, my dear, and I promise to be good and good-humoured. My dear lord, you will spare your sister to me?"

"Lady Maria Esmond is of age to judge for herself," Lord Castlewood replied with a bow, though the sentence, interpreted charitably, likely meant, "Plague take the old woman! She is taking Maria away to separate her from this young Virginian."

"Oh, Tunbridge will be delightful!" sighed Lady Maria.

"Mr. Sampson will go and see Goody Jones for you," the lord continued.

Harry traced patterns on the tablecloth with his finger, lost in a whirlwind of speculation. What delights awaited him? What walks, rides, interminable conversations, delicious shrubberies, and sequestered summer-houses? What poring over music-books, moonlight, and billing and cooing? Yes, the day was coming. They were all departing—My Lady Castlewood to her friends, Madame Bernstein to the waters—and he was to be left alone with his divine charmer. Alone with her and unutterable rapture! The thought was maddening. These people were leaving, and he was to enjoy that heaven, to sit at the feet of that angel and kiss the hem of her white robe. O Gods! 'Twas too great bliss to be real! "I knew it couldn't be," thought poor Harry. "I knew something would happen to take her from me."

"But you will ride with us to Tunbridge, nephew Warrington, and keep us from the highwaymen?" Madame Bernstein asked.

Harry Warrington hoped the company did not see how red his cheeks had grown. He forced his voice to remain calm and steady. Yes, he would ride with their ladyships, and he was certain they need fear no danger. Danger! Harry felt he would rather embrace danger than deny it. He would slay ten thousand highwaymen if they approached his mistress's coach. At least, he would ride alongside that coach, catching glimpses of her eyes at the window. He might not speak to her, but he should be near her. He should press the blessed hand at the inn at night and feel it reposing on his as he led her to the carriage at dawn. They would spend two whole days traveling to Tunbridge, and perhaps he could stay there a day or two. Was not the condemned man at Newgate thankful for even two or three days of respite?

We have only indicated, not described at length, the condition of Mr. Harry Warrington, or that utter depth of imbecility into which the poor young wretch had now plunged. Some boys suffer from love favorably and gently; others, when struck by the fever, are sick unto death, carrying the marks of the malady to their graves or to remotest old age. I say, it is not fair to record a young fellow's words when he is raging in that delirium. Suppose he is in love with a woman twice his age; have we not all read of the young gentleman who committed suicide in consequence of his fatal passion for Mademoiselle Ninon de l'Enclos, who turned out to be his grandmother? Suppose thou art making an ass of thyself, young Harry Warrington of Virginia! Are there not people in England who heehaw too? Kick and abuse him, you who have never brayed; but bear with him, all honest fellow-cardophagi, long-eared messmates, recognize a brother-donkey!

"You will stay with us for a day or two at the Wells," Madame Bernstein continued. "You will see us put into our lodgings. Then you can return to Castlewood and the partridge-shooting, and all the fine things which you and my lord are to study together."

Harry bowed an acquiescence. A whole week of heaven! Life was not altogether a blank, then.

"And as there is sure to be plenty of company at the Wells, I shall be able to present you," the lady graciously added.

"Company! ah! I shan't need company," sighed out Harry. "I mean that I shall be quite contented in the company of you two ladies," he added eagerly; and no doubt Mr. Will wondered at his cousin's peculiar taste.

Since this was to be the last night of cousin Harry's visit to Castlewood, cousin Will suggested that he, the chaplain, and Warrington meet at the latter's quarters to settle accounts. To this proposal, Harry, being a considerable winner in his recent play transactions with the two gentlemen, had no objection. Accordingly, when the ladies retired for the night and Lord Castlewood withdrew, as was his custom, to his own apartments, the three gentlemen found themselves assembled in Mr. Harry's small room before the punch-bowl, Will's usual midnight companion.

But Will's method of settling accounts involved producing a couple of fresh packs of cards and offering to submit Harry's debt to the process of being doubled or acquitted. The poor chaplain possessed no more ready cash than Lord Castlewood's younger brother. Harry Warrington did not wish to win the money of either. Would he give pain to the brother of his adored Maria, or allow any of her near kinsfolk to tax him with a lack of generosity or forbearance? He was ready to give them their revenge, as the gentlemen proposed. Until midnight, he would play with them for whatever stakes they chose to name. So they set to work, the dice-box rattled, and the cards were shuffled and dealt.

Very likely, he did not think about the cards at all. Very likely, he was thinking: "At this moment, my beloved one is sitting with her beauteous golden locks outspread under the fingers of her maid. Happy maid! Now she is on her knees, the sainted creature, addressing prayers to that Heaven which is the abode of angels like her. Now she has sunk to rest behind her damask curtains. Oh, bless, bless her!" "You double us all round? I will take a card upon each of my two. Thank you, that will do—a ten—now, upon the other, a queen—two natural vingt-et-uns, and as you doubled us, you owe me so-and-so."

I imagine volleys of oaths from Mr. William and brisk pattering of imprecations from the chaplain at the young Virginian's luck. He won because he did not want to win. Fortune, that notoriously coquettish jade, came to him because he was thinking of another nymph, who possibly was as fickle. Will and the chaplain may have played against him, constantly soliciting increased stakes and supposing that the wealthy Virginian wished to let them recover their losses. But this was by no means Harry Warrington's notion. When at home, he had taken part in scores of such games, keeping many little circumstances of his life mum from his lady mother, and had learned to play and pay. As he practiced fair play toward his friends, he expected it in return.

"The luck does seem to be with me, cousin," he said, replying to further oaths and growls from Will, "and I am sure I do not want to press it; but you don't suppose I'm going to be such a fool as to fling it away altogether? I have quite a heap of your promises on paper by this time. If we are to go on playing, let us have the dollars on the table, please; or, if not the money, the worth of it."

"Always the way with you rich men," grumbled Will. "Never lend except on security—always win because you are rich."

"Faith, cousin, you have been of late forever flinging my riches into my face. I have enough for my wants and for my creditors."

"Oh, that we could all say as much!" groaned the chaplain. "How happy we, and how happy the duns would be! What have we got to play against our conqueror? There is my new gown, Mr. Warrington. Will you set me five pieces against it? I have but to preach in stuff if I lose. Stop! I have a Chrysostom, a Foxe's Martyrs, a Baker's Chronicle, and a cow and her calf. What shall we set against these?"

"I will bet one of cousin Will's notes for twenty pounds," cried Mr. Warrington, producing one of those documents.

"Or I have my brown mare, and will back her red against your honour's notes of hand, but against ready money."

"I have my horse. I will back my horse against you for fifty," bawled out Will.

Harry accepted the offers of both gentlemen. Within ten minutes, the horse and the bay mare had both changed owners. Cousin William swore more fiercely than ever. The parson dashed his wig to the ground, emulating his pupil in the loudness of his objurgations. Mr. Harry Warrington remained quite calm, not the least elated by his triumph. They had asked him to play, and he had played. He knew he should win. O beloved slumbering angel! he thought, am I not sure of victory when you are kind to me? He looked out from his window toward the casement on the opposite side of the court, which he knew to be hers. He had forgotten about his victims and their groans, and ill-luck, as they crossed the court. Under yonder brilliant flickering star, behind yonder casement where the lamp burned faintly, was his joy, his heart, and his treasure.
