Let no tender-hearted reader tremble for Mr. Harry Warrington's safety, nor imagine that his tumble from a broken-kneed steed has spirited him away entirely from this tale. We assure you, at the outset, that no tragedy of consequence has befallen him. How could we possibly dispatch our heroes while they are still mere adolescents, before the story has even matured into manhood? We are already mourning one Virginian lost to the perils of America; surely we need not extinguish the other in England? Heroes do not meet such abrupt ends without compelling cause. Were a gentleman to perish every time his horse stumbled, the hero would indeed be lost, but so too would the chronicler of this chronicle, who currently sprawls safely outside the grave, ready to rise again once Harry is carried into the house where Madame de Bernstein's servants have rung the bell.

To prove that this youngest of the Virginians still breathes, consider this authentic correspondence from the lady who took him in after his fall, a woman in whom he found a kindred spirit:

"At her House at Richmond, in Virginia

"If Mrs. Esmond Warrington of Virginia can recall twenty-three years past, when Miss Rachel Esmond attended Kensington Boarding School, she may perhaps remember Miss Molly Benson, her classmate. Miss Molly has long since forgotten the petty squabbles they once shared—squabbles in which Miss Molly was frequently at fault—and retains only the memory of the generous, high-spirited, and vivacious Miss Esmond, the Princess Pocahontas, to whom so many of our schoolfellows paid court.

'Dear madam! I cannot forget that you were dear Rachel once, as I was your dearest Molly. Though we parted not on the most amicable terms when you returned to Virginia, you know how fond we once were. I still possess the gold etui your father gifted me during his visit to our speech-day at Kensington, when we two enacted the quarrel of Brutus and Cassius from Shakespeare. It was only yesterday morning I dreamed we were summoned to recite our lessons before the formidable Miss Hardwood, unaware of the summons, and as usual, Miss Rachel Esmond rose above me. How vividly those days remain! How youthful we appear in memory! I recall our walks and exercises, our beloved King and Queen strolling through Kensington Gardens with their court trailing behind, while the pupils of Miss Hardwood's school curtseyed in a row. I can still recount our dinners for each day of the week and point to the spot where your garden stood, always more meticulously tended than mine. Miss Esmond's chest of drawers was a model of neatness, whereas mine were in a state of disarray. Do you remember our storytelling in the dormitory, interrupted by Madame Hibou, the French governess, rising from bed with her characteristic hoot? Have you forgotten the poor dancing-master who claimed to have been ambushed by assassins, only to be beaten, it seems, by your brother's footmen? My dear, your cousin, Lady Maria Esmond (whose father was, I believe, Viscount Castlewood at the time), recently visited this house. I spared her mention of those sorrowful times, about which I am now chatting to Mrs. Esmond.

'Her ladyship has been staying here, along with another relative of yours, the Baroness of Bernstein. Both ladies have departed for Tunbridge Wells; yet another and dearer relative remains in my house, sound asleep, I trust, in the very next room. His name is Mr. Henry Esmond Warrington. Now, do you understand how you receive this news? Do not be alarmed, dear madam! I know you are thinking, "My boy is ill; that is why Miss Molly Benson writes." No, my dear; Mr. Warrington was ill yesterday, but today he is quite comfortable. Our physician, no less a person than my dear husband, Colonel Lambert, has bled him, set his dislocated shoulder, and declares that in two days Mr. Warrington will be fit to travel.

'I fear my household and I shall be saddened that he recovers so swiftly. Yesterday evening, a great ringing at our gate disturbed us all, for the bell rarely sounds in this quiet place unless a passing beggar pulls it for charity. The servants rushed out and returned with news that a young gentleman, having fallen from his horse, lay lifeless on the road, surrounded by his traveling companions. At this, my Colonel—who is surely the most Samaritan of men!—hurried forth to assist the fallen traveler. Presently, aided by the servants and followed by two ladies, he brought into the house such a pale, seemingly lifeless, yet beautiful young man! Ah, my dear, how I rejoice to think your child has found shelter and succour under my roof! That my husband has spared him from pain and fever, and restored him to you and health! We shall be friends again, shall we not? I was gravely ill last year, and it was even thought I should die. Do you know, I often thought of you then, and how we had parted in anger so many years ago? I began a foolish note to you, which sickness prevented me from finishing, to tell you that if I were to depart this life, I wished to leave the world in charity with every soul I had ever known.

'Your cousin, the Right Honourable Lady Maria Esmond, displayed great maternal tenderness and concern for her young kinsman after his accident. I am sure she possesses a kind heart. The Baroness de Bernstein, being of advanced age, could not be expected to feel as keenly as we young people; nevertheless, she was deeply moved until Mr. Warrington regained consciousness, whereupon she expressed anxiety to proceed to Tunbridge, fearing to linger where no doctor was available. My Aesculapius laughed, stating he would not attend a lady of quality, though he would certainly care for his young patient. Indeed, the Colonel, during his campaigns, has ample experience with such accidents, and I am certain that were we to summon every practitioner within twenty miles, Mr. Warrington could receive no better treatment. Leaving the young gentleman to my care and my daughters, the Baroness and her ladyship took their leave, the latter reluctant to depart. When he is well enough, my Colonel will ride with him as far as Westerham, on his own horses, to an old army-comrade of Mr. Lambert's residence. Since this letter will not reach Falmouth until, by God's blessing, your son is well and fully restored, you need harbor no alarm for him while he rests under the roof of, madam, your affectionate and humble servant, MARY LAMBERT.

'P.S. Thursday.

'I am glad to hear (Mr. Warrington's colored gentleman informed our staff of this gratifying development) that Providence has blessed Mrs. Esmond with such vast wealth and an heir likely to honor it. Our current means are sufficient, but will be diminished when divided among our survivors. Ah, dear madam! I have heard of your calamity last year. Though the Colonel and I have raised many children (five), we have lost two, and a mother's heart feels for yours! I confess, mine yearned toward your boy today when, in a manner inexpressibly affecting to me and Mr. Lambert, he mentioned his dear brother. 'Tis impossible to see your son and not to love and regard him. I am thankful it has been our lot to succor him in his trouble, and that in receiving a stranger within our gates, we offered hospitality to the son of an old friend.'"

Nature has inscribed a letter of credit upon the faces of certain men, honored almost wherever presented. Harry Warrington's countenance bore such a stamp in his youth. His eyes were bright, his cheek red and healthy, his gaze so frank and open that almost everyone who beheld him, nay, even those who sought to deceive him, chose to trust him. Nevertheless, as hinted, the lad was by no means the artless stripling he appeared. He was knowing enough with all his blushing cheeks; perhaps more wily and wary than he would become in later years. Surely, a shrewd and generous man, who has lived honestly and bears no secret blushes for his conscience, grows simpler with age; arrives at the sum of right through more rapid calculations; learns to discard false arguments more readily, and strikes the mark of truth with less prior trouble and mental disturbance. Or is it merely a senile delusion that our vanities are cured with growing years, and that we become more just in our perceptions of our own and our neighbor's shortcomings? ... I would humbly suggest that young people, though prettier, with larger eyes and fewer wrinkles around their eyelids, are often as artful as some of their elders. What little monsters of cunning your frank schoolboys are! How they cheat mamma! How they hoodwink papa! How they humbug the housekeeper! How they cringe to the big boy for whom they toil at school! What a long lie and five years of hypocrisy and flattery constitute their conduct toward Dr. Birch! And the little boys' sisters? Are they any better, and is it only after they enter the world that the little darlings learn a trick or two?

You may see, by the letter above from Mrs. Lambert, that she, like all good women (and indeed, almost all bad women), was a sentimental person. As she gazed at Harry Warrington lying in her best bed, after the Colonel had bled him and secured his shoulder, holding her husband's hand as she beheld the lad in a sweet slumber, murmuring faint, inarticulate words, a faint blush quivering on his cheek, she owned he was a pretty lad indeed. She confessed with a sort of compunction that neither of her two boys—Jack, at Oxford, and Charles, who had just returned to school after the Bartlemytide holidays—was half so handsome as the Virginian. What a good figure the boy had! And when papa bled him, his arm was as white as any lady's!

"Yes, as you say, Jack might have been as handsome but for the small-pox: and as for Charley----" "Always took after his papa, my dear Molly," said the Colonel, gazing at his own honest face in a small looking-glass with a cut border and a japanned frame, by which the chief guests of the worthy gentleman and lady had surveyed their patches and powder, or shaved their hospitable beards.

"Did I say so, my love?" whispered Mrs. Lambert, looking rather startled.

"No; but you thought so, Mrs. Lambert."

"How can you tell one's thoughts so, Martin?" asked the lady.

"Because I am a conjurer, and because you tell them yourself, my dear," answered her husband. "Don't be frightened: he won't wake after that draught I gave him. Because you never see a young fellow but you compare him with your own. Because you never hear of one but you think which of our girls he shall fall in love with and marry."

"Don't be foolish, sir," said the lady, placing a hand upon the Colonel's lips. They had softly trodden out of their guest's bedchamber by this time, entering the adjoining dressing-closet, a snug little wainscoted room overlooking gardens, adorned with India curtains, numerous Japan chests and cabinets, a treasure of china, and a most refreshing odor of fresh lavender.

"You can't deny it, Mrs. Lambert," the Colonel resumed. "As you were looking at the young gentleman just now, you were thinking to yourself which of my girls will he marry? Shall it be Theo, or shall it be Hester? And then you thought of Lucy who was at boarding-school."

"There is no keeping anything from you, Martin Lambert," sighed the wife.

"There is no keeping it out of your eyes, my dear. What is this burning desire all you women have for selling and marrying your daughters? We men don't wish to part with 'em. I am sure, for my part, I should not like yonder young fellow half as well if I thought he intended to carry one of my darlings away with him."

"Sure, Martin, I have been so happy myself," said the fond wife and mother, looking at her husband with her very best eyes, "that I must wish my girls to do as I have done, and be happy, too!"

"Then you think good husbands are common, Mrs. Lambert, and that you may walk any day into the road before the house and find one shot out at the gate like a sack of coals?"

"Wasn't it providential, sir, that this young gentleman should be thrown over his horse's head at our very gate, and that he should turn out to be the son of my old schoolfellow and friend?" asked the wife. "There is something more than accident in such cases, depend upon that, Mr. Lambert!"

"And this was the stranger you saw in the candle three nights running, I suppose?"

"And in the fire, too, sir; twice a coal jumped out close by Theo. You may sneer, sir, but these things are not to be despised. Did I not see you distinctly coming back from Minorca, and dream of you at the very day and hour when you were wounded in Scotland?"

"How many times have you seen me wounded, when I had not a scratch, my dear? How many times have you seen me ill when I had no sort of hurt? You are always prophesying, and 'twere very hard on you if you were not sometimes right. Come! Let us leave our guest asleep comfortably, and go down and give the girls their French lesson."

So saying, the honest gentleman put his wife's arm under his, and they descended together the broad oak staircase of the comfortable old hall, round which hung the effigies of many foregone Lamberts, worthy magistrates, soldiers, country gentlemen, as was the Colonel whose acquaintance we have just made. The Colonel was a gentleman of pleasant, waggish humour. The French lesson which he and his daughters recited together was a scene from Monsieur Moliere's comedy of "Tartuffe," and papa was pleased to be very facetious with Miss Theo, addressing her as Madam and treating her with great mock respect and ceremony. The
