The harmonious sounds of the night had lulled the young patient into a sweet, unconscious slumber. When he awoke, the morning sun streamed warmly through the window, illuminating the bed-curtains where his kind host and hostess smiled upon him. Hunger gnawed at him, but his doctor, seeing him fit, immediately permitted him to partake of a hearty mess of chicken, which the doctor's wife proudly attributed to the hands of one of her daughters.

A fleeting image rose in Harry Warrington's mind—a vision of two young persons with flushed cheeks and dark, waving hair, smiling around his couch before vanishing as he regained full consciousness. This was followed by a sharp pang of memory regarding a different woman: lovely, yet considerably older, and with... horrors and remorse surged through him as a specific recollection crossed his mind. An immense gulf of time yawned between him and that past. How long had it been since he learned those pearls were artificial and those golden locks merely pinchbeck? It was a long time ago, when he was an innocent boy. Now he was a man, and felt quite an old one. He had been bled copiously, suffered a fever, gone without food for hours, and endured a sleeping draught that had dragged him into a deep, restorative slumber.

"What is it, my dear child?" cried kind Mrs. Lambert as he started.

"Nothing, madam; a twinge in my shoulder," said the lad. "I speak to my host and hostess? You have been very kind to me."

"We are old friends, Mr. Warrington," replied Mrs. Lambert. "My husband, Colonel Lambert, knew your father, and I and your mother were schoolgirls together at Kensington. You were no stranger to us when your aunt and cousin told us who you were."

"Are they here?" asked Harry, looking somewhat blank.

"They must have lain at Tunbridge Wells last night. They sent a horseman from Reigate yesterday for news of you."

"Ah! I remember," Harry said, glancing at his bandaged arm.

"I have made a good cure of you, Mr. Warrington. Now Mrs. Lambert and the cook must take charge of you."

"Nay; Theo prepared the chicken and rice, Mr. Lambert," the lady corrected gently. "Will Mr. Warrington rise after breakfast? We will send your valet."

"If howling proves fidelity, your man must be a most fond creature," Mr. Lambert observed with a chuckle.

"He let your baggage travel off after all in your aunt's carriage," Mrs. Lambert added. "You must wear my husband's linen, which, I dare say, is not so fine as yours."

"Pish, my dear! my shirts are good enough for any Christian," cried the Colonel.

"They are Theo's and Hester's work," said the mother, arching her eyebrows at her husband. "And Theo has ripped and sewed your sleeve to make it comfortable for your shoulder," she added.

"What beautiful roses!" exclaimed Harry, admiring a fine china vase full of them on the toilet-table beneath a Japan-framed glass.

"My daughter Theo cut them this morning. Well, Mr. Lambert? She did cut them!"

The Colonel likely thought his wife had introduced Theo too prominently into the conversation, nudging her into a sense of propriety with a subtle gesture.

"And I fancied I heard someone singing the Evening Hymn very sweetly last night—or was it only a dream?" asked the young patient.

"Theo again, Mr. Warrington!" laughed the Colonel. "My servants said your negro man began to sing it in the kitchen as if he were a church organ."

"Our people sing it at home, sir. My grandpapa loved it very much. His wife's father was a great friend of good Bishop Ken, who wrote it; and—and my dear brother used to love it too," said the boy, his voice dropping.

It was then that Mrs. Lambert felt inclined to give the boy a kiss. His accident, illness, and recovery, along with the kindness of those around him, had softened Harry Warrington's heart, opening it to better influences than those that had plagued him for the past six weeks. He breathed a purer air than the tainted atmosphere of selfishness, worldliness, and corruption into which he had been plunged since arriving in England. Often, fate or weakness leads a young man into the fellowship of the giddy and vain; happy is he whose lot introduces him to wiser company, whose lamps are trimmed, and whose pure hearts keep modest watch.

The pleased matron left her young patient devouring Miss Theo's meal of rice and chicken, while the Colonel sat by the bedside. Gratitude for his hospitable entertainers and contentment after a comfortable meal placed Mr. Warrington in a pleasant state of mind and body. He was ready to talk more freely than usual; for unless excited by strong interest or emotion, the young man was commonly taciturn and cautious, lacking an imaginative turn. He had been a remiss student of books, and his remarks on literature were neither profound nor valuable; yet regarding dogs, horses, and the ordinary business of life, he was a far better critic, conversing freely with anyone interested in such subjects.

Harry's host, possessing considerable shrewdness and experience with books, cattle, and men, quickly took the measure of his young guest during their conversation. It was the first time the Virginian learned that Mrs. Lambert had been an early friend of his mother, and that the Colonel's own father had served with Harry's grandfather, Colonel Esmond, in the famous wars of Queen Anne. He found himself in a friend's country, soon at ease with his honest host, whose manners were simple and cordial, and who appeared perfectly a gentleman despite wearing a plain fustian coat and a waistcoat devoid of lace.

"My boys are both away," said the host, "or they would have shown you the country when you rose, Mr. Warrington. Now you can only have the company of my wife and her daughters. Mrs. Lambert has already told you about one of them, Theo, our eldest, who made your broth, cut your roses, and mended your coat. She is not such a wonder as her mother imagines; but little Theo is a smart little housekeeper and a very good, cheerful lass, though her father says so."

"It is very kind of Miss Lambert to take so much care for me," said the young patient.

"She is no kinder to you than to any other mortal, and does but her duty." The Colonel smiled. "I laugh at their mother for praising our children, and I think I am as foolish about them myself. The truth is, God has given us very good and dutiful children, and I see no reason to disguise my thankfulness for such a blessing. You have never a sister, I think?"

"No, sir, I am alone now," Mr. Warrington replied.

"Ay, truly, I ask your pardon for my thoughtlessness. Your man has told our people what befell last year. I served with Braddock in Scotland; and hope he mended before he died. A wild fellow, sir, but there was a fund of truth about the man, and no little kindness under his rough swaggering manner. Your black fellow talks very freely about his master and his affairs. I suppose you permit him these freedoms as he rescued you—"

"Rescued me?" cried Mr. Warrington.

"From ever so many Indians on that very expedition. My Molly and I did not know we were going to entertain so prodigiously wealthy a gentleman. He says that half Virginia belongs to you; but if the whole of North America were yours, we could but give you our best."

"Those negro boys, sir, lie like the father of all lies. They think it is for our honor to represent us as ten times as rich as we are. My mother has what would be a vast estate in England, and is a very good one at home. We are as well off as most of our neighbors, sir, but no better; and all our splendor is in Mr. Gumbo's foolish imagination. He never rescued me from an Indian in his life, and would run away at the sight of one, as my poor brother's boy did on that fatal day when he fell."

"The bravest man will do so at unlucky times," said the Colonel. "I myself saw the best troops in the world run at Preston, before a ragged mob of Highland savages."

"That was because the Highlanders fought for a good cause, sir."

"Do you think," asked Harry's host, "that the French Indians had the good cause in the fight of last year?"

"The scoundrels! I would have the scalp of every murderous redskin among them!" cried Harry, clenching his fist. "They were robbing and invading British territories, too. But the Highlanders were fighting for their king."

"We, on our side, were fighting for our king; and we ended by winning the battle," said the Colonel, laughing.

"Ah!" cried Harry; "if his Royal Highness the Prince had not turned back at Derby, your king and mine, now, would be his Majesty King James the Third!"

"Who made such a Tory of you, Mr. Warrington?" asked Lambert.

"Nay, sir, the Esmonds were always loyal!" answered the youth. "Had we lived at home, and twenty years sooner, brother and I often agreed that our heads would have been in danger. We certainly would have staked them for the king's cause."

"Yours is better on your shoulders than on a pole at Temple Bar. I have seen them there, and they don't look very pleasant, Mr. Warrington."

"I shall take off my hat, and salute them, whenever I pass the gate," cried the young man, "if the king and the whole court are standing by!"

"I doubt whether your relative, my Lord Castlewood, is as staunch a supporter of the king over the water," said Colonel Lambert, smiling. "Or your aunt, the Baroness of Bernstein, who left you in our charge. Whatever her old partialities may have been, she has repented of them; she has rallied to our side, landed her nephews in the Household, and looks to find a suitable match for her nieces. If you have Tory opinions, Mr. Warrington, take an old soldier's advice, and keep them to yourself."

"Why, sir, I do not think that you will betray me!" said the boy.

"Not I, but others might. You did not talk in this way at Castlewood? I mean the old Castlewood which you have just come from."

"I might be safe amongst my own kinsmen, surely, sir!" cried Harry.

"Doubtless. I would not say no. But a man's own kinsmen can play him slippery tricks at times, and he finds himself none the better for trusting them. I mean no offense to you or any of your family; but lacqueys have ears as well as their masters, and they carry about all sorts of stories. For instance, your black fellow is ready to tell all he knows about you, and a great deal more besides, as it would appear."

"Hath he told about the broken-kneed horse?" cried out Harry, turning very red.

"To say truth, my groom seemed to know something of the story, and said it was a shame a gentleman should sell another such a brute; let alone a cousin. I am not here to play the Mentor to you, or to carry about servants' tittle-tattle. When you have seen more of your cousins, you will form your own opinion of them; meanwhile, take an old soldier's advice, I say again, and be cautious with whom you deal, and what you say."

Very soon after this colloquy, Mr. Lambert's guest rose, with the assistance of Gumbo, his valet, to whom he, for the hundredth time at least, promised a sound caning if ever he should hear that Gumbo had ventured to talk about his affairs again in the servants'-hall—a prohibition Gumbo solemnly vowed and declared he would forever obey; but I dare say he was chattering the whole of the Castlewood secrets to his new friends in Colonel Lambert's kitchen, for Harry's hostess certainly heard a number of stories concerning him which she could not prevent her housekeeper from repeating. Though I would not accuse that worthy lady, or any of her sex or ours, of undue curiosity regarding their neighbors' affairs, how can you prevent servants talking, or listening when the faithful, attached creatures talk to you?

Mr. Lambert's house stood on the outskirts of the little town of Oakhurst, which, if the patient reader travels in the right direction, will be found on the road between Farnham and Reigate—where Madame Bernstein's servants naturally pulled at the first bell at hand when the young Virginian met with his mishap. A few hundred yards farther lay the long street of the little old town, where hospitality might have been found under the great swinging ensigns of a couple of tuns, and medical relief was to be had, as a blazing gilt pestle and mortar indicated. But what surgeon could have ministered more cleverly to a patient than Harry's host, who tended him without a fee, or what Boniface could make him more comfortably welcome?

Two tall gates, each surmounted by a couple of heraldic monsters, led from the highroad up to a neat, broad stone terrace whereon stood Oakhurst House: a square brick building with windows faced with stone, many high chimneys, and a tall roof surmounted by a fair balustrade. Behind the house stretched a large garden, where there was plenty of room for cabbages as well as roses to grow; and before the mansion, separated from it by the highroad, was a field of many acres where the Colonel's cows and horses were at grass. Over the center window was a carved shield supported by the same monsters who pranced or ramped upon the entrance-gates, with a coronet above. The fact is, that the house had originally been the jointure-house of Oakhurst Castle, which stood hard by—its chimneys and turrets appearing over the surrounding woods, now bronzed with the darkest foliage of summer. Mr. Lambert's was the greatest house in Oakhurst town; but the
