Cousin Maria made her entrance, flanked by two gardener's boys carrying baskets brimming with blooms intended to transform Madame de Bernstein's drawing-room for the arrival of her guests. Three footmen, their livery gorgeously laced with worsted, arranged double the number of card tables. A major-domo, dressed in black with fine ruffled cuffs and a bag slung over his shoulder—looking as though a sword belonged by his side—followed the lacqueys bearing fasces of wax candles. He placed a pair upon each table and set others in the silver sconces mounted on the wainscoting. Sunlight streamed through the windows, gilding the walls and illuminating the view of the green common beyond, where rocks, tree clumps, and distant houses twinkled in the afternoon light. Groups of figures in hoops, powder, and brocade sauntered across the lawn, casting dappled shadows upon the plain. Across the way lay the Pantiles, a perpetual fair where the clatter and buzz of society never ceased. A band played for the benefit of the visitors to the Wells. Madame Bernstein's chief sitting-room might not suit a recluse or a scholar, but for those who preferred bustle, gaiety, bright cross-light, and a panoramic view of the cheery, busy place, no lodging could be more pleasant. As the windows were lit, passersby below knew her ladyship was at home holding a card assembly, accessible to any with an introduction.

Reflecting on the past, one realizes that the night-life of society a century prior was far darker than today. There was not one wax candle for ten that we now see in a lady's drawing-room, let alone gas or the wondrous new illuminations of clubs. Horrible, guttering tallow smoked and stank in the passages. The candle-snuffer was a notorious officer in the theatre. Consider Hogarth's pictures: how dark they are, how his feasts seem begrimed with tallow! In "Marriage à la Mode," in Lord Viscount Squanderfield's grand saloons, where he and his wife sit yawning before the horror-stricken steward after their party, there are but eight candles—one on each card-table, half a dozen in a brass chandelier. If Jack Briefless had convoked his friends to oysters and beer in his chambers at Pump Court, he would have had twice as many. Let us comfort ourselves by thinking that Louis Quatorze, in all his glory, held his revels in the dark, and bless Mr. Price and other Luciferous benefactors of mankind for banishing the abominable gloom of our youth.

Maria, the fairest flower herself, popped her roses, sweet-williams, and other blossoms into vases here and there, adorning the apartment to the best of her art. She lingered fondly over this bowl and that dragon jar, casting only sly, timid glances at young cousin Harry. His own blush would have become any young woman, and one might have thought she intended to outstay her aunt. But the Baroness, seated in her armchair with her crooked tortoiseshell stick in hand, pointed the servants imperiously to their duties. She rated them soundly: Tom for a darn in his stocking, John for having greased his locks too profusely from the candle-box, and so forth, maintaining a stern domination over them. Another remark concerning poor James of a hundred years ago: James slept two to a bed, four to a room, and that room was likely a cellar; he washed in a trough such as one would hardly see anywhere in London now outside the barracks of Her Majesty's Foot Guards.

If Maria hoped for a present interview, her fond heart was disappointed. "Where are you going to dine, Harry?" asked Madame de Bernstein. "My niece Maria and I shall have a chicken in the little parlour—I think you should go to the best ordinary. There is one at the White Horse at three; we shall hear his bell in a minute or two. And you will understand, sir, that you ought not to spare expense, but behave like Princess Pocahontas's son. Your trunks have been taken over to the lodging I have engaged for you. It is not good for a lad to be always hanging about the aprons of two old women. Is it, Maria?"

"No," said her ladyship, dropping her meek eyes, whilst the other lady glared in triumph. I think Andromeda had been exposed to the Dragon considerably during the last five or six days; and if Perseus had cut the latter's cruel head off, he would have committed not unjustifiable monstricide. But he did not bare sword or shield; he only looked mechanically at the lacqueys in tawny and blue as they creaked about the room.

"And there are good mercers and tailors from London always here to wait on the company at the Wells. You had better see them, my dear, for your suit is not of the very last fashion—a little lace—"

"I can't go out of mourning, ma'am," said the young man, looking down at his sables.

"Ho, sir!" cried the lady, rustling up from her chair and rising on her cane. "Wear black for your brother till you are as old as Methuselah, if you like. I am sure I don't want to prevent you. I only want you to dress, and to do like other people, and make a figure worthy of your name."

"Madam," said Mr. Warrington with great state, "I have not done anything to disgrace it that I know."

Why did the old woman stop and give a little start as if she had been struck? Let bygones be bygones. She and the boy had a score of little passages of this kind in which swords were crossed and thrusts rapidly dealt or parried. She liked Harry none the worse for his courage in facing her. "Sure a little finer linen than that shirt you wear will not be a disgrace to you, sir," she said, with rather a forced laugh.

Harry bowed and blushed. It was one of the homely gifts of his Oakhurst friends. He felt pleased somehow to think he wore it; thought of the new friends, so good, so pure, so simple, so kindly, with immense tenderness, and felt, while invested in this garment, as if evil could not touch him. He said he would go to his lodging and make a point of returning arrayed in the best linen he had.

"Come back here, sir," said Madame Bernstein, "and if our company has not arrived, Maria and I will find some ruffles for you!" And under a footman's guidance, the young fellow walked off to his new lodgings.

Harry found not only handsome and spacious apartments provided for him, but a groom in attendance waiting to be engaged by his honour, and a second valet, if he was inclined to hire one to wait upon Mr. Gumbo. Ere he had been many minutes in his rooms, emissaries from a London tailor and bootmaker waited him with the cards and compliments of their employers, Messrs. Regnier and Tull; the best articles in his modest wardrobe were laid out by Gumbo, and the finest linen with which his thrifty Virginian mother had provided him. Visions of the snow-surrounded home in his own country, of the crackling logs and the trim quiet ladies working by the fire, rose up before him. For the first time, a little thought crossed the young man's mind that the homely clothes were not quite smart enough, the home-worked linen not so fine as it might be. That he should be ashamed of anything belonging to him or to Castlewood! That was strange. The simple folks there were only too well satisfied with all things that were done, or said, or produced at Castlewood; and Madam Esmond, when she sent her son forth on his travels, thought no young nobleman need be better provided. The clothes might have fitted better and been of a later fashion, to be sure—but still the young fellow presented a comely figure enough when he issued from his apartments, his toilet over; and Gumbo calling a chair, marched beside it, until they reached the ordinary where the young gentleman was to dine.

Here he expected to find the beau whose acquaintance he had made a few hours before at his aunt's lodging, and who had indicated to Harry that the White Horse was the most modish place for dining at the Wells. He mentioned his friend's name to the host: but the landlord and waiters, leading him into the room with many smiles and bows, assured his honour that his honour did not need any other introduction than his own. They helped him hang up his coat and sword on a peg, asked him whether he would drink Burgundy, Pontac, or champagne to his dinner, and led him to a table.

Though the most fashionable ordinary in the village, the White Horse did not happen to be crowded on this day. Monsieur Barbeau, the landlord, informed Harry that there was a great entertainment at Summer Hill, which had taken away most of the company. Indeed, when Harry entered the room, there were but four other gentlemen in it. Two of these guests were drinking wine and had finished their dinner; the other two were young men in the midst of their meal. As the landlord passed, he must have whispered the name of the newcomer to them, for they looked at him with some appearance of interest and made him a slight bow across the table as the smiling host bustled away for Harry's dinner.

Mr. Warrington returned the salute of the two gentlemen, who bade him welcome to Tunbridge and hoped he would like the place upon better acquaintance. Then they smiled and exchanged waggish looks with each other, of which Harry did not understand the meaning, nor why they cast knowing glances at the two other guests over their wine.

One of these persons was in a somewhat tarnished velvet coat with a huge queue and bag, voluminous ruffles, and embroidery. The other was a little beetle-browed, hook-nosed, high-shouldered gentleman, whom his opposite companion addressed as "milord" or "my lord" in a very high voice. My lord, who was sipping the wine before him, barely glanced at the newcomer and then addressed himself to his own companion.

"And so you know the nephew of the old woman—the Croesus who comes to arrive?"

"You're thrown out there, Jack!" said one young gentleman to the other.

"Never could manage the lingo," said Jack. The two elders had begun to speak in the French language.

"But assuredly, my dear lord!" said the gentleman with the long queue.

"You have shown energy, my dear Baron! He has been here but two hours. My people told me of him only as I came to dinner."

"I knew him before! I have met him often in London with the Baroness and my lord, his cousin," said the Baron.

A smoking soup for Harry came in, borne by the smiling host. "Behold, sir! Behold a potage of my fashion!" said my lord, laying down the dish and whispering to Harry the celebrated name of the nobleman opposite. Harry thanked Monsieur Barbeau in his own language, upon which the foreign gentleman, turning round, grinned most graciously at Harry and said, "Fous bossedez notre langue barfaidement, monsieur." Mr. Warrington had never heard the French language pronounced in that manner in Canada. He bowed in return to the foreign gentleman.

"Tell me more about the Croesus, my good Baron," continued his lordship, speaking rather superciliously to his companion and taking no notice of Harry, which perhaps somewhat nettled the young man.

"What will you, that I tell you, my dear lord? Croesus is a youth like other youths; he is tall, like other youths; he is awkward, like other youths; he has black hair, as they all have who come from the Indies. Lodgings have been taken for him at Mrs. Rose's toy-shop."

"I have lodgings there too," thought Mr. Warrington. "Who is Croesus they are talking of? How good the soup is!"

"He travels with a large retinue," the Baron continued, "four servants, two postchaises, and a pair of outriders. His chief attendant is a black man who saved his life from the savages in America, and who will not hear, on any account, of being made free. He persists in wearing mourning for his elder brother from whom he inherits his principality."

"Could anything console you for the death of yours, Chevalier?" cried out the elder gentleman.

"Milor! his property might," said the Chevalier, "which you know is not small."

"Your brother lives on his patrimony—which you have told me is immense—you by your industry, my dear Chevalier."

"Milor!" cries the individual addressed as Chevalier.

"By your industry or your esprit—how much more noble! Shall you be at the Baroness's to-night? She ought to be a little of your parents, Chevalier?"

"Again I fail to comprehend your lordship," said the other gentleman, rather sulkily.

"Why, she is a woman of great wit—she is of noble birth—she has undergone strange adventures—she has but little principle (there you happily have the advantage of her). But what care we men of the world? You intend to go and play with the young Creole, no doubt, and get as much money from him as you can. By the way, Baron, suppose he should be a guet-apens, that young Creole? Suppose our excellent friend has invented him up in London and brings him down with his character for wealth to prey upon the innocent folks here?"

"J'y ai souvent pensé, milor," said the little Baron, placing his finger to his nose very knowingly, "that Baroness is capable of anything."

"A Baron—a Baroness, que voulez-vous, my friend? I mean the late lamented husband. Do you know who he was?"

"Intimately. A more notorious villain never dealt a card. At Venice, at Brussels, at Spa, at Vienna—the gaols of every one of which places he knew. I knew the man, my lord."

"I thought you would. I saw him at the Hague, where I first had the honour of meeting you, and a more dis
