Mr. Warrington repaired one day to his customary dinner at the White Horse ordinary, finding the scene exactly as he had anticipated: a raucous assembly of country gentlemen surrounding the table, dominated by the jolly, good-humored countenance of Parson Sampson. The clergyman was regaling the company with a rapid-fire succession of stories and *bons-mots*, keeping the air thick with roars of laughter. Though Harry had not been in London for several months, the parson possessed the latest intelligence—or what passed for such among the folk of the ordinary. He detailed the intrigues at the King's house in Kensington and the Duke's in Pall Mall; he recounted Mr. Byng's behavior in prison and the shifting odds at Newmarket; he named the reigning toasts of Covent Garden.

Parson Sampson was a man of the world, a figure not uncommon in English society a century prior. He was the Abbe Parson, the clergyman who frequented the theater, the tavern, the racecourse, and the height of fashion. His voice was the loudest in the hunting field, his songs the jolliest at the Rose or the Bedford Head, and his ability to call a main at the gaming table was unmatched. The accuracy of his news mattered little to the country gentlemen who listened; whether My Lord Viscount Squanderfield was ruining himself for Mrs. Polly or Mrs. Lucy, whether Lady Jane loved the actor instead of Lady Mary, or whether Harry Hilton of the Horse Grenadiers had the quarrel with Chevalier Solingen rather than Tommy Ruffler of the Foot Guards—these details were secondary. What mattered was that the stories were lively and wicked. Mr. Sampson laughed and chattered, charming his audience with spirits and talk, draining bottle after bottle of claret, which his delighted listeners insisted he finish.

When Mr. Warrington entered, the parson's rosy face reddened further, whether from modesty or the effects of the vintage. He whispered *Maxima debetur* to the laughing squire seated beside him—a man in a drab coat and gold-laced red waistcoat—and rose abruptly, stumbling forward in his haste to greet the Virginian. "My dear sir, my very dear sir, my conqueror of spades, clubs, and hearts!" cried the chaplain. "I am delighted to see your honour looking so fresh and well."

Harry returned the greeting with evident pleasure, equally glad to see Mr. Sampson and quick to compliment the reverend's cheerful complexion and rosy gills. The squire in the drab coat, recognizing Mr. Warrington, immediately made space beside himself and called out for the parson to resume his seat on the other side to continue his tale of Lord Ogle and the grocer's wife. His sentence was cut short, however, by a shout and an oath directed at the parson for having stepped on his gouty toe.

The chaplain apologized profusely, turned quickly to Mr. Warrington, and proceeded to deliver a comprehensive report on the state of Castlewood and its neighborhood. He announced that My Lord Castlewood sent his affectionate remembrances to his cousin and had given special orders for him to come to Tunbridge Wells to oversee the young gentleman's morals. He noted that My Lady Viscountess and My Lady Fanny had departed for Harrogate for the waters, that Mr. Will had won his money at Newmarket and was visiting the Duke, and that Molly, the housemaid, was weeping over Gumbo, Mr. Warrington's valet. In short, he delivered all the news of the region, managing to weave names of the highest rank into his discourse. "All Hampshire has heard of his successes at Tunbridge," Mr. Sampson declared with an arch smile, "successes of every kind." He suggested that the lords and ladies hoped Harry would not be spoiled for his quiet Hampshire home.

As the guests drifted away one by one, leaving the young Virginian to his bottle and the chaplain, the atmosphere shifted. "Though I have had plenty," said the jolly chaplain, "that is no reason why I should not have plenty more." He drank toast after toast and bumper after bumper to Harry's amusement. By the time Sampson had satisfied his appetite, Harry had become equally generous, warm-hearted, and friendly.

"Why should Mr. Sampson incur the expense of an inn when there is a room at Harry's quarters?" The chaplain's trunk was ordered to the lodgings, and Gumbo was commanded to make him as comfortable as possible. Nothing satisfied Mr. Warrington more than seeing Sampson descend to the stables to inspect his horses. Harry now possessed several mounts, and when Sampson recognized his own horse—the one Harry had won from him—the beast whinnied with delight, rubbing his nose against his old master's coat. Harry rapped out a few brisk, energetic expressions and vowed by Jupiter that Sampson should have his old horse back. It was a gift the chaplain accepted with fervor, seizing Harry's hand to bless him, then flinging his arms around the horse's neck and weeping tears of Bordeaux and gratitude. Arm-in-arm, the friends walked to Madame Bernstein's, carrying the scents of the stables into her ladyship's apartment. Their flushed cheeks and brightened eyes testified to the day's amusement.

Madame Bernstein received her nephew's chaplain with kindness. The old lady relished Sampson's broad jokes and rattling talk, much as she enjoyed a highly-spiced dish or a novel entree from her cook, provided it appeared only a few times. Her only enduring amusement, she confessed, was cards. "The cards don't cheat," she would say. "A bad hand tells you the truth to your face, and there is nothing so flattering in the world as a good suite of trumps." When in a good humor, she would laughingly bid the chaplain say grace before the meal. Honest Sampson initially hesitated to join the game at Tunbridge Wells, citing that the stakes were too high for his pocket, which had already been emptied for the fortunate youth at Castlewood. Like most of her age and sex, Madame Bernstein was not prodigal with money. It was likely from Harry Warrington, whose heart overflowed with generosity as his purse with guineas, that the chaplain procured a small stock of ready coin, enabling him to sit at the card table.

Our young gentleman welcomed Mr. Sampson to his coin as readily as he did all the other good things he had gathered about him. It was remarkable how quickly the young Virginian adapted to the habits of the life he now led. His suits remained black, yet of the finest cut and quality. "With a star and ribbon, his stocking down, and his hair over his shoulder, he would make a pretty Hamlet," observed the gay old Duchess Queensberry. "And I make no doubt he has been the death of a dozen Ophelias already, here and amongst the Indians," she added, thinking no less of Harry for his supposed successes with the fair. His lace and linen were as fine as his aunt could desire. He purchased fine shaving plates from toy-shop women and magnificent brocade bedgowns in which he lolled at ease, sipping his chocolate in the mornings. He owned swords, walking canes, French watches with painted backs and diamond settings, and snuff boxes enamelled by artists of that cunning nation. A levee of grooms, jockeys, and tradesmen waited daily in his anteroom, admitted one by one to him and Parson Sampson over their chocolate by Gumbo, the groom of the chambers. No single negro could have managed all the fine things Mr. Warrington now possessed, let alone the horses and the postchaise his honor had bought.

Furthermore, Harry instructed himself in the arts befitting a gentleman of the era. A French fencing-master and a dancing-master of the same nation resided at Tunbridge during that season. The young Virginian frequented these men of science assiduously, acquiring considerable skill and grace in both peaceful and warlike accomplishments. Ere many weeks were over, he could handle foils against his master or any frequenter of the fencing school. With a sigh, Lady Maria—who danced very elegantly herself—owned that there was no gentleman at court who could walk a minuet more gracefully than Mr. Warrington. As for riding, though he took a few lessons on the great horse from a master who came to Tunbridge, he declared that their own Virginian manner was sufficient. He saw no one among the fine folks and jockeys who could ride better than his friend, Colonel George Washington of Mount Vernon.

The obsequious Sampson found himself in better quarters than he had enjoyed for a long time. He knew much of the world and told even more, and Harry was delighted with his stories, whether real or fancied. The man of twenty looked up to the man of thirty, admiring the latter's old jokes, stale puns, and tarnished anecdotes, all slopped with the wine of a hundred dinner tables. Sampson's town and college pleasantries were all new and charming to the young Virginian. A hundred years ago, there used to be grown men in London who loved to consort with fashionable youths entering life, to tickle their young fancies with merry stories, to act as mentors at the Round-house, to accompany lads to the gaming table, and to stagger into the streets with cool heads when young lords reeled out to beat the watch. Of this extinct race, Mr. Sampson was a specimen. It is a comfort to think that in Queen Victoria's reign there are no such flatterers left, no parasites pandering to the follies of young men; that all the toads have been eaten off the face of the island, and the toad-eaters have perished for lack of nourishment.

With some sauces, as I read, the above-mentioned animals are said to be exceedingly fragrant, wholesome, and savoury eating. Indeed, no man could look more rosy and healthy, or flourish more cheerfully, than friend Sampson upon the diet. He became the young friend's confidential leader. From the following letter, preserved in the Warrington correspondence, it will be seen that Mr. Harry not only had dancing and fencing masters but likewise a tutor, chaplain, and secretary:

***

"HONOURED MADAM—Your honoured letter of 20 June, per Mr. Trail of Bristol, has been forwarded to me duly, and I have to thank your goodness and kindness for the good advice which you are pleased to give me, as also for the remembrances of dear home, which I shall love never the worse for having been to the home of our ancestors in England.

"I writ you a letter by the last monthly packet, informing my honoured mother of the little accident I had on the road hither, and of the kind friends who I found and whom took me in. Since then I have been profiting of the fine weather and the good company here, and have made many friends among our nobility, whose acquaintance I am sure you will not be sorry that I should make. Among their lordships I may mention the famous Earl of Chesterfield, late Ambassador to Holland, and Viceroy of the Kingdom of Ireland; the Earl of March and Ruglen, who will be Duke of Queensberry at the death of his Grace; and her Grace the Duchess, a celebrated beauty of the Queen's time, when she remembers my grandpapa at Court. These and many more persons of the first fashion attend my aunt's assemblies, which are the most crowded at this crowded place. Also on my way hither I stayed at Westerham, at the house of an officer, Lieut.-Gen. Wolfe, who served with my grandfather and General Webb in the famous wars of the Duke of Marlborough. Mr. Wolfe has a son, Lieut.-Col. James Wolfe, engaged to be married to a beautiful lady now in this place, Miss Lowther of the North—and though but 30 years old he is looked up to as much as any officer in the whole army, and has served with honour under his Royal Highness the Duke wherever our arms have been employed.

"I thank my honoured mother for announcing to me that a quarter's allowance of 52l. 10s. will be paid me by Mr. Trail. I am in no present want of cash, and by practising a rigid economy, which will be necessary (as I do not disguise) for the maintenance of horses, Gumbo, and the equipage and apparel requisite for a young gentleman of good family, hope to be able to maintain my credit without unduly trespassing upon yours. The linnen and clothes which I brought with me will with due care last for some years—as you say. 'Tis not quite so fine as worn here by persons of fashion, and I may have to purchase a few very fine shirts for great days: but those I have are excellent for daily wear.

"I am thankful that I have been quite without occasion to use your excellent family pills. Gumbo hath taken them with great benefit, who grows fat and saucy upon English beef, ale, and air. He sends his humble duty to his mistress, and prays Mrs. Mountain to remember him to all his fellow-servants, especially Dinah and Lily, for whom he has bought posey-rings at Tunbridge Fair.

"Besides partaking of all the pleasures of the place, I hope my honoured mother will believe that I have not been unmindful of my education. I have had masters in fencing and dancing, and my Lord Castlewood's chaplain, the Reverend Mr. Sampson, having come hither to drink the waters, has been so good as to take a vacant room at my lodging. Mr. S. breakfasts with me, and we read together of a morning—he saying that I am not quite such a dunce as I used to appear at home. We have read in Mr. Rapin's History, Dr. Barrow's Sermons, and, for amusement, Shakspeare, Mr. Pope's Homer, and (in French) the translation of an Arabian Work of Tales, very diverting. Several men of
