The secret Mr. Lambert whispered to his wife at the close of the previous chapter was finally unveiled, bringing a wave of delight through the entire Oakhurst household. With the hay harvested and the corn still green, the farm horses were free. "Why," asked Colonel Lambert, "should we not harness them to the coach and pay a visit to Tunbridge Wells, perhaps picking up friend Wolfe at Westerham along the way?"

Mamma embraced the proposal with evident joy, and the honest gentleman who suggested it was rewarded with equal enthusiasm. The children leaped for happiness. The girls immediately scattered to gather their finest attire—calamancoes, paduasoys, falbalas, furbelows, capes, cardinals, sacks, negligees, solitaires, caps, ribbons, mantuas, clocked stockings, and high-heeled shoes, alongside countless other articles of toilet. Mamma's best robes were summoned from the presses, reserved for rare and solemn occasions, retreating afterward to lavender and seclusion. The brave Colonel produced his laced hat, waistcoat, and silver-hilted hanger. Charley rejoiced in a *rasee* holiday suit belonging to his father, in which the Colonel had been married—a garment Mrs. Lambert cut up, not without a pang. Even the dogs, Ball and Dumpling, had their tails and manes tied with ribbon. Chump, the old white cart-horse, was appointed unicorn leader to assist the carriage-horses up the first five hilly miles from Oakhurst to Westerham.

The carriage itself was an ancient vehicle, rumored to have served in the procession that brought George I. from Greenwich to London upon his first assumption of sovereignty. It had belonged to Mr. Lambert's father and was regarded by the family as one of the most splendid coaches in the three kingdoms. Brian, coachman and ploughman of the Oakhurst family, took his place on the box beside Mr. Charley. The precious clothes were packed in imperials on the roof. The Colonel's pistols were secured in the carriage pockets, and a blunderbuss hung behind the box within reach of Brian, an old soldier. Fortunately, no highwayman molested the convoy, nor did any innkeeper levy contributions on Colonel Lambert, whose slender purse and large family rendered him immune to depredators on the king's highway. A reasonable, modest lodging had been engaged by young Colonel Wolfe at his usual haunt, and he accompanied them on horseback.

These lodgings stood opposite Madame Bernstein's. As the Oakhurst family reached their quarters on a Saturday evening, they observed chair after chair discharging powdered beaux and patched, brocaded beauties at the Baroness's door, where she was hosting one of her many card parties. The sun had not yet set, for their ancestors began their dissipations at early hours, indulging in meat, drink, or cards anytime after three in the afternoon until the night or morning. From their window, the young country ladies and their mother watched the various personages entering the Bernstein rout. Colonel Wolfe identified the guests for the ladies. It was almost as delightful as attending the party themselves; Hetty and Theo not only saw the arrivals but peered into the Baroness's open casements to watch the guests inside.

Among the few personages they had glimpsed before, the Duchess of Queensberry passed. When Mr. Wolfe explained her identity, Martin Lambert was ready with a score of lines from his favorite Mat Prior about "Kitty, beautiful and young."

"Think that that old lady was once like you, girls!" cried the Colonel.

"Like us, papa? Well, certainly we never set up for being beauties!" said Miss Hetty, tossing up her little head.

"Yes, like you, you little baggage; like you at this moment, who want to go to that drum yonder:"

*"Inflamed with rage at sad restraint / Which wise mamma ordained, / And sorely vexed to play the saint / Whilst wit and beauty reigned."*

"We were never invited, papa; and I am sure if there's no beauty more worth seeing than that, the wit can't be much worth the hearing," remarked the satirist of the family.

"Oh, but he's a rare poet, Mat Prior!" continued the Colonel. "Though, mind you, girls, you'll skip over all the poems I have marked with a cross. A rare poet! And to think you should see one of his heroines! 'Fondness prevailed, mamma gave way' (she always will, Mrs. Lambert!)"

*"Fondness prevailed, mamma gave way, / Kitty at heart's desire / Obtained the chariot for a day, / And set the world on fire!"*

"I am sure it must have been very inflammable," said Mamma.

"So it was, my dear, twenty years ago, much more inflammable than it is now," remarked the Colonel.

"Nonsense, Mr. Lambert," answered Mamma.

"Look, look!" cried Hetty, running forward to point to the little square and the covered gallery where the door to Madame Bernstein's apartments stood, surrounded by a crowd of street urchins, idlers, and yokels watching the company.

"It's Harry Warrington!" exclaimed Theo, waving a handkerchief to the young Virginian. But Warrington did not see Miss Lambert. The Virginian walked arm-in-arm with a portly clergyman in a crisp, rustling silk gown, and the two entered Madame de Bernstein's door.

"I heard him preach a most admirable sermon here last Sunday," said Mr. Wolfe. "A little theatrical, but most striking and eloquent."

"You seem to be here most Sundays, James," said Mrs. Lambert.

"And Monday, and soon till Saturday," added the Colonel. "See, Harry has beautified himself already; hath his hair in buckle, and I have no doubt he is going to the drum too."

"I had rather sit quiet generally of a Saturday evening," said sober Mr. Wolfe. "At any rate, away from card-playing and scandal; but I own, dear Mrs. Lambert, I am under orders. Shall I go across the way and send Mr. Warrington to you?"

"No, let him have his sport. We shall see him tomorrow. He won't care to be disturbed amidst his fine folks by us country-people," said meek Mrs. Lambert.

"I am glad he is with a clergyman who preaches so well," said Theo softly; her eyes seemed to say, *You see, good people, he is not so bad as you thought him, and as I, for my part, never believed him to be.* "The clergyman has a very kind, handsome face."

"Here comes a greater clergyman," cried Mr. Wolfe. "It is my Lord of Salisbury, with his blue ribbon, and a chaplain behind him."

"And whom a mercy's name have we here?" broke in Mrs. Lambert as a sedan-chair, covered with gilding and topped with no less than five earl's coronets, carried by bearers in richly laced clothes and preceded by three footmen in splendid livery, approached Madame de Bernstein's door. The Bishop, who had been about to enter, stopped and ran back with the most respectful bows and curtseys to the sedan-chair, giving his hand to the lady who stepped forth.

"Who on earth is this?" asked Mrs. Lambert.

"Sprechen sie Deutsch? Ja, meinherr. Nichts verstand," said the waggish Colonel.

"Pooh, Martin."

"Well, if you can't understand High Dutch, my love, how can I help it? Your education was neglected at school. Can you understand heraldry?—I know you can."

"I make," cried Charley, reciting the shield, "three merions on a field or, with an earl's coronet."

"A countess's coronet, my son. The Countess of Yarmouth, my son."

"And pray who is she?"

"It hath ever been the custom of our sovereigns to advance persons of distinction to honour," continued the Colonel, gravely. "And this eminent lady hath been so promoted by our gracious monarch to the rank of Countess of this kingdom."

"But why, papa?" asked the daughters together.

"Never mind, girls!" said Mamma.

But that incorrigible Colonel would go on.

"Y, my children, is one of the last and most awkward letters of the whole alphabet. When I tell you stories, you are always saying Why. Why should my Lord Bishop be cringing to that lady? Look at him rubbing his fat hands together and smiling into her face! It's not a handsome face any longer. It is all painted red and white like Scaramouch's in the pantomime. See, there comes another blue-ribbon, as I live. My Lord Bamborough. The descendant of the Hotspurs. The proudest man in England. He stops, he bows, he smiles; he is hat in hand, too. See, she taps him with her fan. Get away, you crowd of little blackguard boys, and don't tread on the robe of the lady whom the King delights to honour."

"But why does the King honour her?" asked the girls once more.

"There goes that odious last letter but one! Did you ever hear of her Grace the Duchess of Kendal? No. Of the Duchess of Portsmouth? Non plus. Of the Duchess of La Valliore? Of Fair Rosamond, then?"

"Hush, papa! There is no need to bring blushes on the cheeks of my dear ones, Martin Lambert!" said the mother, putting her finger to her husband's lips.

"'Tis not I; it is their sacred Majesties who are the cause of the shame," cried the son of the old republican. "Think of the bishops of the Church and the proudest nobility of the world cringing and bowing before that painted High Dutch Jezebel. Oh, it's a shame! a shame!"

"Confusion!" broke out Colonel Wolfe, making a dash at his hat and running from the room. He had seen the young lady he admired and her guardian walking across the Pantiles on foot to the Baroness's party. They arrived just as the Countess of Yarmouth-Walmoden was engaged in conversation with the two lords spiritual and temporal, who made the lowest reverences and bows to the Countess, waiting until she had passed in at the door on the Bishop's arm.

Theo turned away from the window with a sad, almost awestruck face. Hetty remained there, looking from it with indignation in her eyes and a little red spot on each cheek.

"A penny for little Hetty's thoughts," said Mamma, coming to the window to lead the child away.

"I am thinking what I should do if I saw papa bowing to that woman," said Hetty.

Tea and a hissing kettle appeared, and the family sat down to their evening meal, leaving Miss Hetty, from her place, in command of the window, which she begged her brother not to close. That young gentleman had gone down among the crowd to inspect the armorial bearings of the Countess's and other sedans, and also to invest sixpence in a cheese-cake by Mamma's order and his own desire. He returned presently with the delicacy wrapped in paper.

"Look, mother," he said, coming back. "Do you see that big man in brown beating all the pillars with a stick? That is the learned Mr. Johnson. He comes to the Friars sometimes to see our master. He was sitting with some friends just now at the tea-table before Mrs. Brown's tart-shop. They have tea there, twopence a cup; I heard Mr. Johnson say he had had seventeen cups—that makes two-and-twenty pence. What a sight of money for tea!"

"What would you have, Charley?" asked Theo.

"I think I would have cheese-cakes," said Charley, sighing as his teeth closed on a large slice. "And the gentleman whom Mr. Johnson was with," continued Charley, with his mouth quite full, "was Mr. Richardson who wrote—"

"Clarissa!" cried all the women in a breath, running to the window to see their favorite writer. By this time the sun had sunk, the stars were twinkling overhead, and the footman came to light the candles in the Baroness's room opposite their spies.

Theo and her mother stood together looking from their vantage point. There was a small illumination at Mrs. Brown's tart-and-tea shop by which they could see one lady getting Mr. Richardson's hat and stick, and another tying a shawl round his neck, after which he walked home.

"Oh dear me! he does not look like Grandison!" cried Theo.

"I rather think I wish we had not seen him, my dear," said Mamma, who had been described as a most sentimental woman and eager novel-reader. Here again they were interrupted by Miss Hetty, who cried:

"Never mind that little fat man, but look yonder, mamma."

And they looked yonder. First, they saw Mr. Warrington undergoing the honor of a presentation to the Countess of Yarmouth, who was still followed by the obsequious peer and prelate with blue ribands. Now the Countess graciously sat down to a card-table, the Bishop and the Earl and a fourth person being her partners. Then Mr. Warrington came into the embrasure of the window with a lady they recognized as the one they had seen for a few minutes at Oakhurst.

"How much finer he is!" remarked Mamma.

"How he is improved in his looks! What has he done to himself?" asked Theo.

"Look at his grand lace frills and rules! My dear, he has not got on our shirts any more," cried the matron.

"What are you talking about, girls?" asked Papa, reclining on his sofa, where perhaps he was dozing after the fashion of honest house-fathers.

The girls explained how Harry Warrington was in the window, talking with his cousin Lady Maria Esmond.

"Come away!" cried Papa. "You have no right to be spying the young fellow. Down with the curtains, I say!"

And down the curtains went, so that the girls saw no more of Madame Bernstein's guests or doings for
