The first spark in Martin Lambert's chest upon learning the secret his youngest daughter had inadvertently spilled was not love, but a hot, prickling fury directed at the thief who had stolen it. "A plague on all such reckless spirits, whether English or Indian!" the Colonel bellowed to his wife, his face flushing with indignation. "I wish this young rascal had broken his nose against every doorpost in the parish but ours!"

"Perhaps, my dear, we are destined to cure him of his recklessness," Mrs. Lambert interposed, her voice a soothing balm against his storm. "That fall at our gate holds a providential weight. You mocked me when I suggested it before, Mr. Lambert, but if Heaven did not send this young gentleman to us, who would? And it may well be for the blessing of us all that he arrived."

"It is hard, Molly!" the Colonel groaned, the weight of his grievance pressing down on him. "We cherish and dote upon them; we nurse them through sickness and health; we toil and scheme, hoarding pennies in stockings and mending our own worn coats. If they ache, we cannot sleep; if they desire, we labor day and night to grant it. We are their darling daddy and dearest pappy. Yet, on Tuesday morning, I am king of my house. On Tuesday evening, Prince Whippersnapper appears, and my reign is ended. A whole life is forgotten for a pair of blue eyes, a pair of lean legs, and a head of yellow hair."

"'Tis written that we women must leave all to follow our husbands," the matron said gently, laying her hand upon his arm. "I believe our courtship was not very long, dear Martin."

"'Tis human nature, and what can you expect of the jade?" the Colonel sighed.

"And I believe I fulfilled my duty to my husband, though I admit I left my father for him," Mrs. Lambert added softly.

"Excellent wench! Perdition catch my soul, but I do love thee, Molly!" the good Colonel declared. "But mind you, your father never loved me; and if I am ever to have sons-in-law—"

"Ever, indeed! Of course my girls must have husbands, Mr. Lambert!" cried the mother.

"Well, when they come, I shall hate them, madam, just as your father hated me; and quite rightly, for taking his treasure away."

"Do not be irreligious and unnatural, Martin Lambert! I say you are unnatural, sir!" the matron retorted.

"Nay, my dear, I have an old tooth in my left jaw here," the Colonel explained, tapping his chin. "It is natural for the tooth to loosen, but when the tooth-drawer pulls it, it is natural that I should feel pain. Do you suppose, madam, that I do not love Hetty better than any tooth in my head?"

Yet no woman is ever truly averse to the idea of her daughter finding a husband, however violently a father may revolt at the intrusion of the son-in-law. Mothers and grandmothers, in fact, are married anew in the unions of their young ones; their souls don the laces and muslins of their youth, the white ribbons of the postilion bloom once more, and they flutter into the carriage, driving away into the past. What woman, regardless of age, has not stowed away the bridal favors and raiment in the lavender-lined cupboards of her heart?

"It will be a sad thing, parting with her," Mrs. Lambert sighed.

"You have settled that point already, Molly," the Colonel laughed. "Had I not best go out and order raisins and currants for the wedding cake?"

"And then I shall have to leave the house in their charge when I go to her in Virginia. How many miles is it, Martin? Thousands?"

"A hundred and seventy-three thousand, three hundred and ninety-one and three-quarters, my dear, by the near way—that through Prester John's country. By the other route, through Persia—"

"Oh, give me the path with the least sea and your horrid ships, which I cannot bear!" cried the Colonel's spouse. "I hope Rachel Esmond and I shall become better friends. She had a very high spirit when we were girls at school."

"Shall we not attend to the baby linen, Mrs. Martin Lambert?" her husband interjected, sensing a shift in the atmosphere. Now, Mrs. Lambert, who had surely noticed the pretty lace caps and bibs in Mrs. Bobbinit's shop, found herself wondering. On that Sunday afternoon, when the discovery was made and little Hetty lay upon her pillow with feverish cheeks, closed eyes, and a piteous expression, her mother looked at the child with perfect ease of mind, seeming almost pleased by Hetty's distress.

The girl was not merely unhappy; she was enraged with herself for having published her secret. Perhaps she had not known her own state until the sudden emotion revealed it to her, and now the little maid chose to be as ashamed as if she had committed a crime and been caught. She was indignant at her own weakness, breaking into transports of wrath against herself. She vowed she would never forgive herself for submitting to such humiliation. Thus, the young pard, wounded by the hunter's dart, chafes with rage in the forest, angry at the surprise of the rankling steel in his side, snarling and biting at his sister-cubs and the leopardess, his spotted mother.

Little Hetty tore and gnawed and growled so ferociously that one would not wish to be her fraternal cub, nor her spotted dam or sire. "What business has any young woman," she cried out, "to indulge in such nonsense? Mamma, I ought to be whipped and sent to bed. I know perfectly well that Mr. Warrington does not care a fig about me. I dare say he prefers French actresses and the commonest little milliner-girl in the toy-shop to me. And so he ought, and so they are better than me. Why, what a fool I am to burst out crying like a ninny about nothing, simply because Mr. Wolfe said Harry played cards on a Sunday! I know he is not clever like Papa. I believe he is stupid—I am certain he is stupid—but he is not so stupid as I am. Why, of course, I cannot marry him. How could I go to America and leave you and Theo? Of course, he likes somebody else, in America or at Tunbridge or Jericho. He is a prince in his own country and cannot think of marrying a poor half-pay officer's daughter with twopence to her fortune. Did you not tell me, when I was a baby, how I cried and wanted the moon? I am a baby now, a most absurd, silly, little baby—do not talk to me, Mrs. Lambert, I am one. Only there is this to be said: he knows nothing about it, and I would rather cut my tongue out than tell him."

Dire were the threats Hetty leveled at Theo, should her sister betray her. As for the infantile Charley, whose mind was entirely set on cheese-cakes, he had neither remarked nor been moved by Miss Hester's emotion; and the parents and the kind sister, of course, all promised to keep the little maid's secret safe.

"I begin to think it had been best for us to stay at home," sighed Mrs. Lambert to her husband.

"Nay, my dear," replied the other. "Human nature will be human nature; surely Hetty's mother told me herself that she had the beginning of a liking for a certain young curate before she fell head over heels in love with a certain young officer of Kingsley's. And as for me, my heart was wounded in a dozen places ere Miss Molly Benson took entire possession of it. Our sons and daughters must follow in the way of their parents, I suppose. Why, but yesterday, you were scolding me for grumbling at Miss Het's precocious fancies. To do the child justice, she disguises her feelings entirely, and I defy Mr. Warrington to know from her behavior how she is disposed towards him."

"A daughter of mine and yours, Martin," cried the mother with great dignity, "is not going to fling herself at a gentleman's head!"

"Neither herself nor the teacup, my dear," answered the Colonel. "Little Miss Het treats Mr. Warrington like a vixen. He never comes to us, but she boxes his ears in one fashion or another. I protest she is barely civil to him; but, knowing what is going on in the young hypocrite's mind, I am not going to be angry at her rudeness."

"She hath no need to be rude at all, Martin; and our girl is good enough for any gentleman in England or America. Why, if their ages suit, shouldn't they marry after all, sir?"

"Why, if he wants her, shouldn't he ask her, my dear? I am sorry we came. I am for putting the horses into the carriage and turning their heads towards home again."

But mamma fondly said, "Depend on it, my dear, that these matters are wisely ordained for us. Depend upon it, Martin, it was not for nothing that Harry Warrington was brought to our gate in that way; and that he and our children are thus brought together again. If that marriage has been decreed in Heaven, a marriage it will be."

"At what age, Molly, I wonder, do women begin and leave off match-making? If our little chit falls in love and falls out again, she will not be the first of her sex, Mrs. Lambert. I wish we were on our way home again, and, if I had my will, would trot off this very night."

"He has promised to drink his tea here tonight. You would not take away our child's pleasure, Martin?" asked the mother, softly.

In his fashion, the father was not less good-natured. "You know, my dear," said Lambert, "that if either of them had a fancy to our ears, we would cut them off and serve them in a fricassee."

Mary Lambert laughed at the idea of her pretty little delicate ears being so served. When her husband was most tender-hearted, his habit was to be most grotesque. When he pulled the pretty little delicate ear behind which the matron's fine hair was combed back, wherein twinkled a shining line or two of silver, I dare say he did not hurt her much. I dare say she was thinking of the soft, well-remembered times of her own modest youth and sweet courtship. Hallowed remembrances of sacred times! If the sight of youthful love is pleasant to behold, how much more charming the aspect of the affection that has survived years, sorrows, faded beauty perhaps, and life's doubts, differences, and trouble!

Regarding her promise to disguise her feelings for Mr. Warrington in that gentleman's presence, Miss Hester was better, or worse if you will, than her word. Harry not only came to take tea with his friends but invited them for the next day to an entertainment at the Rooms, to be given in their special honor.

"A dance, and given for us!" cried Theo. "Oh, Harry, how delightful! I wish we could begin this very minute!"

"Why, for a savage Virginian, I declare, Harry Warrington, thou art the most civilized young man possible!" said the Colonel. "My dear, shall we dance a minuet together?"

"We have done such a thing before, Martin Lambert!" said the soldier's fond wife. Her husband hummed a minuet tune, whipped a plate from the tea-table, and made a preparatory bow and flourish with it as if it were a hat, whilst madam performed her best curtsey.

Only Hetty, of the party, persisted in looking glum and displeased. "Why, child, have you not a word of thanks to throw to Mr. Warrington?" asked Theo of her sister.

"I never did care for dancing much," said Hetty. "What is the use of standing up opposite a stupid man and dancing down a room with him?"

"Merci du compliment!" said Mr. Warrington.

"I don't say that you are stupid—that is—that is, I—I only meant country dances," said Hetty, biting her lips as she caught her sister's eye. She remembered she had called Harry stupid, and Theo's droll, humorous glance was her only reminder.

But with this, Miss Hetty chose to be as angry as if it had been quite a cruel rebuke. "I hate dancing—there—I own it," she said, with a toss of her head.

"Nay, you used to like it well enough, child!" interposed her mother.

"That was when she was a child: don't you see she is grown up to be an old woman?" remarked Hetty's father. "Or perhaps Miss Hester has got the gout?"

"Fiddle!" said Hester, snappishly, drubbing with her little feet.

"What's a dance without a fiddle?" said the imperturbed papa.

Darkness came over Harry Warrington's face. "I come to try my best and give them pleasure and a dance," he thought, "and the little thing tells me she hates dancing. We do not practice kindness, or acknowledge hospitality, so in our country. No—nor speak to our parents so, neither." He feared that in this particular, usages had changed in the United States during the last hundred years, and that the young folks there were considerably "Hettified."

Not content with this, Miss Hester proceeded to make such fun of all the company at the Wells, and especially of Harry's own immediate pursuits and companions, that the honest lad was still further pained by her behavior. When he saw Mrs. Lambert alone, he asked how or in what he had again offended, that Hester was so angry with him? The kind matron felt more than ever well disposed towards the boy after her daughter's conduct to him. She would have liked to tell the secret which Hester hid so fiercely. Theo, too, remonstrated with her sister in private; but Hester would not listen to the subject, and was as angry in her bedroom,
