The Colonel and his wife, having conferred in private, resolved to remove their little Hetty from the reach of the charmer with all possible speed. While absence often cures the infatuation of men, it is a remedy rarely effective for women; some will travel ever so far and stay away forever, yet the obstinate disease remains, defying distance and climate. One may whip, abuse, or insult them, and still the deluded creature persists in her fidelity. Indeed, after profound study, I find few better ways to secure the faithfulness of a partner than judicious ill-treatment, a brisk dose of occasional violence as an alterative, and a diet of constant, cooling neglect. Love and kindness should be administered only at sparing intervals; for those who are most indifferent to their husbands are often those cloyed by too much sugar-plum. I have seen a young woman, with every wish gratified, yawn in her adoring husband's face, preferring the conversation of a mere booby. Conversely, I have seen Chloe, whom Strephon has cursed before the servants, creep fondling to his knee at tea-time, playing his favorite tunes and looking round proudly at the butler to say, "Now, John, look how good my dearest Henry is!" Make your game, gentlemen! There is the coaxing line for the henpecked, and the manly, selfish system where she answers to the whistle and knows her master, licking the hand raised to do her good. As the late lamented O'Connell remarked, "Hereditary bondsmen, know ye not, who would be free, themselves must strike the blow?" So up with your cudgels, my enslaved boys!

Women will appreciate this humor, understanding the irony, though young Grubstreet might claim I advocate thrashing women and lack a noble soul. I assure you, ladies, I am only joking; I consider your sex a hundred times more loving and faithful than ours.

But what use is Hetty's removal if she intends to be just as fond of Harry absent as present? Why not let her see him before the Ball and Dobbin are put to, saying, "Good-bye, Harry! I was wilful last night, but you were kind"? She would show no special emotion, too ashamed of her secret to betray it. Harry, too preoccupied to discover it, would part calmly, assuming she is happy to return to her music and flowers. He did not ride partway home by his friend's carriage, having other engagements. When he returned, the Lamberts were gone from Tunbridge Wells; their windows stood open, a card indicating the apartments were to let. A passing sorrow at the blank aspect of rooms once enlivened by such frank countenances may have crossed the young gentleman's mind, but he dined at the White Horse and called fiercely for his bottle. Meanwhile, poor little Hester choked over her tea as the Lamberts arrived at Westerham. The young roses would be wan in her cheeks, black circles around her eyes. It was the thunder, the heat; she could not sleep. Home they came. There was the gate where he fell, the bed he lay in, the chair he used to sit in—what ages seemed to pass! What a gulf between today and yesterday! Who was that little child calling chickens or watering roses yonder? Was she and that girl the same Hester Lambert? She seemed older than Theo, who had always been so composed and clever. But in a night or two, Hester had lived long, long years. Poppy and mandragora would never medicine them to the sweet sleep they tasted yesterday.

Maria Esmond watched the Lambert cavalcade drive away, feeling a grim relief. When Harry entered his aunt's card-room, flushed with Barbeau's wine, she looked at him with hot eyes. He laughed, rattling in reply to his aunt's question about which girl was his sweetheart, gaily declaring he loved them both like sisters. He praised the Lamberts highly, wondering why Lambert was not a general, noting his Royal Highness the Duke's fondness for him. Madame Bernstein, delighted with her boy's success, mimicked the Countess's German accent, saying, "Elle ravvole de fous, cher bedid anche!" She sneered at her niece, asking if Harry carried off the hearts of all the old women.

"You were quite right not to perceive that she cheated at cards," Madame de Bernstein continued, praising Harry's play as that of a grand seigneur.

"Did she cheat?" cried Harry, astonished. "I am sure, ma'am, I saw no unfair play."

"No more did I, my dear, but I am sure she cheated. Bah! Every woman cheats, I and Maria included, when we can get a chance. But when you play with the Walmoden, you don't do wrong to lose in moderation. Cultivate her. She has taken a fancy to your beaux yeux. Why should your Excellency not be Governor of Virginia? You must pay your respects to the Duke and his Majesty at Kensington. The Countess of Yarmouth will be your best friend."

"Why should you not introduce me, aunt?" asked Harry.

The old lady's rouged cheek grew redder. "I am not in favor at Kensington," she said. "Faces so unwelcome to kings are those they wish to forget. All of us want to forget something or somebody. I dare say our ingenu here would like to wipe a sum or two off the slate. Wouldst thou not, Harry?"

Harry turned red, as did Maria, and his aunt laughed a wicked laugh unpleasant to hear. What guilty signals passed on their cheeks? What account was scored upon their memories, which they desired to efface? I fear Madame Bernstein was right; most folks have ugly reckonings on their consciences they are glad to be quit of.

Had Maria known one cause of Harry's disquiet, the spinster would have been more unquiet. For some days he had missed a pocket-book. He remembered possessing it the day he drank claret at the White Horse and Gumbo carried him to bed. He sought it in vain; no servant had seen it, and there were no traces at the inn. He dared not cry the book, making only cautious inquiries. If Lady Maria Esmond knew the outpourings of her heart were in the hands of the public, she would be in a pretty condition of mind. The letters contained disclosures of family secrets, satire, abuse of persons she and Mr. Warrington knew, expostulations about his attentions to other ladies, and scornful jokes. There were appeals of eternal fidelity, the usual farrago written to Edward before becoming Mrs. Jones. Would she like those letters read by anyone else? Did she recall her unfavorable opinions of the Miss Browns or Mrs. Thompson? Would Mr. J. like to see her remarks regarding Jones himself? She wouldn't. Then be pleased to withdraw that imputation already cast in her mind upon Lady Maria Esmond. No doubt her letters were foolish, as most love-letters are, but it does not follow there was anything wrong in them. They are foolish when written by young folks, and how much more foolish when written by an old man to a young lass! No wonder Lady Maria should not like her letters read. Why, the very spelling didn't matter so much in her ladyship's days. It is not the spelling that matters; it is the writing at all. I for one am determined never to speak or write my mind out regarding anything or anybody. I intend to say of every woman that she is chaste and handsome; of every man that he is handsome, clever, and rich; of every book that it is delightfully interesting; of Snobmore's manners that they are gentlemanlike; of Screwby's dinners that they are luxurious; of Jawkins's conversation that it is lively; of Xantippe that she has a sweet temper; of Jezebel that her color is natural; of Bluebeard that he was most indulgent to his wives, and that very likely they died of bronchitis. What? A word against the spotless Messalina? What an unfavorable view of human nature! What? King Cheops was not a perfect monarch? Oh, you railer at royalty and slanderer of all that is noble and good! When this book is concluded, I shall change the jaundiced livery my books have worn since I began to lisp in numbers, give them rose-colored coats with cherubs on the cover, and all characters within shall be perfect angels.

Meanwhile, we are in a society of men and women from whose shoulders no wings have sprouted, who undoubtedly have their little failings. There is Madame Bernstein, fallen asleep after dinner, eating and drinking too much. Mr. Harry Warrington has gone to play billiards with Count Caramboli; I suspect idleness is his failing. This is what Mr. Chaplain Sampson remarks to Lady Maria as they talk in a low tone to avoid interrupting Aunt Bernstein's doze.

"A gentleman of Mr. Warrington's means can afford to be idle," says Lady Maria. "Why, sure you love cards and billiards yourself, my good Mr. Sampson?"

"I don't say, madam, my practice is good, only my doctrine is sound," says the Chaplain with a sigh. "This young gentleman should have some employment. He should appear at court, enter the service of his country, settle down, and choose a woman of suitable rank as his wife." Sampson looks in her ladyship's face.

"Indeed, my cousin is wasting his time," says Lady Maria, blushing slightly.

"Mr. Warrington might see his relatives of his father's family," suggests the Chaplain.

"Suffolk country boobies drinking beer and hallooing after foxes! I don't see anything to be gained by his frequenting them, Mr. Sampson!"

"They are of an ancient family, of which the chief has been knight of the shire these hundred years," says the Chaplain. "I have heard Sir Miles hath a daughter of Mr. Harry's age—and beauty, too."

"I know nothing, sir, about Sir Miles Warrington, and his daughters, and his beauties!" cries Maria, in a fluster.

"The Baroness stirred—no, her ladyship is in a sweet sleep," says the Chaplain softly. "I fear, madam, for your ladyship's cousin, Mr. Warrington. I fear for his youth; for designing persons who may get about him; for extravagances, follies, intrigues even into which he will be led. His lordship, my kind patron, bade me to come and watch over him, and I am here accordingly. I know the follies of young men. Perhaps I have practised them myself. I own it with a blush," adds Mr. Sampson with much unction, though not bringing the promised blush forward.

"Between ourselves, I fear Mr. Warrington is in some trouble now, madam," continues the Chaplain, steadily looking at Lady Maria.

"What, again?" shrieks the lady.

"Hush! Your ladyship's dear invalid!" whispers the Chaplain, pointing toward Madame Bernstein. "Do you think your cousin has any partiality for any member of Mr. Lambert's family? For example, Miss Lambert?"

"There is nothing between him and Miss Lambert," says Lady Maria.

"Your ladyship is certain?"

"Women are said to have good eyes in such matters, my good Sampson," says my lady with an easy air. "I thought the little girl seemed to be following him."

"Then I am at fault once more," the frank Chaplain said. "Mr. Warrington said of the young lady that she ought to go back to her doll, and called her a pert, stuck-up little hussy."

"Ah!" sighed Lady Maria, as if relieved.

"Then, madam, there must be somebody else," said the Chaplain. "Has he confided nothing to your ladyship?"

"Some six days ago, after we had been dining at the White Horse and drinking too freely, Mr. Warrington lost a pocket-book containing letters."

"Letters?" gasps Lady Maria.

"And probably more money than he likes to own," continues the Chaplain with a grave nod. "He is very much disturbed about the book. We have both made cautious inquiries about it. We have..."

"Gracious powers, is your ladyship ill?"

Here my Lady Maria gave three remarkably shrill screams and tumbled off her chair.

"I will see the Prince. I have a right to see him. What's this?—Where am I?—What's the matter?" cries Madame Bernstein, waking from her sleep, dreaming of old days. The old lady shook in all her limbs, her face very flushed. She stared wildly, then tottered forward on her tortoiseshell cane. "What—what's the matter?" she asked again. "Have you killed her, sir?"

"Some sudden qualm must have come over her ladyship. Shall I cut her laces, madam? or send for a doctor?" cries the Chaplain, with every look of innocence and alarm.

"What has passed between you, sir?" asked the old lady, fiercely.

"I give you my honour, madam, I have done I don't know what. I but mentioned that Mr. Warrington had lost a pocket-book containing letters, and my lady swooned, as you see."

Madame Bernstein dashed water on her niece's face. A feeble moan told presently that the lady was coming to herself.

The Baroness looked sternly after Mr. Sampson as she sent him away on his errand for the doctor. Her aunt's grim countenance offered little comfort to poor Maria when she saw it on waking.

"What has happened?" asked the younger lady, bewildered and gasping.

"H'm! You know best what has happened, madam, I suppose. What hath happened before in our family?" cried the old Baroness, glaring at her niece with savage eyes.

"Ah, yes! the letters have been lost—ach lieber Himmel!" And Maria, as she would sometimes do when much moved, began to speak in the language of her mother.

"Yes! the seal has been broken, and the letters have been lost, 'tis the old story of the Esmonds," cried the elder, bitterly.

"Seal broken, letters lost? What do
