The Baroness Bernstein, though she had clearly suffered the worst of the skirmish described in the previous chapter, met her niece with a composure that belied any lingering rancor. When they next encountered one another, the elder lady offered no reproach. "Of course, my Lady Maria," she said smoothly, "you cannot expect me, as Harry Warrington's near relative, to be delighted by the prospect of his marrying a woman who is as old as his mother and possesses no fortune of her own. Yet, if he chooses such a folly, it is not my affair. I doubt I should have taken the offer of five thousand pounds seriously had I known the full extent of this arrangement at Castlewood. Had I been aware, my dear, I might have spared some unnecessary opposition. When a pitcher is broken, what railing can mend it?"

"Madam!" Lady Maria interjected sharply.

"Pardon me—I mean no slight against your ladyship's honor or character, which, no doubt, remain impeccable. Harry attests to it, and you attest to it—what more could one desire?"

"Have you spoken with Mr. Warrington, madam?"

"And he has confessed that he made you a promise at Castlewood; you hold it in his handwriting."

"Certainly I do, madam!" Lady Maria replied.

"Ah!" The elder lady did not flinch. "And I admit that at first I misinterpreted the tone of your letters to him. They implicated other members of the family..."

"Who have spoken most wickedly of me and endeavored to prejudice me against my dear Mr. Warrington in every possible way. Yes, madam, I admit I wrote against them to justify myself."

"But, naturally, you are pained to think that any wretch should seize stories damaging to our family and turn them into public scandal. Hence your recent unease."

"Exactly so," said Lady Maria. "From Mr. Warrington, I could conceal nothing henceforth, and I spoke freely to him. But that is a very different matter from wishing the entire world to know the domestic disputes of a noble house."

"Upon my word, Maria, I admire you, and I have done you an injustice. These—these twenty years, let us say."

"I am very glad, madam, that you conclude by granting me justice at all," the niece replied.

"When I saw you last night, opening the ball with my nephew, can you guess what occupied my thoughts, my dear?"

"I truly have no idea what the Baroness de Bernstein was thinking," Lady Maria said haughtily.

"I recalled that you had performed to that very tune with the dancing-master at Kensington, my dear!"

"Madam, it was an infamous calumny."

"By which the poor dancing-master received a cudgeling for nothing!"

"It is cruel and unkind, madam, to recall that slander—and I shall beg to decline living any longer with anyone who utters it," Maria continued with considerable spirit.

"You wish to return home? I can imagine you will not find Tunbridge agreeable. It will be excessively hot for you if those letters are discovered."

"There was not a single word against you in them, madam; regarding that, I can assure you of my peace of mind."

"So Harry said, and did your ladyship justice. Well, my dear, we are weary of one another and shall be better apart for a while."

"That is precisely my own opinion," said Lady Maria, dropping a curtsey.

"Mr. Sampson can escort you to Castlewood. You and your maid may take a postchaise."

"We can take a postchaise, and Mr. Sampson can escort me," echoed the younger lady. "You see, madam, I act like a dutiful niece."

"Do you know, my dear, I have a notion that Sampson has obtained the letters?" the Baroness said frankly.

"I confess that such a notion has crossed my own mind."

"And you intend to go home in the chaise and coax the letters from him! Delilah! Well, they can be of no use to me, and I trust you may succeed in retrieving them. When will you depart? The sooner the better, you say? We are women of the world, Maria. We only exchange names when we are in a passion. We do not require each other's company; and we part on good terms. Shall we proceed to Lady Yarmouth's? 'Tis her evening. There is nothing like a change of scene after one of those nervous attacks you have suffered, and cards dispel unpleasant thoughts better than any physician."

Lady Maria agreed to attend Lady Yarmouth's card party and was dressed and ready first, awaiting her aunt in the drawing-room. As Madame Bernstein descended, she remarked that Maria's door stood ajar. "She has the letters upon her," the old lady thought. The pair departed for their respective entertainments in separate chairs, displaying that charming cordiality and mutual respect which women can exhibit even after, and sometimes during, the bitterest quarrels.

That night, upon their return from the Countess's assembly, Mrs. Brett, Madame Bernstein's maid, presented herself to Lady Maria's summons, which the lady rang as she retired to her chamber. Betty, Mrs. Brett was ashamed to admit, was not in a fit state to attend her mistress. Betty had been carousing and merrymaking with Mr. Warrington's black servant, Mr. Lord Bamborough's valet, and several other gentlemen and ladies of that station, and the liquor—Mrs. Brett was shocked to acknowledge it—had proved too much for Mrs. Betty. Should Mrs. Brett undress my lady? My lady said she would undress without a maid and granted Mrs. Brett leave to withdraw. "She has the letters in her stays," Madame Bernstein thought. They had bid each other an amicable good-night on the stairs.

The following morning, Betty received a severe scolding when she came to wait upon her mistress from the closet adjoining Lady Maria's apartment, where she lay. She owned, with contrition, her partiality for rum-punch, which Mr. Gumbo possessed the knack of brewing most delicately. She accepted her rebuke with meekness, performed her usual duties regarding her lady's person, and retired.

Now, Betty was one of the Castlewood girls who had been so fascinated by Gumbo, and she was a very good-looking, blue-eyed lass upon whom Mr. Case, Madame Bernstein's confidential man, had also cast the eyes of affection. Consequently, between Messrs. Gumbo and Case, there had been jealousies and even quarrels; which had caused Gumbo, who was of a peaceful disposition, to be rather shy of the Baroness's gentlemen, the chief of whom vowed they would break his bones or take his life if he persisted in his attentions to Mrs. Betty.

But on the night of the rum-punch, though Mr. Case found Gumbo and Mrs. Betty whispering in the doorway in the cool breeze, and Gumbo would have turned pale with fear had he been capable of such a thing, no one could be more gracious than Mr. Case. It was he who proposed the bowl of punch, which was brewed and consumed in Mrs. Betty's room, and which Gumbo concocted with exquisite skill. He complimented Gumbo on his music. Though ordinarily a sober man, he insisted upon more and more drinking, until poor Mrs. Betty was reduced to the state that occasioned her ladyship's just censure.

As for Mr. Case himself, who lay out of the house, he was so ill with the punch that he kept his bed the whole of the next day and did not regain the strength to appear and wait upon his ladies until supper-time; when his mistress good-naturedly rebuked him, saying that it was not often he sinned in that manner.

"Why, Case, I could have sworn it was you I saw on horseback this morning galloping on the London road," said Mr. Warrington, who was supping with his relatives.

"Me! law bless you, sir! I was in bed, and I thought my head would come off with the aching. I ate a bit at six o'clock and drank a deal of small beer, and I am almost my own man again now. But that Gumbo, saving your honour's presence, I won't taste none of his punch again." And the honest major-domo went on with his duties among the bottles and glasses.

As they sat after their meal, Madame Bernstein was friendly enough. She prescribed strong fortifying drinks for Maria against the recurrence of her fainting fits. The lady had such attacks not infrequently. She urged her to consult her London physician and to send up an account of her case by Harry. "By Harry!" asked the lady. "Yes. Harry is going for two days on an errand for his aunt to London." "I do not care to tell you, my dear, that it is on business which will do him good. I wish Mr. Draper to put him into my will, and as I am going traveling upon a round of visits when you and I part, I think, for security, I shall ask Mr. Warrington to take my trinket-box in his postchaise to London with him, for there have been robberies of late, and I have no fancy for being stopped by highwaymen."

Maria looked blank at the notion of the young gentleman's departure but hoped that she might have his escort back to Castlewood, whither her elder brother had now returned. "Nay," says his aunt, "the lad hath been tied to our apron-strings long enough. A day in London will do him no harm. He can perform my errand for me and be back with you by Saturday."

"I would offer to accompany Mr. Warrington, but I preach on Friday before her ladyship," said Mr. Sampson. He was anxious that my Lady Yarmouth should judge of his powers as a preacher; and Madame Bernstein had exerted her influence with the king's favorite to induce her to hear the chaplain.

Harry relished the notion of a rattling journey to London and a day or two of sport there. He promised that his pistols were good and that he would hand the diamonds over in safety to the banker's strong-room. Would he occupy his aunt's London house? No, that would be a dreary lodging with only a housemaid and a groom in charge of it. He would go to the Star and Garter in Pall Mall, or to an inn in Covent Garden. "Ah! I have often talked over that journey," said Harry, his countenance saddening.

"And with whom, sir?" asked Lady Maria.

"With one who promised to make it with me," said the young man, thinking, as he always did, with an extreme tenderness of the lost brother. "He has more heart, my good Maria, than some of us!" says Harry's aunt, witnessing his emotion. Uncontrollable gusts of grief would, not unfrequently, still pass over our young man. The parting from his brother; the scene and circumstances of George's fall last year; the recollection of his words, or of some excursion at home which they had planned together; would recur to him and overcome him. "I doubt, madam," whispered the chaplain, demurely, to Madame Bernstein, after one of these bursts of sorrow, "whether some folks in England would suffer quite so much at the death of their elder brother."

But, of course, this sorrow was not to be perpetual; and we can fancy Mr. Warrington setting out on his London journey eagerly enough, and very gay and happy, if it must be owned, to be rid of his elderly attachment. Yes. There was no help for it. At Castlewood, on one unlucky evening, he had made an offer of his heart and himself to his mature cousin, and she had accepted the foolish lad's offer. But the marriage was now out of the question. He must consult his mother. She was the mistress for life of the Virginian property. Of course she would refuse her consent to such a union. The thought of it was deferred to a late period. Meanwhile, it hung like a weight round the young man's neck and caused him no small remorse and disquiet.

No wonder that his spirits rose more gaily as he came near London, and that he looked with delight from his postchaise windows upon the city as he advanced towards it. No highwayman stopped our traveler on Blackheath. Yonder were the gleaming domes of Greenwich, canopied with woods. There was the famous Thames, with its countless shipping; there actually was the Tower of London. "Look, Gumbo! There is the Tower!" "Yes, master," says Gumbo, who has never heard of the Tower; but Harry has, and remembers how he has read about it in Howell's *Medulla*, and how he and his brother used to play at the Tower, and he thinks with delight now, how he is actually going to see the armor and the jewels and the lions. They pass through Southwark and over that famous London Bridge, which was all covered with houses like a street two years ago. Now there is only a single gate left, and that is coming down. Then the chaise rolls through the city; and, "Look, Gumbo, that is Saint Paul's!" "Yes, master; Saint Paul's," says Gumbo, obsequiously, but little struck by the beauties of the architecture. And so by the well-known course we reach the Temple, and Gumbo and his master look up with awe at the rebel heads on Temple Bar.

The chaise drives to Mr. Draper's chambers in Middle Temple Lane, where Harry handed the precious box over to Mr. Draper, and a letter from his aunt, which the gentleman read with some interest seemingly, and carefully put away. He then consigned the trinket-box to his strong closet, went into the adjoining room, taking his clerk with him, and then was at Mr. Warrington's service to take him to an hotel. An hotel in Covent Garden was fixed upon as the best place for his residence. "I shall have to keep you for two or three days, Mr. Warrington," the lawyer said. "I don't think the papers which the Baroness wants can be
