The morning light filtered through the window of Mr. Warrington's chamber, illuminating the London Advertiser that lay upon his breakfast table. His eyes scanned the columns until they rested upon a bold announcement: an invitation to all lovers of manly British sport to witness a trial of skill between the great champions Sutton and Figg. The news struck a chord deep within Harry; he resolved immediately to attend the performances. With determination in his step, he mounted the pair of horses he had purchased the day before and set off for the Wooden House in Marybone Fields.

The young charioteer was not yet familiar with the winding roads of the city. His phaeton veered and tacked with unnecessary frequency as he navigated from Covent Garden, momentarily losing his way through the verdant lanes behind Mr. Whitfield's Round Tabernacle and the grounds surrounding Middlesex Hospital. Yet, he eventually reached his destination, finding the area teeming with life. A motley crowd had gathered around the doors of this temple of British valour—a mix of rough London blackguards and the polished equipages of fashionable patrons like himself, all drawn to witness the spectacle.

Beggars and cripples pressed close to the young gentleman, whining for charity, while shoeblack boys scrambled over one another to polish his boots. Nosegay-women and flying fruiterers vied for his attention, and a chaotic throng of piemen, pads, and tramps surrounded the impending battlefield. A flag fluttered atop the building, and from the stage below, accompanied by the rhythmic beat of a drum and the shrill blast of a horn, a manager repeatedly announced that the noble English sports were about to commence.

Mr. Warrington paid his entry fee and secured a seat in a gallery offering a commanding view of the platform. Below him, his servant Gumbo settled into the amphitheatre, ready to retreat whenever the heat of the crowd demanded a pint of beer or a game of cards with the coachmen waiting outside. The scene was a microcosm of old society, encumbered by a prodigious number of liveried servants. Footmen swarmed like ants around every chapel door, theatre, and carriage box, a race that the narrator lamented was doomed to extinction, much like the noble Red Indians of America. Only a few thousand remained, grand and melancholy, clinging to their plush coats and powdered wigs in a world that was rapidly changing.

Before the principal combatants appeared, the arena filled with minor exhibitions. A boxing match took place, but the fighters lacked true spirit, receiving little punishment and offering scant entertainment. This was followed by cudgel-play, where the injuries inflicted were so trivial and the participants so insignificant that the crowd began to hiss and grumble in evident discontent. "The masters! The masters!" the people shouted, demanding the arrival of the famous champions.

Soon, the intrepid Sutton ascended the steps, sword in hand. He saluted the company with martial grace, making a special bow to a private box occupied by a stout gentleman of apparent importance. He was swiftly followed by the renowned Figg, to whom the stout gentleman waved a hand of approval. Both men stood shirtless, their heads shaved clean but marked by the cracks and scars of countless past battles. Each wore an "armiger," a ribbon denoting his color, upon his burly sword arm. The gladiators shook hands, sealing their pact as a contemporary poet noted: "The word it was bilboe."

The combat began with a ferocity that silenced the crowd. Great Figg delivered a blow so tremendous that, had it struck Sutton's head, it would have severed it cleanly. Instead, Sutton deflected the strike with his own sword. However, the force of Figg's blow was so mighty that it shattered the weapon in Sutton's hands, proving the blade less constant than the heart of its wielder. New swords were issued, and the fight continued. The first blood spilled from Figg's panting side, eliciting a roar of delight from Sutton's supporters. Yet, the veteran champion appealed to his audience, particularly the stout gentleman in the gallery, revealing that the wound was a result of his own broken sword.

During the brief pause caused by this incident, Mr. Warrington observed a gentleman in a riding-frock and plain wig entering the stout man's box. It was his friend from Tunbridge Wells, Lord March and Ruglen. The nobleman, usually sparing with his politeness, displayed singular deference to the stout gentleman, accepting bank-bills with a profound bow. Spotting Harry in the gallery, Lord March crossed over and warmly greeted his young friend.

They watched the combat unfold with immense skill and valour on both sides. After the swordplay, the warriors engaged with quarter-staves, and ultimately, victory remained with the ancient champion, Figg. As the warriors fought, a thunderstorm broke over the building. Mr. Warrington gladly accepted a seat in Lord March's chariot, leaving his own phaeton to be driven home by his groom.

Harry was in high spirits, declaring this to be the finest sport he had witnessed since arriving in England. Yet, as was his custom, he associated his pleasure with a longing for his boyhood companion to share it. He sighed, "I wish..." and then stopped himself.

"What do you wish and what don't you wish?" Lord March asked.

"I was thinking, my lord, of my elder brother," Harry replied. "We promised to have our sport together at home. Many times we talked of it. But he wouldn't have liked this rough sort of sport, nor did he care for fighting, though he was the bravest lad alive."

"Oh! He was the bravest lad alive, was he?" Lord March queried, lolling on his cushion with curiosity.

"You should have seen him in a quarrel with a very gallant officer," Harry continued, his voice animated. "It was absurd, but hard to keep George off him. I never saw a fellow so cool, nor more savage and determined. Ah! For the honour of the country, I wish he could have come here instead of me, to show you a real Virginian gentleman."

"Nay, sir, you'll do very well," the amused nobleman countered. "What is this I hear of Lady Yarmouth taking you into favour?"

"I will do as well as another," Harry insisted. "I can ride, and I think I can shoot better than George. But then my brother had the head, sir, the head!" He tapped his own skull. "He had read almost every book ever written; could play the fiddle and harpsichord; could compose poetry and sermons most elegant. What can I do? I am only good to ride, play at cards, and drink Burgundy." He hung his head in penitence. "But them I can do as well as most fellows. In fact, my lord, I'll back myself."

Lord March relished the young man's naivete, much like a jaded voluptuary enjoys a wholesome chop of meat. "By Gad, Mr. Warrington," he said, "you ought to be taken to Exeter Change and put in a show. A gentleman from Virginia who has lost his elder brother and absolutely regrets him. The breed isn't known in this country. Upon my honour, I believe you would like to have him back again."

"Believe!" cried the Virginian, flushing red.

"That is, you believe you believe you would like him back again. But depend on it you wouldn't. 'Tis not in human nature, sir. Here are some fine houses we are coming to. That corner is Sir Richard Littleton's; that great one was my Lord Bingley's. 'Tis a pity they do nothing better with this great empty space of Cavendish Square than fence it with unsightly boards. By George! I don't know where the town's running. Montagu House has been turned into a confounded Don Saltero's museum, stuffed with books, birds, and rhinoceroses. They've even run a cursed cut—the New Road—at the back of Bedford House Gardens, spoiling the Duke's comfort, though I guess they'll console him in the pocket. I don't know where the town will stop. Shall we go down Tyburn Road and the Park, or through Swallow Street into the habitable quarter? We can dine at Pall Mall, or, if you like, with you; and spend the evening as you like—with the Queen of Spades, or..."

"With the Queen of Spades, if your lordship pleases," Mr. Warrington blushed, saying.

The equipage drove to his hotel in Covent Garden, where the landlord, recognizing Lord March, bowed his wig onto the nobleman's shoes in humble welcome. A rich young English peer in the reign of George the Second; a wealthy patrician in the reign of Augustus; which would you rather have been? A question worthy of any modern debating club.

The best English dinner possible was served to the young Virginian and his noble friend. After dinner, wine flowed in plenty, of quality good enough for the epicurean earl. Over the wine, they discussed seeing fireworks at Vauxhall or playing cards. Harry, having never seen fireworks beyond a dozen squibs at Williamsburg on the fifth of November (which he considered a sublime display), would have preferred Vauxhall, but yielded to his guest's preference for piquet. Soon, they were absorbed in the game.

Harry began by winning, as usual. However, within half an hour, luck turned in favor of Lord March. The arrival of Mr. Draper, Harry's man of business, caused a brief interruption. Mr. Warrington always invited everyone to sit and drink, sharing his crust, haunch, or bottle of Burgundy with a kindly spirit. Such hospitality was rare in their selfish world; often brought from the country in youth, these virtues withered under the stifling London air. Draper, though not fond of wine, delighted in witnessing piquet played by men of fashion. Undismayed by Lord March's sidelong scowls, he surveyed the game. Harry was no match for the experienced London club player, especially with Lord March holding superior cards.

Their stakes were no concern of Mr. Draper's. The gentlemen played for shillings, counting gains and losses in a low tone with grave politeness. But a second interruption was destined to occur, bringing execrations from Lord March's lips. First came a scuffle outside, then whispers, then the outcry of a woman in tears. Finally, a female rushed into the room, triggering an explosion of naughty language from the lord.

"I wish your women would take some other time for coming, confound 'em," Lord March said, laying his cards down in a pet.

"What, Mrs. Betty!" cried Harry.

Indeed, it was no other than Mrs. Betty, Lady Maria's maid, with Gumbo standing behind her, his fine countenance beslobbered with tears.

"What has happened?" Mr. Warrington asked, perturbed. "Is the Baroness well?"

"Help! Help, sir, your honour!" Mrs. Betty ejaculated, falling to her knees.

"Help whom?"

A howl erupted from Gumbo.

"Gumbo! You scoundrel! Has anything happened between Mrs. Betty and you?" asked the black's master.

Mr. Gumbo stepped back with great dignity, placing a hand on his heart. "No, sir; nothing hab happened 'twix' this lady and me."

"It's my mistress, sir," Betty cried. "Help! Help! Here's the letter she have wrote, sir! They have gone and took her, sir!"

"Is it only that old Molly Esmond? She's known to be over head and heels in debt!" Lord March dismissed her, taking up his cards. "Dry your eyes in the next room, Mrs. Betty, and let me and Mr. Warrington go on with our game."

"Help! Help her!" Betty cried again. "Oh, Mr. Harry! You won't be a-going on with your cards when my lady calls out to you to come and help her! Your honour used to come quick enough when my lady used to send me to fetch you at Castlewood!"

"Confound you! Can't you hold your tongue?" Lord March snapped, using choice words and oaths.

But Betty would not cease weeping, and it was decreed that Lord March must cease winning for that night. Mr. Warrington rose and rang the bell.

"My dear lord, the game must be over for to-night. My relative writes to me in great distress, and I am bound to go to her."

"Curse her! Why couldn't she wait till to-morrow?" Lord March testily exclaimed.

Mr. Warrington ordered a postchaise instantly. His own horses would take him to Bromley.

"Bet you, you don't do it within the hour!" Lord March challenged. "Bet you, you don't do it within five quarters of an hour! Bet you four to one—or I'll take your bet, which you please—that you're not robbed on Blackheath! Bet you, you are not at Tunbridge Wells before midnight!"

"Done!" said Mr. Warrington. Lord March carefully noted the terms of the four wagers in his pocket-book.

Lady Maria's letter read as follows:

"MY DEAR COUSIN—I am fell into a trapp, which I perceive the machinations of villians. I am a prisner. Betty will tell you all. Ah, my Henrico! Come to the resque of your MOLLY."

Within half an hour of receiving this missive, Mr. Warrington was in his postchaise, galloping over Westminster Bridge on the road to succour his kinswoman.
