Harry Warrington stood firm in his resolve to honor the grim wager his cousin had wrung from him, though no benevolent observer would mistake this for a desire on the young man's part. He was eager to be rid of the engagement. Perhaps the beating inflicted upon poor Will was intended to hasten this resolution; Harry likely reasoned that a fistfight between them would inevitably drag the families into a feud. In such a chaos, Maria might side with her brother, leaving Harry isolated. He would offer no apology or retraction. Should Will then challenge him to settle the score by force, Harry would simply fight to determine the stronger man. Amidst the rising storm of family discord, the agreement would surely dissolve, freeing him once more.

Thus, honest Harry laid his trap and lit the fuse. Yet, when the explosion faded, the damage was minimal: William Esmond's nose was swollen and his eye blackened for a week. Will did not issue a challenge to his cousin, Harry Warrington, and consequently, neither man killed the other. Will was knocked down, but he rose again. How many sensible men would have done the same, had they been able to settle their grievances in private, away from prying eyes?

Maria did not take her family's side in the dispute; instead, she rallied behind her cousin, a stance supported by Lord Castlewood upon hearing of the disturbance. "Will struck the first blow," the Lord declared, citing the chaplain's provocation. It was not the first time he had been found quarreling while drunk. Mr. Warrington displayed proper spirit in resenting the insult, and it was for Will, not Harry, to seek pardon.

Harry insisted on accepting no apology until his horse was returned and his bet settled. While the chronicler cannot ascertain from surviving papers how the wager was finally resolved, it is certain that the cousins soon met in the homes of various friends, avoiding further physical altercation.

Maria's elder brother had initially been content to see his sister, who had remained unmarried for so many years, wed any gentleman who presented himself, especially one from Virginia. He envisioned her retiring to his wigwam in the forest, where she could be quietly disposed of. In the natural order of things, Harry would outlive his elderly bride and console himself as he saw fit after her departure.

However, following an interview with Aunt Bernstein upon arriving in London, the Lord changed his mind. He even attempted to dissuade Maria from the match, feigning pity for the young man condemned to a life of misery due to a foolish promise made at twenty-one.

"Miery, indeed!" Maria protested, confused by the sentiment. "Pity, forsooth?" Lord Castlewood had believed it was no pity at all. Maria understood the true meaning of pity. Her brother had confided in Aunt Bernstein, who had offered money to break off the match. She grasped the Lord's implication, yet she trusted Mr. Warrington as a man of honor.

On this, the Lord departed for White's or whatever haunt he frequented. It is probable his sister guessed accurately the nature of his conversation with Madame Bernstein.

"And so," he thought, "the end of my virtue is that the Mohock shall fall prey to others, rendering my sparing him useless. *Quem deus vult*—what was that schoolmaster's adage? If I do not have him, someone else will. My brother has had a slice; my dear sister intends to swallow the whole of him bodily. Here have I been at home respecting his youth and innocence, declining to play beyond the value of a sixpence, acting as his guardian and mentor. Why, I am but a fool fattening a goose for others to feed upon! Not many good actions have I performed in this life, and here is this one that benefits whom?—others. Talk of remorse! By all the fires and furies, the remorse I feel is for things I haven't done and might have done! Why did I spare Lucretia? She hated me ever after, and her husband met his predestined end. Why have I let this lad off?—that March and the rest, who do not want him, may pluck him! And I carry a bad repute; I am the man people point at, calling the wicked lord, against whom women warn their sons! Pardi, I am not a penny worse, only a great deal more unlucky than my neighbors, and it is only my cursed weakness that has been my greatest enemy!"

Here, the chronicler, in recording a speech a gentleman merely thought, may be accused of overdrawn narrative by the patient reader, who has a right to withhold full credulity. Yet, have not Livy, Thucydides, and countless other historians penned speeches for their heroes that the latter never actually delivered? How much more may we, knowing Lord Castlewood's character so intimately, declare what passed in his mind and transcribe his thoughts? What? A whole pack of wolves hunts this lamb, intending to make a meal of him, while one hungry old hunter stands by, denied a single cutlet? Who has not admired that noble speech of Lord Clive, when reproached upon returning from India for making too free with jaghires, lakhs, gold mohurs, diamonds, pearls, and the like? "Upon my life," said the hero of Plassy, "when I think of my opportunities, I am surprised I took so little!"

To tell disagreeable stories of a gentleman until one is forced to impart them is painful to a feeling mind. Hence, though I knew before the first page of this history was written the sort of person Lord Castlewood was and the esteem held by his contemporaries, I have withheld much that was unpleasant, allowing only the candid reader to perceive he was a nobleman who ought not to be liked. It is true that Lord March and other gentlemen of whom he complained would have bet with Mr. Warrington for his last shilling and taken their winnings without scruple, picking the bones of a chicken; they would seize any advantage in the game, the race, or their superior knowledge of the horses. In this, they followed the practice of all gentlemen: but when they played, they played fair, and when they lost, they paid.

Madame Bernstein was reluctant to reveal all she knew to her Virginian nephew regarding his family's discredit; she was even touched by the Lord's forbearance toward Harry upon his first arrival in Europe and pleased with his compliance with her wishes. However, in their conversation concerning Maria's designs on Harry, he spoke his mind with his usual cynicism. He voted himself a fool for sparing a lad whom no sparing would eventually keep from ruin, pointing out Mr. Harry's undeniable extravagances, his spendthrift associates, his nights at faro and hazard, and his rides to Newmarket. He asked why he alone should keep his hands off the young fellow.

In vain Madame Bernstein pleaded that Harry was poor. "Bah!" retorted the Lord. "He is heir to a principality which ought to have been his, Castlewood's, and might have restored our ruined family. Indeed, Madame Bernstein thought Mr. Warrington's Virginian property much greater than it was. Were there not money-lenders in the town who would lend him on post-obits in plenty?" Castlewood knew this to his cost; he had applied during his father's lifetime, and the cursed crew had eaten up two-thirds of his miserable income. He spoke with such desperate candor and ill-humor that Madame Bernstein became alarmed for her favorite and determined to caution him at the first opportunity.

That evening she began to pen a note to Mr. Warrington. But all her life she was slow with her pen and disliked using it. "I never knew any good come of writing more than *bon jour* or business," she used to say. "What is the use of writing ill, when there are so many clever people who can do it well? And even then, it were best left alone." So she sent one of her men to Mr. Harry's lodgings, bidding him come and drink a dish of tea with her the next day, when she proposed to warn him.

But the next morning she was indisposed and could not receive Mr. Harry when he came. She kept her chamber for a couple of days, and the next day there was a great engagement, and the day after that Mr. Harry was off on some expedition of his own. In the whirl of London life, what man sees his neighbor, what brother his sister, what schoolfellow his old friend? Many days passed before Mr. Warrington and his aunt had the confidential conversation she desired.

She began by scolding him mildly about his extravagance and madcap frolics (though, in truth, she was charmed with him for both). He replied that young men will be young men, and that it was in dutifully waiting in attendance on his aunt that he had made the acquaintance with whom he mostly lived at present. Then, with some prelude, she began to warn him regarding his cousin, Lord Castlewood. On this, he broke into a bitter laugh and said the good-natured world had told him plenty about Lord Castlewood already.

"To say of a man of his lordship's rank, or of any gentleman, 'Don't play with him,' is more than I like to do," continued the lady.

"Oh, you may say on, aunt!" said Harry, with something like an imprecation on his lips.

"And have you played with your cousin already?" asked the young man's worldly old monitress.

"And lost and won, madam!" answered Harry, gallantly. "It don't become me to say which. If we have a bout with a neighbor in Virginia, a bottle, or a pack of cards, or a quarrel, we don't go home and tell our mothers. I mean no offense, aunt!" And, blushing, the handsome young fellow went up and kissed the old lady. He looked very brave and brilliant, with his rich lace, his fair face and hair, his fine new suit of velvet and gold. On taking leave of his aunt, he gave his usual sumptuous benefaction to her servants, who crowded round him. It was a rainy wintry day, and the gentleman, to save his fine silk stockings, must come in a chair. "To White's!" he called out to the chairmen, and away they carried him to the place where he passed a great deal of his time.

Our Virginian's friends might have wished he had been a less sedulous frequenter of that house of entertainment; but so much may be said in favor of Mr. Warrington that, having engaged in play, he fought his battle like a hero. He was not flustered by good luck, and perfectly calm when the chances went against him. If Fortune is proverbially fickle to men at play, how many men are fickle to Fortune, running frightened from her advances and deserting her, who perhaps had never thought of leaving them but for their own cowardice?

"By George, Mr. Warrington," said Mr. Selwyn, waking up in a rare fit of enthusiasm, "you deserve to win! You treat your luck as a gentleman should, and as long as she remains with you, behave to her with the most perfect politeness. *Si celeres quatit pennas*—you know the rest, no? Well, you are not much the worse off—you will call her ladyship's coach and make her a bow at the step. Look at Lord Castlewood yonder, passing the box. Did you ever hear a fellow curse and swear so at losing five or six pieces? She must be a jade indeed if she long gives her favors to such a niggardly canaille as that!"

"We don't consider our family canaille, sir," said Mr. Warrington, "and my Lord Castlewood is one of them."

"I forgot. I forgot, and ask your pardon! And I make you my compliment upon my lord, and Mr. Will Esmond, his brother," said Harry's neighbor at the hazard-table. "The box is with me. Five's the main! Deuce Ace! my usual luck. *Virtute mea me involvo!*"—and he sank back in his chair.

Whether it was upon this occasion of taking the box that Mr. Harry threw the fifteen mains mentioned in one of those other letters of Mr. Walpole's, which have not come into his present learned editor's hands, I know not; but certain it is that on his first appearance at White's, Harry had five or six evenings of prodigious good luck and seemed more than ever the Fortunate Youth. The five hundred pounds withdrawn from his patrimonial inheritance multiplied into thousands. He bought fine clothes, purchased fine horses, gave grand entertainments, made handsome presents, lived as if he had been as rich as Sir James Lowther or his Grace of Bedford, and yet the five thousand pounds never seemed to diminish. No wonder he gave where giving was so easy; no wonder he was generous with Fortunatus's purse in his pocket. I say no wonder he gave, for such was his nature. Other Fortunati tie up the endless purse, drink small beer, and go to bed with a tallow candle.

During this vein of luck, what must Mr. Harry do but find out from Lady Maria what her ladyship's debts were and pay them off to the last shilling? Her stepmother and half-sister, who did not love her, he treated to all sorts of magnificent presents.

"Had you not better get yourself arrested, Will?" my lord sardonically said to his brother. "Although you bit him in that affair of the horse, the Mohock will certainly take you out of pawn." It was then that Mr. William felt a true remorse, although not of that humble kind which sent the repentant Prodigal to his knees. "Confound it," he groaned, "to think that I have let this fellow slip for such a little matter as forty pounds! Why, he was good for a thousand at least."

As for Maria, that generous creature accepted the good fortune sent her with a grateful heart and was ready to accept as much more as one pleased. Having paid off her debts to her various milliners, tradesmen, and purveyors, she forthwith proceeded to contract new ones. Mrs. Betty, her ladyship's maid, went round informing the tradespeople that her mistress was about to contract a matrimonial alliance with a
