Mr. Harry Warrington of Virginia kept his lodgings in Bond Street, London, living upon the fat of the land and drinking bumpers of the finest wine. To the fashionable world, he was the Fortunate Youth, a title recognized with genuine envy. Young, wealthy, handsome, and blessed with fortune, he was welcomed by all. Let us not, my dear brethren, cry out too loudly against the selfishness of a world that is kind to the young and handsome while frowning upon the old, the ugly, and the miserable. If I have the right to choose my acquaintances—preferring at the club the company of a lively, well-dressed gentleman who amuses me over that of a slouching misanthrope or a ceaselessly prating coxcomb—has not society, the aggregate of you and me, the same right to such choice? Harry was liked because he was likeable; because he was rich, handsome, jovial, well-born, and brave; because with jolly topers he shared a song and a bottle; because with gentlemen sportsmen he loved any game on foot or horseback; because with ladies he possessed a modest, blushing timidity that rendered him intriguing; and because to those humbler than himself in degree, he was magnificently liberal and anxious to spare annoyance. Our Virginian was very grand, high and mighty, to be sure; but in those times, when the distinction of ranks still held sway, to be distant with inferiors brought no unpopularity to a gentleman. Remember that in those days, the Secretary of State knelt when he went to the king with his despatches, and the Under-Secretary never dared to sit in his chief's presence. If I were Secretary of State, I should not like to kneel before my audience; if Under-Secretary, I should dread standing while the Right Honourables looked over the papers. Yet there is a *modus in rebus*: certain lines must be drawn. I am only half pleased when Bob Bowstreet and Tom Garbage propose to join fellowship as brother literary men, slap me on the back, and call me "old boy" or by my Christian name.

As much pleasure as the town could offer in the winter season of 1756–57, Mr. Warrington had for the asking. There were operas, in which he took moderate delight, despite the prodigious satire brought against them for being foolish, Popish, and unmanly. There were the theatres with Mr. Garrick and Mrs. Pritchard, and Mrs. Clive. There were masquerades and ridottos frequented by fine society, and the private drums and assemblies of lords and ladies, which began and ended with cards. Mr. Warrington preferred White's, for the play there was neither so high nor so fair as at the club-table.

One day, his kinsman Lord Castlewood took him to court, presenting Harry to his Majesty, who had come to town from Kensington. But that gracious sovereign either disliked Harry's introducer or had other reasons for being sulky. His Majesty merely said, "Oh, heard of you from Lady Yarmouth. The Earl of Castlewood," turning to his lordship and speaking in German, "shall tell him that he plays too much!" And so saying, the Defender of the Faith turned his royal back.

Lord Castlewood shrank back, frightened at this cold reception.

"What does he say?" asked Harry.

"His Majesty thinks they play too high at White's, and is displeased," whispered the nobleman.

"If he does not want us, we had better not come again, that is all," said Harry, simply. "I never, somehow, considered that German fellow a real King of England."

"Hush! for Heaven's sake, hold your confounded colonial tongue!" cried my lord. "Don't you see the walls here have ears!"

"And what then?" asked Mr. Warrington. "Why, look at the people! Hang me, if it is not quite a curiosity! They were all shaking hands with me, bowing, and flattering me just now; and at present they avoid me as if I were the plague!"

"Shake hands, nephew," said a broad-faced, broad-shouldered gentleman in a scarlet-laced waistcoat and a great old-fashioned wig. "I heard what you said. I have ears like the wall, look you. And, now, if other people show you the cold shoulder, I'll give you my hand;" and so saying, the gentleman put out a great brown hand, grasping Harry's. "Something of my brother about your eyes and face. Though I suppose in your island you grow more wiry and thin. I am thine uncle, child. My name is Sir Miles Warrington. My lord knows me well enough."

My lord looked very frightened and yellow. "Yes, my dear Harry. This is your paternal uncle, Sir Miles Warrington."

"Might as well have come to see us in Norfolk, as dangle about playing the fool at Tunbridge Wells, Mr. Warrington, or Mr. Esmond—which do you call yourself?" said the Baronet. "The old lady calls herself Madam Esmond, don't she?"

"My mother is not ashamed of her father's name, nor am I, uncle," said Mr. Harry, rather proudly.

"Well said, lad! Come home and eat a bit of mutton with Lady Warrington at three, in Hill Street—that is if you can do without your White's kickshaws. You need not look frightened, my Lord Castlewood! I shall tell no tales out of school."

"I—I am sure Sir Miles Warrington will act as a gentleman!" said my lord, in much perturbation.

"Belike, he will," growled the Baronet, turning on his heel. "And thou wilt come, young man, at three; and mind, good roast mutton waits for nobody. Thou hast a great look of thy father. Lord bless us, how we used to beat each other! He was smaller than me, and in course younger; but many a time he had the best of it. Take it he was henpecked when he married, and Madam Esmond took the spirit out of him when she got him in her island. Virginia is an island. Ain't it an island?"

Harry laughed and said "No!" And the jolly Baronet, going off, said, "Well, island or not, thou must come and tell all about it to my lady. She'll know whether 'tis an island or not."

"My dear Mr. Warrington," said my lord, with an appealing look, "I need not tell you that in this great city every man has enemies, and that there is a great deal of detraction and scandal. I never spoke to you about Sir Miles Warrington precisely because I did know him, and because we have had differences together. Should he permit himself remarks to my disparagement, you will receive them *cum grano*, and remember that it is from an enemy they come." And the pair walked out of the King's apartments into Saint James's Street. Harry found the news of his cold reception at court had already preceded him to White's. The King had turned his back upon him. The King was jealous of Harry's favour with the favourite. Harry was *au mieux* with Lady Yarmouth. A score of gentlemen wished him a compliment upon his conquest. Before night it was a settled matter that this was amongst the other victories of the Fortunate Youth.

Sir Miles told his wife and Harry as much when the young man appeared at the appointed hour at the Baronet's dinner-table, rallying Harry in his simple rustic fashion. The lady, at first a grand and stately personage, told Harry that the reputation the world had made for him was so bad that at first she had given him but a frigid welcome. With the young ladies, Sir Miles's daughters, it was "How d'ye do, cousin?" and "No, thank you, cousin," and a number of prim curtseys to the Virginian as they greeted and left him. The little boy, the heir of the house, dined at table under the care of his governor; having his glass of port by papa after dinner, he gave a loose to his innocent tongue and asked many questions of his cousin. At last the innocent youth said, after looking hard in Harry's face, "Are you wicked, cousin Harry? You don't look very wicked!"

"My dear Master Miles!" expostulated the tutor, turning very red.

"But you know you said he was wicked!" cried the child.

"We are all miserable sinners, Miley," explained papa. "Haven't you heard the clergyman say so every Sunday?"

"Yes, but not so very wicked as cousin Harry. Is it true that you gamble, cousin, and drink all night with wicked men, and frequent the company of wicked women? You know you said so, Mr. Walker—and mamma said so, too, that Lady Yarmouth was a wicked woman."

"And you are a little pitcher," cried papa: "and my wife, nephew Harry, is a staunch Jacobite—you won't like her the worse for that. Take Miles to his sisters, Mr. Walker, and Topsham shall give thee a ride in the park, child, on thy little horse." The idea of the little horse consoled Master Miles; for when his father ordered him away to his sisters, he had begun to cry bitterly, bawling out that he would far rather stay with his wicked cousin.

"They have made you a sad reputation among 'em, nephew!" said the jolly Baronet. "My wife, you must know, of late years, and since the death of my poor eldest son, has taken to, to, hum—to Tottenham Court Road and Mr. Whitfield's preaching: and we have had one Ward about the house, a friend of Mr. Walker's yonder, who has recounted sad stories about you and your brother at home."

"About me, Sir Miles, as much as he pleases," cried Harry, warm with port: "but I'll break any man's bones who dares say a word against my brother! Why, sir, that fellow was not fit to buckle my dear George's shoe; and if I find him repeating at home what he dared to say in our house in Virginia, I promise him a second caning."

"You seem to stand up for your friends, nephew Harry," said the Baronet. "Fill thy glass, lad, thou art not as bad as thou hast been painted. I always told my lady so. I drink Madam Esmond Warrington's health, of Virginia, and will have a full bumper for that toast."

Harry, as in duty bound, emptied his glass, filled again, and drank Lady Warrington and Master Miles.

"Thou wouldst be heir to four thousand acres in Norfolk, did he die, though," said the Baronet.

"God forbid, sir, and be praised that I have acres enough in Virginia of my own!" said Mr. Warrington. He went up presently and took a dish of coffee with Lady Warrington; he talked to the young ladies of the house. He was quite easy, pleasant, and natural. There was one of them somewhat like Fanny Mountain, and this young lady became his special favourite. When he went away, they all agreed their wicked cousin was not near so wicked as they had imagined him to be; at any rate, my lady had strong hopes of rescuing him from the pit. She sent him a good book that evening, whilst Mr. Harry was at White's, with a pretty note praying that *Law's Call* might be of service to him. This despatched, she and her daughters went off to a rout at the house of a minister's lady. But Harry, before he went to White's, had driven to his friend Mr. Sparks in Tavistock Street and purchased more trinkets for his female cousins—"from their aunt in Virginia," he said. You see, he was full of kindness; he kindled and warmed with prosperity. There are men on whom wealth hath no such fortunate influence. It hardens base hearts; it makes those who were mean and servile, mean and proud. If it should please the gods to try me with ten thousand a year, I will, of course, meekly submit myself to their decrees, but I will pray them to give me strength enough to bear the trial. All the girls in Hill Street were delighted at getting the presents from Aunt Warrington in Virginia and addressed a collective note, which must have astonished that good lady when she received it in spring-time, when she and Mountain and Fanny were on a visit to grim deserted Castlewood, when the snows had cleared away and a thousand peach-trees flushed with blossoms. "Poor boy!" the mother thought. "This is some present he gave his cousins in my name, in the time of his prosperity—nay, of his extravagance and folly. How quickly his wealth has passed away! But he ever had a kind heart for the poor Mountain; and we must not forget him in his need. It behoves us to be more than ever careful of our own expenses, my good people!" And so, I dare say, they warmed themselves by one log, ate of one dish, and worked by one candle. And the widow's servants, whom the good soul began to pinch more and more, lied, stole, and cheated more and more; and what was saved in one way was stolen in another.

One afternoon, Mr. Harry sat in his Bond Street lodgings, arrayed in his dressing-gown, sipping his chocolate, surrounded by luxury, encased in satin, and yet enveloped in care. A few weeks previously, when the luck was with him and he was scattering his benefactions to and fro, he had royally told Parson Sampson to get together a list of his debts which he, Mr. Warrington, would pay. Accordingly Sampson had gone to work and got together a list, not of all his debts—no man ever does set down all—but such a catalogue as he thought sufficient to bring to Mr. Warrington, at whose breakfast-table the divine had humbly waited until his honour should choose to attend it.

Harry appeared at length, very pale and languid, in curl-papers, and scarce any appetite for his breakfast. The chaplain
