The rejection of his peace-offerings had ignited a fire of indignation in the young American chief, a wrath directed not merely against Colonel Lambert but against the entire lineage of that gentleman. "He has humiliated me before the girls!" the young man fumed internally. "He and Mr. Wolfe, who were forever preaching morality and posturing with an air of superior protection, have once again held me up to the family as a scapegrace and prodigal. They are so virtuous they refuse to shake my hand; and when I attempt to show them a scrap of common gratitude, they fling my presents in my face!"

"Why, sir, the things must be worth a fortune!" observed Parson Sampson, his eyes gleaming with covetousness as he cast a glance at the two morocco boxes resting on white satin cushions, displaying Mr. Sparks's golden gewgaws.

"They cost some money, Sampson," admitted the young man. "Not that I would grudge ten times the amount to people who have been kind to me."

"No, faith, sir, not if I know your honour!" interjected Sampson, seizing every opportunity to praise his young patron.

"The repeater, they told me, was a great bargain, worth a hundred pounds at Paris. Little Miss Hetty said she longed for a repeating watch."

"Oh, what a love!" cried the chaplain, his voice rising. "With a little circle of pearls on the back and a diamond knob for the handle! Why, 'twould win any woman's heart, Sir!"

"There passes an apple-woman with a basket. I have a mind to fling the thing out to her!" Mr. Warrington shouted fiercely, his temper fraying under the weight of his own perceived slights.

When Harry departed on business that took him to the City and the Temple, his parasite did not follow him far into the Strand; he turned away, confessing a terror of Chancery Lane and its inhabitants. Mr. Warrington proceeded to his broker, and they walked to the Bank, conducting some minor business. After signing a trifling document or two, Harry departed with a bundle of crisp bank-notes in his pocket. The broker escorted him to one of the great dining-houses famous in the City, and afterwards showed him the Virginian walk upon 'Change. Harry passed through it with a certain shamefacedness. *What would a certain lady in Virginia say,* he thought, *if she knew that he was carrying off in that bottomless gambler's pocket a great portion of his father's patrimony?* *Those are all Virginia merchants,* he mused, imagining the whispers of the exchange. *They are all talking about me, saying, 'That is young Esmond, of Castlewood, on the Potomac, Madam Esmond's son; and he has been losing his money at play, selling out so much, and so much, and so much.'*

His spirits did not rise until he had passed under the traitors' heads of Temple Bar and was fairly out of the City. From the Strand, Mr. Harry walked home, glancing into St. James's Street by the way, but there was nobody there yet; the company did not arrive at the Chocolate-House until a later hour.

Arrived at home, Mr. Harry produced his bundle of bank-notes. He took three of them, placed them in a sheet of paper which he sealed carefully, having previously written within the sheet the words, "Much good may they do you. H. E. W." He directed this packet to the Reverend Mr. Sampson, leaving it on the chimney-glass with instructions to his servants to deliver it to the divine upon his arrival.

Now his honour's phaeton was brought to the door, and he stepped in, intending to drive round the park. But the rain began to fall, or the east wind blew, or some other reason arose, and his honour turned his horses' heads down St. James's Street, returning to White's at about three o'clock. Scarcely anybody had come in yet; it was the hour when folks were at dinner. However, there was his cousin Castlewood, lounging over the *Public Advertiser*, having just come off from his duty at Court.

Lord Castlewood yawned over the newspaper. "What shall they do?" he asked. "Shall we have a little piquet?" Harry had no objection to a little piquet. "Just for an hour," said Lord Castlewood. "I dine at Arlington Street at four." "Just for an hour," said Mr. Warrington, and they called for cards.

"Or shall we have 'em in upstairs?" suggested my lord. "Out of the noise?"

"Certainly, out of the noise," said Harry.

At five o'clock, a half-dozen gentlemen had come in after their dinner, sitting at cards, coffee, or talk. The folks from the ordinary had not left the table yet. There the gentlemen of White's would often sit till past midnight.

One toothpick pointed over the coffee-house blinds into the street. "Whose phaeton?" asked Toothpick 1 of Toothpick 2.

"The Fortunate Youth's," said No. 2.

"Not so fortunate the last three nights. Luck confoundedly against him. Lost, last night, thirteen hundred to the table. Mr. Warrington been here to-day, John?"

"Mr. Warrington is in the house now, sir. In the little tea-room with Lord Castlewood since three o'clock. They are playing at piquet," said John.

"What fun for Castlewood!" said No. 1, with a shrug.

The second gentleman growled out an execration. "Curse the fellow!" he said. "He has no right to be in this club at all. He doesn't pay if he loses. Gentlemen ought not to play with him. Sir Miles Warrington told me at court the other day that Castlewood has owed him money on a bet these three years."

"Castlewood," said No. 1, "doesn't lose if he plays alone. A large company flurries him, you see—that's why he doesn't come to the table." The facetious gentleman grinned, showing all his teeth, polished perfectly clean.

"Let's go up and stop 'em," growled No. 2.

"Why?" asked the other. "Much better look out the window. Lamplighter going up the ladder—famous sport. Look at that old putt in the chair: did you ever see such an old quiz?"

"Who is that just gone out of the house? As I live, it's Fortunatus! He seems to have forgotten that his phaeton has been here, waiting all the time. I bet you two to one he has been losing to Castlewood."

"Jack, do you take me to be a fool?" asked the one gentleman of the other. "Pretty pair of horses the youth has got. How he is flogging 'em!" And they saw Mr. Warrington galloping up the street, scared coachmen and chairmen clearing before him; presently my Lord Castlewood was seen to enter a chair and go his way.

Harry drove up to his own door. It was but a few yards, and those poor horses had been beating the pavement all this while in the rain. Mr. Gumbo was engaged at the door in conversation with a countrified-looking lass, who tripped off with a curtsey. Mr. Gumbo was always engaged with some pretty maid or other.

"Gumbo, has Mr. Sampson been here?" asked Gumbo's master from his driving-seat.

"No, sar. Mr. Sampson have not been here!" answered Mr. Warrington's gentleman. Harry bid him go upstairs and bring down a letter addressed to Mr. Sampson.

"Addressed to Mr. Sampson? Oh yes, sir," said Mr. Gumbo, who could not read.

"A sealed letter, stupid! on the mantelpiece, in the glass!" said Harry; and Gumbo leisurely retired to fetch that document. As soon as Harry had it, he turned his horses' heads towards St. James's Street, and the two gentlemen, still yawning out of the window at White's, beheld the Fortunate Youth, in an instant, back again.

As they passed out of the little tea-room where he and Lord Castlewood had had their piquet together, Mr. Warrington had seen that several gentlemen had entered the play-room and that there was a bank there. Some were already steadily at work, wearing their gaming jackets, which they kept at the club to put on when they intended to sit down to a regular night's play.

Mr. Warrington went to the clerk's desk, paid his account of the previous night, and, sitting down at the table, called for fresh counters. This had been decidedly an unlucky week with the Fortunate Youth, and tonight was no more fortunate than previous nights. He called for more counters, and more presently. He was a little pale and silent, though very easy and polite when talked to. But he could not win.

At last he got up. "Hang it! stay and mend your luck!" said Lord March, who was sitting by his side with a heap of counters before him, green and white. "Take a hundred of mine, and go on!"

"I have had enough for to-night, my lord," said Harry, and he rose and went away, eating a broiled bone in the coffee-room and walking back to his lodgings some time about midnight. A man after a great catastrophe commonly sleeps pretty well. It is the waking in the morning which is sometimes queer and unpleasant. Last night you proposed to Miss Brown; you quarrelled over your cups with Captain Jones, and valorously pulled his nose; you played at cards with Colonel Robinson, and gave him—oh, how many I O U's! These thoughts, with a fine headache, assail you in the morning watches. What a dreary, dreary gulf between to-day and yesterday! It seems as if you are years older. Can't you leap back over that chasm again, and is it not possible that Yesterday is but a dream? There you are, in bed. No daylight in at the windows yet. Pull your nightcap over your eyes, the blankets over your nose, and sleep away Yesterday. Psha, man, it was but a dream! Oh no, no! The sleep won't come. The watchman bawls some hour—what hour? Harry minded him that he had got the repeating watch under his pillow which he had bought for Hester. *Ting, ting, ting!* the repeating watch sang out six times in the darkness, with a little supplementary performance indicating the half-hour. Poor dear little Hester!—so bright, so gay, so innocent! he would have liked her to have that watch. What will Maria say? (Oh, that old Maria! what a bore she is beginning to be! he thought.) What will Madam Esmond at home say when she hears that he has lost every shilling of his ready money—of his patrimony? All his winnings, and five thousand pounds besides, in three nights. Could Castlewood have played him false? No. My lord knows piquet better than Harry does, but he would not deal unfairly with his own flesh and blood. No, no. Harry was glad his kinsman, who wanted the money, had got it. And for not one more shilling than he possessed, would he play. It was when he counted up his losses at the gaming-table, and found they would cover all the remainder of his patrimony, that he passed the box and left the table. But, O cursed bad company! O extravagance and folly! O humiliation and remorse! "Will my mother at home forgive me?" thought the young prodigal. "Oh, that I were there, and had never left it!"

The dreary London dawn peeped at length through shutters and curtains. The housemaid entered to light his honour's fire and admit the dun morning into his windows. Her Mr. Gumbo presently followed, who warmed his master's dressing-gown and set out his shaving-plate and linen. Then arrived the hairdresser to curl and powder his honour, whilst he read his morning's letters; and at breakfast-time came that inevitable Parson Sampson, with eager looks and servile smiles, to wait on his patron. The parson would have returned yesterday according to mutual agreement, but some jolly fellows had kept him to dinner at the St. Alban's, and, faith, they had made a night of it.

"Oh, Parson!" groaned Harry, "'twas the worst night you ever made in your life! Look here, sir!"

"Here is a broken envelope with the words, 'Much good may it do you,' written within," said the chaplain, glancing at the paper.

"Look on the outside, sir!" cried Mr. Warrington. "The paper was directed to you." The poor chaplain's countenance exhibited great alarm. "Has some one broke it open, sir?" he asked.

"Some one, yes. I broke it open, Sampson. Had you come here as you proposed yesterday afternoon, you would have found that envelope full of bank-notes. As it is, they were all dropped at the infernal macco-table last night."

"What, all?" said Sampson.

"Yes, all, with all the money I brought away from the city, and all the ready money I have left in the world. In the afternoon I played piquet with my cousin—with a gentleman at White's—and he eased me of all the money I had about me. Remembering that there was still some money left here, unless you had fetched it, I came home and carried it back and left it at the macco-table, with every shilling besides that belongs to me—and—great heaven, Sampson, what's the matter, man?"

"It's my luck, it's my usual luck," cried out the unfortunate chaplain, and fairly burst into tears.

"What! You are not whimpering like a baby at the loss of a loan of a couple of hundred pounds?" cried out Mr. Warrington, very fierce and angry. "Leave the room, Gumbo! Confound you! why are you always poking your woolly head
