The hackney-coach horses flew with a frantic, rattling speed, tearing George Warrington through the Strand and Fleet Street toward the rescue of his imprisoned brother. To any who recall Hogarth's grim depictions of London's thoroughfares in that era, the weariness of the journey is palpable: scarce a light save those held by link-boys, coaches poorly hung, pavements treacherous, and vast quagmires of winter mud swallowing the wheels. The drive from Piccadilly to Fleet Street stretched before the young man as endlessly as the road from Marlborough to London had that morning.

George had written to Harry announcing his arrival in Bristol, and previously, he had penned the great news of his existence and his return from captivity. Yet, war raged between England and France; French privateers were ever on the lookout, seizing British merchant-ships often within sight of port. The letter bearing intelligence of George's restoration must have fallen into the hands of one of the many American vessels captured by the French. The missive telling of George's arrival in England remained unopened by poor Harry. It lay undisturbed in his apartments, reaching him on the third morning after his captivity, only to be ignored when the angry Mr. Ruff refused to surrender a single item of his lodger's property.

It was to these very apartments that George first went upon his arrival in London, seeking his brother. The maid-servant who opened the door screamed at the likeness between the two men and fled back to her mistress. The mistress, unwilling to own that poor Harry was actually a prisoner at her husband's suit, lied, claiming Mr. Warrington had simply left his lodgings. George knew Clarges Street was near Bond Street; he had studied the London map often. Aunt Bernstein would tell him where Harry was. Perhaps she held him at that very moment. George recalled Harry's letters to Virginia detailing Aunt Bernstein's kindness. Even Madam Esmond had been softened by it, particularly by a letter from the Baroness that had once driven George post-haste to Europe. He hoped and trusted that Madam Beatrix had found occasion to repent of her former ways; it was time, indeed, at her age, though Heaven knew she had much to repent of. There were harmless souls of eighty still stoned by irreproachable ladies for slips made centuries prior, yet Rachel Esmond never mentioned her eldest daughter, and Madam Esmond Warrington never mentioned her sister. In spite of the order for remission of the sentence, there remained a crime some folks never would pardon, regarding which female virtue, especially, was inexorable.

Perhaps the Virginians' agent at Bristol had told George fearful stories of his brother's doings. Gumbo, whom he met at his aunt's door, had stammered out a few words of his young master's whereabouts and pitiable condition once the lad recovered from his terror at the sudden reappearance of the master he supposed dead. Hence, Mr. George's stern demeanor when he presented himself to the old lady. It seemed to him a matter of course that his brother in difficulty should be rescued by his relations. Oh, George, how little you know about London and London ways! Whenever you take your walks abroad, how many poor you meet—if a philanthropist were to rescue all of them, not all the wealth of all the provinces of America would suffice him!

Yet, the feeling and agitation displayed by the old lady touched her nephew's heart as George jolted through the dark streets toward the house of his brother's captivity. "She does feel my poor Harry's misfortune," he thought to himself, "I have been too hasty in judging her." Again and again in his life, Mr. George had to rebuke himself for the crime of being too hasty. How many of us have not? And alas, the mischief done, there is no repentance that can mend it. "Quick, coachman!" he urged. "We are almost as slow as you are in getting from Clarges Street to the Temple." Poor Gumbo knew the way to the bailiff's house well enough.

Again the bell rang. The first door opened to George and his negro, then locked warily upon them, leaving them in a little passage with a little Jewish janitor. A second door unlocked, and they entered the house. The janitor stared, his flaring tallow-torch illuminating a second Mr. Warrington. "Come to see that gentleman?" he asked. "Yes. But wait a moment. This is Mr. Warrington's brother from America. Gumbo must go and prepare his master first. Step into this room. There's a gentleman already there about Mr. W.'s business, and another upstairs with him now. There's no end of people who have been about him."

The room into which George was introduced was a small apartment known as Mr. Amos's office. By a guttering candle and the light of the porter, a stout gentleman in a cloak and laced hat sat talking to the bailiff. The young porter carried his candle, preceding Mr. George, ensuring sufficient light.

"We are not angry any more, Harry!" the stout gentleman said in a cheery voice, rising and advancing with an outstretched hand to the newcomer. "Thank God, my boy! Mr. Amos here says there will be no difficulty about James and me being your bail, and we will do your business by breakfast-time. Why... Angels and ministers of grace! Who are you?" He started back as the other grasped his hand.

But the stranger held it more strongly. "God bless you, sir!" he said. "I know who you are. You must be Colonel Lambert, of whose kindness to him my poor Harry wrote. And I am the brother whom you have heard of, sir; who was left for dead in Mr. Braddock's action; and came to life again after eighteen months amongst the French; and live to thank God and thank you for your kindness to my Harry," the lad continued with a faltering voice.

"James! James! Here is news!" cried Mr. Lambert to a gentleman in red who now entered the room. "Here are the dead come alive! Here is Harry Scapegrace's brother come back, and with his scalp on his head, too!" George had taken his hat off and stood by the light. "This is my brother-bail, Mr. Warrington! This is Lieutenant-Colonel James Wolfe, at your service. You must know there has been a little difference between Harry and me, Mr. George. He is pacified, is he, James?"

"He is full of gratitude," said Mr. Wolfe, bowing to Mr. Warrington.

"Harry wrote home about Mr. Wolfe, too, sir," said the young man. "And I hope my brother's friends will be so kind as to be mine."

"I wish he had none other but us, Mr. Warrington. Poor Harry's fine folks have been too fine for him, and have ended by landing him here."

"Nay, your honours, I have done my best to make the young gentleman comfortable; and, knowing your honour before, when you came to bail Captain Watkins, and that your security is perfectly good—if your honour wishes, the young gentleman can go out this very night, and I will make it all right with the lawyer in the morning," said Harry's landlord, recognizing the rank and respectability of the two gentlemen offering bail.

"The debt is five hundred and odd pounds, I think?" said Mr. Warrington. "With a hundred thanks to these gentlemen, I can pay the amount at this moment into the officers' hands, taking the usual acknowledgment and caution. But I can never forget, gentlemen, that you helped my brother at his need, and, for doing so, I say thank you, and God bless you, in my mother's name and mine."

Meanwhile, Gumbo had gone upstairs to his master's apartment. Harry would probably have scolded the negro for returning that night, but the young gentleman was very much soothed and touched by the conversation he had had with the friend who had just left him. He sat over his pipe of Virginia in a sad mood; somehow, even Maria's goodness and affection, as she had just exhibited them, had not altogether consoled him. He had thought, with a little dismay, of certain consequences to which that very kindness and fidelity bound him. Then Mr. Wolfe's homely features and eager outstretched hand came to cheer the prisoner. He heard how Mr. Lambert was below and the errand upon which the two officers had come. In spite of himself, Lambert would be kind to him. In spite of Harry's ill-temper, needless suspicion, and anger, the good gentleman was determined to help him if he might—even against Mr. Wolfe's own advice.

"For you were wrong, Mr. Warrington," said the Colonel. "And you wouldn't be set right; and you, a young man, used hard words and unkind behaviour to your senior, and what is more, one of the best gentlemen who walks God's earth. You see, sir, what his answer hath been to your wayward temper. Will you bear with a friend who speaks frankly with you? Martin Lambert hath acted in this as he always doth, as the best Christian, the best friend, the most kind and generous of men. Nay, if you want another proof of his goodness, here it is: He has converted me, who, as I don't care to disguise, was angry with you for your treatment of him, and has absolutely brought me down here to be your bail. Let us both cry *Peccavimus*! Harry, and shake our friend by the hand! He is sitting in the room below. He would not come here till he knew how you would receive him."

"I think he is a good man!" groaned out Harry. "I was very angry and wild at the time when he and I met last, Colonel Wolfe. Nay, perhaps he was right in sending back those trinkets, hurt as I was at his doing so. Go down to him, will you be so kind, sir? and tell him I am sorry, and ask his pardon, and—and, God bless him for his generous behaviour." And here the young gentleman turned his head away, rubbing his hand across his eyes.

"Tell him all this thyself, Harry!" cried the Colonel, taking the young fellow's hand. "No deputy will ever say it half so well. Come with me now."

"You go first, and I'll—I'll follow,—on my word I will. See! I am in my morning-gown! I will but put on a coat and come to him. Give him my message first. Just—just prepare him for me!" said poor Harry, who knew he must do it, but yet did not much like that process of eating humble-pie.

Wolfe went out smiling, understanding the lad's scruples well enough. As he opened the door, Mr. Gumbo entered; almost forgetting to bow to the gentleman, profusely courteous as he was on ordinary occasions, his eyes glaring round, his great mouth grinning, himself in a state of such high excitement and delight that his master remarked his condition.

"What, Gum? What has happened to thee? Hast thou got a new sweetheart?"

"No, Gum had not got no new sweetheart, master."

"Give me my coat. What has brought thee back?"

Gum grinned prodigiously. "I have seen a ghost, mas'r!" he said.

"A ghost! And whose, and where?"

"Whar? Saw him at Madame Bernstein's house. Come with him here in the coach! He downstairs now with Colonel Lambert!" Whilst Gumbo spoke, putting on his master's coat, his eyes rolled, his head wagged, his hands trembled, and his lips grinned.

"Ghost—what ghost?" said Harry, in a strange agitation. "Is anybody—is—my mother come?"

"No, sir; no, Master Harry!" Gumbo's head rolled nearly off its violent convolutions, and his master, looking oddly at him, flung the door open and went rapidly down the stairs.

He was at the foot of them just as a voice within the little office, of which the door was open, was saying, "and for doing so, I say thank you, and God bless you, in my mother's name and mine."

"Whose voice is that?" called out Harry Warrington, with a strange cry in his own voice.

"It's the ghost's, mas'r!" said Gumbo from behind; and Harry ran forward to the room. There, if you please, we will pause a little minute before we enter. The two gentlemen who were there turned their heads away. The lost was found again. The dead was alive. The prodigal was on his brother's heart—his own full of love, gratitude, repentance.

"Come away, James! I think we are not wanted any more here," said the Colonel. "Good-night, boys. Some ladies in Hill Street won't be able to sleep for this strange news. Or will you go home and sup with 'em, and tell them the story?"

No, with many thanks, the boys would not go and sup that night. They had stories of their own to tell. "Quick, Gumbo, with the trunks! Good-bye, Mr. Amos!" Harry felt almost unhappy when he went away.
