Lord Castlewood's residence in Kensington Square was a sprawling edifice designed to house his entire noble clan and their retinue, situated conveniently near the palace for when the King resided there. While Lady Castlewood hosted her evening gatherings and card parties here, the location felt remote to the Londoners of a century prior. George Selwyn, for one, harbored a distinct dread of venturing out at night, fearing robbery by footpads draped in crape or by ladies in rouge at the quadrille table—though the latter threat remained a matter of speculation.

About noon, the day following Harry's dramatic reappearance at White's, the virtuous kinfolk assembled for breakfast, even Mr. Will, who was scheduled to begin his service as a footman later that afternoon. The ladies arrived first for their chocolate, joined by Will in his court suit. Finally, Lord Castlewood entered, languid in his bedgown and nightcap, having not yet donned his wig for the day. This was the news Will had brought from the Star and Garter the previous evening, having heard it from men who had witnessed it at White's and Ranelagh.

"Heard what? Seen what?" the head of the house asked, picking up his *Daily Advertiser*.

"Ask Maria!" Lady Fanny interjected. My lord turned to his elder sister, whose face wore an expression of portentous sadness, pale as a tablecloth.

"'Tis one of Will's usual elegant and polite inventions," Maria dismissed.

"No," Will swore, punctuating his denial with several oaths. "It was no invention of his. Tom Claypool of Norfolk saw them both at Ranelagh; and Jack Morris came out of White's, where he heard the story straight from Harry Warrington's own lips. Curse him, I'm glad of it!" Will roared, slapping the table. "What do you think of your Fortunate Youth, your Virginian, whom your lordship made so much of, turning out to be a second son?"

"The elder brother not dead?" my lord queried.

"No more dead than you are. Never was. It's my belief that it was a cross between the two."

"Mr. Warrington is incapable of such duplicity!" Maria cried out.

"I never encouraged the fellow; I am sure you will do me justice there," Lady Castlewood replied. "Nor did Fanny: not we, indeed!"

"Not we, indeed!" echoed Lady Fanny.

"The fellow is only a beggar, and, I dare say, has not paid for the clothes on his back," Will continued. "I'm glad of it, for, hang him, I hate him!"

"You don't regard him with favourable eyes; especially since he blacked yours, Will!" my lord grinned. "So the poor fellow has found his brother, and lost his estate!" He turned toward his sister Maria, who, despite looking the picture of woe, must have suggested something ludicrous to the humorist beside her. After gazing at her for a minute, he burst into a shrill laugh, causing the poor lady's face to flush and her eyes to overflow with tears.

"It's a shame! It's a shame!" she sobbed, hiding her face in her handkerchief. Maria's stepmother and sister exchanged glances.

"We never quite understand your lordship's humour," the former lady remarked gravely.

"I don't see there is the least reason why you should," my lord said coolly. "Maria, my dear, pray excuse me if I have said—or done anything—to hurt your feelings."

"Done anything! You pillaged the poor lad in his prosperity, and laugh at him in his ruin!" Maria rose from the table, glaring around at her family.

"Excuse me, my dear sister, I was not laughing at him," my lord said gently.

"Oh, never mind at what or whom else, my lord! You have taken from him all he had to lose. All the world points at you as the man who feeds on his own flesh and blood. And now you have his all, you make merry over his misfortune!" With a rustle of defiance, she left the room, casting looks of anger at the assembled party.

"Tell us what has happened, or what you have heard, Will, and my sister's grief will not interrupt us." Will recounted the story of George Warrington's sudden apparition at great length, filled with immense exultation at Harry's discomfiture. Lord Castlewood feigned sorrow for Harry, calling him a good, brave lad whom he liked as much as certain worldly folks liked each other. To be sure, he had played Harry at cards and taken advantage of the market upon him; but why not? The peach which other men would certainly pluck, he might as well devour. *Eh! if that were all my conscience had to reproach me with, I need not be very uneasy!* my lord thought. "Where does Mr. Warrington live?"

Will expressed readiness to enter upon a state of reprobation if he knew or cared.

"He shall be invited here, and treated with every respect," my lord declared.

"Including piquet, I suppose!" Will growled.

"Or will you take him to the stables, and sell him one of your bargains of horseflesh, Will?" my lord asked. "You would have won of Harry Warrington fast enough, if you could; but you cheat so clumsily at your game that you got paid with a cudgel. I desire, once more, that every attention may be paid to our cousin Warrington."

"And that you are not to be disturbed, when you sit down to play, of course, my lord!" cried Lady Castlewood.

"Madam, I desire fair play, for Mr. Warrington, and for myself, and for every member of this amiable family," my lord retorted fiercely.

"Heaven help the poor gentleman if your lordship is going to be kind to him," the stepmother said with a curtsey. There is no knowing how far this family dispute might have been carried had not, at that moment, a phaeton driven up to the house, in which sat the two young Virginians.

It was the carriage the prodigal had purchased in the days of his prosperity. He still drove it; George sat by his side, their negroes behind them. Harry had been meekly giving the whip and reins to his brother, ceding the whole property to him. "What business has a poor devil like me with horses and carriages, Georgy?" Harry had humbly said. "Beyond the coat on my back, and the purse my aunt gave me, I have nothing in the world. You take the driving-seat, brother; it will ease my mind if you will take the driving-seat." George laughingly said he did not know the way, and Harry did; and that, as for the carriage, he would claim only a half of it, as he had already done with his brother's wardrobe. "But a bargain is a bargain; if I share thy coats, thou must divide my breeches' pocket, Harry; that is but fair dealing!" Again and again Harry swore there never was such a brother on earth. How he rattled his horses over the road! How pleased and proud he was to drive such a brother! They arrived at Kensington in famous high spirits, and Gumbo's thunder upon Lord Castlewood's door was worthy of the biggest footman in all St. James's.

Only Lady Castlewood and her daughter Lady Fanny were in the room into which the young gentlemen were ushered. Will had no particular fancy to face Harry; my lord was not yet dressed; Maria had her reasons for being away, at least until her eyes were dried. When we drive up to friends' houses nowadays in our coaches-and-six, when John carries up our noble names, when, finally, we enter the drawing-room with our best hat and best Sunday smile foremost, does it ever happen that we interrupt a family row? That we come simpering and smiling in, stepping over the delusive ashes of a still-burning domestic heat? That in the interval between the hall-door and the drawing-room, Mrs., Mr., and the Misses Jones have grouped themselves in a family tableau? This girl artlessly arranging flowers in a vase; that one reclining over an illuminated work of devotion; mamma on the sofa, with the butcher's and grocer's book pushed under the cushion, some elegant work in her hand, and a pretty little foot pushed out advantageously; while honest Jones, far from saying, "Curse that Brown, he is always calling here!" holds out a kindly hand, shows a pleased face, and exclaims, "What, Brown my boy, delighted to see you! Hope you've come to lunch!" I say, does it ever happen to us to be made the victims of domestic artifices, the spectators of domestic comedies got up for our special amusement? Oh, let us be thankful, not only for faces, but for masks! Not only for honest welcome, but for hypocrisy, which hides unwelcome things from us! Whilst I am talking, for instance, in this easy, chatty way, what right have you, my good sir, to know what is really passing in my mind? It may be that I am racked with gout, or that my eldest son has just sent me in a thousand pounds' worth of college-bills, or that I am writhing under an attack of the Stoke Pogis Sentinel, which has just been sent me under cover, or that there is a dreadfully scrappy dinner, the evident remains of a party to which I didn't invite you, and yet I conceal my agony, I wear a merry smile; I say, "What! come to take pot-luck with us, Brown my boy! Betsy! put a knife and fork for Mr. Brown. Eat! Welcome! Fall to! It's my best!" I say that humbug which I am performing is beautiful self-denial—that hypocrisy is true virtue. Oh, if every man spoke his mind, what an intolerable society ours would be to live in!

As the young gentlemen were announced, Lady Castlewood advanced toward them with perfect ease and good humour. "We have heard, Harry," she said, looking at the latter with special friendliness, "of this most extraordinary circumstance. My Lord Castlewood said at breakfast that he should wait on you this very day, Mr. Warrington, and, cousin Harry, we intend not to love you any the less because you are poor."

"We shall be able to show now that it is not for your acres that we like you, Harry!" Lady Fanny said, following her mother's lead.

"And I to whom the acres have fallen?" Mr. George said, with a smile and a bow.

"Oh, cousin, we shall like you for being like Harry!" replied the arch Lady Fanny.

Ah! Who that has seen the world has not admired that astonishing ease with which fine ladies drop you and pick you up again? Both the ladies now addressed themselves almost exclusively to the younger brother. They were quite civil to Mr. George: but with Mr. Harry they were fond, softly familiar, gently kind, affectionately reproachful. Why had Harry not been for days and days to see them?

"Better to have had a dish of tea and a game at piquet with them than with some other folks," Lady Castlewood said. "If we had won enough to buy a paper of pins from you we should have been content; but young gentlemen don't know what is for their own good," said mamma.

"Now you have no more money to play with, you can come and play with us, cousin!" cried fond Lady Fanny, lifting up a finger, "and so your misfortune will be good fortune to us."

George was puzzled. This welcome of his brother was very different from that to which he had looked. All these compliments and attentions paid to the younger brother, though he was without a guinea! Perhaps the people were not so bad as they were painted? The Blackest of all Blacks is said not to be of quite so dark a complexion as some folks describe him.

This affectionate conversation continued for some twenty minutes, at the end of which period my Lord Castlewood made his appearance, wig on head, and sword by side. He greeted both the young men with much politeness: one not more than the other. "If you were to come to us—and I, for one, cordially rejoice to see you—what a pity it is you did not come a few months earlier! A certain evening at piquet would then most likely never have taken place. A younger son would have been more prudent."

"Yes, indeed," said Harry.

"Or a kinsman more compassionate. But I fear that love of play runs in the blood of all of us. I have it from my father, and it has made me the poorest peer in England. Those fair ladies whom you see before you are not exempt. My poor brother Will is a martyr to it; and what I, for my part, win on one day, I lose on the next. 'Tis shocking, positively, the rage for play in England. All my poor cousin's bank-notes parted company with me within twenty-four hours after I got them."

"I have played, like other gentlemen, but never to hurt myself, and never indeed caring much for the sport," remarked Mr. Warrington.

"When we heard that my lord had played with Harry, we did so scold him," cried the ladies.

"But if it had not been I, thou knowest, cousin Warrington, some other person would have had thy money. 'Tis a poor consolation, but as such Harry must please to take it, and be glad that friends won his money, who wish him well, not strangers, who cared nothing for him, and fleeced him."

"Eh! a tooth out is a tooth out, though it be your brother who pulls it, my lord!" said Mr. George, laughing. "Harry must bear the penalty of his faults, and pay his debts, like other men."

"I am sure I have never said or thought otherwise. 'Tis not like an Englishman to be sulky because he is beaten," said Harry.

"Your hand, cousin! You speak like a man!" cried my lord, with delight. The ladies smiled to each other.

"My sister, in Virginia, has
