Life, in its raw and unvarnished reality, offers the novelist scant material for a narrative. When dealing with the profession of arms, where courage is tested and danger is tangible, the writer can draw upon vivid circumstances and heroic deeds. But for the rest of existence—the mundane drudgery of commerce, law, or tailoring—there is little to recount. To chronicle the daily sale of sugar or the poring over of dusty legal volumes would be to write a tedious history of hobnails and pennies, a tale no reader could endure. Even in the romanticized past, poets depicted shepherds in absurd finery, dancing before flocks with flageolets tied in satin ribbons, ignoring the truth of their labor. Thus, the novelist is forced to admit that, save for war, the actual affairs of life remain beyond the scope of fiction. We can only depict men removed from their trades, caught in the throes of passion, love, laughter, and hatred, while their professions remain a silent, subaudient backdrop.

Consequently, our characters are rarely seen in their workplaces. We find them only in the theater lobbies, coffee houses, pleasure grounds, and fair booths, drifting away from their humdrum labors. Corydon carts litter and threshes barley only to make love to Phillis; Ancillula dresses the nursery and waits on breakfast before catching a fleeting moment to speak with Boopis, the policeman. All day, their feet beat the stale pavement; only in stolen moments, away from toil, do we glimpse them.

Poor Harry Warrington found himself increasingly shunned by the macaronis and fine gentlemen of White's and Arthur's. The Ring, the Mall, and the gaming tables knew him no more. Madame de Bernstein, his aunt, attempted to brace him against the world's indifference, vowing that courage would conquer it. Yet Harry, too honest to wear a mask of smiling compliance when discontented, could not parry slights with adroit flattery.

"You pull a long face, Harry," the old lady chided, "and complain of the world's treatment. Fiddlededee, sir! Everyone must put up with impertinences. If you get a box on the ear because you are poor and cast down, you must bear it with a smile and seek revenge ten years hence. Moi qui vous parle! Do you suppose I have not eaten humble-pie? We all must swallow it. Now that you are no longer the Fortunate Youth, be the Clever Youth. Win back your place. Go to every rout and party. Be civil to everyone, especially women. Show your spirit, of which you have plenty. With economy and your brother's generosity, you can still make a genteel figure. With your handsome person, you cannot fail to attract a rich heiress. Go to the merchants in the City; they won't know you are out of fashion at Court. When did you visit my Lady Yarmouth? She took a fancy to you. Be constant at her evenings!"

Thus, the woman who once loved Harry with such eagerness turned against him. Instead of smiles, she met him with coldness, becoming peevish and patronizing. She cast gibes at him before her guests, flushing his honest face with humiliation and awakening sharp pangs of grief in his gentle heart. Her servants, once eager to respect him, now ignored him. My Lady was often indisposed when he called; her people did not press him to stay or offer dinner as they had when he was the Fortunate Youth.

Despairing, Harry carried his woes to Mrs. Lambert. In a passion of sorrow, he recounted his aunt's cruelty. Stricken by the world's fickleness, he sat glum in a window-seat while the good lady and her daughters bustled about their household cares.

"I know you are the best people alive," he told them, "and the kindest. I must be the dullest company in the world—yes, that I am."

"Well, you are not very lively, Harry," said Miss Hetty, beginning to command him, perhaps wondering, "Is this the hero I took him for?"

"If he is unhappy, why should he be lively?" asked Theo, gently. "He has a good heart and is pained by his friends' desertion. Surely there is no harm in that?"

"I would have too much spirit to show I was hurt," cried Hetty, clenching her fists. "I would smile, though that horrible old painted woman boxed my ears. She is horrible, Mamma. You think so yourself, Theo! Admit it! You said so last night, acting her coming in on her crutch and grinning at the company."

"I mayn't like her," said Theo, turning red. "But there is no reason to call Harry's aunt names before his face."

"You provoking thing! You are always right!" Hetty cried, angry. "Indeed, Harry, it was very wrong of me to make rude remarks about your relations."

"I don't care about the others, Hetty," Harry replied, his voice trembling. "But it seems hard that this one should turn upon me. I had grown very fond of her. It makes me mad when people I love turn away or act unkindly."

"Suppose George were to do so?" Hetty asked.

"You are very clever and lively, and may suppose many things," Harry snapped, standing up with resolute anger. "But not that, Hetty, if you please! You don't know my brother as I know him—or you wouldn't take such a liberty as to suppose my brother George could do anything unkind or unworthy!" Harry flushed deeply as he spoke.

Hetty turned pale, looked up at Harry, and said nothing.

Before leaving, Harry added simply, "I am very sorry, Hetty, and beg your pardon if I said anything rough. But I always fight up if anyone says anything against George."

Hetty offered no answer from her pale lips, only giving him her hand and dropping a prim curtsey.

Later, when Hetty and Theo shared curl-paper confidences, she sighed, "Oh! I thought it would be so happy to see him every day. Now that I do see him, I keep offending him. I can't help it. And I know he isn't clever, Theo. But oh! Isn't he good, kind, and brave? Didn't he look handsome when he was angry?"

"You silly little thing," Theo replied, "you are always trying to make him look handsome."

Among these young people were Theo and Hetty, Harry and George. Perhaps General Lambert applied the monosyllable "Bo" to his wife as a rebuke for her inveterate love of sentiment and propensity for match-making—a hint that she was a goose if she fancied the two Virginian lads would fall for the Lambert daughters. Little Het might have her fancies; little girls will. But they grow out of them. "And you know, Molly," the General noted, "you fancied somebody else before you fancied me." Harry, however, had evidently not been smitten by Hetty. Now superseded by his elder brother, he could not even claim the coat on his back as his own. Master Harry was no great catch.

"Oh yes," Mrs. Lambert said, "now he is poor we will show him the door, as the rest of the world does."

"That is what I always do, isn't it, Molly? Turn my back on my friends in distress?" the General asked.

"No, my dear! I am a goose, now, and that I own, Martin!" the wife admitted, reaching for her pocket-handkerchief.

"Let the poor boy come to us and welcome. Ours is almost the only house in this selfish place where so much can be said for him. He is unhappy, and to be with us puts him at ease. In God's name, let him be with us!" the kind-hearted officer declared. Accordingly, whenever crestfallen Hal wanted a dinner or an evening's entertainment, Mr. Lambert's table had a corner for him. George was welcome too. Though he did not initially feel the cordiality Harry did, George was colder and more mistrustful. Yet, the goodness and friendliness of the family touched him. Soon, George learned to love them for their own sake, as well as for their kindness to his brother. He saw Harry's sadness and pitied his depression. In his sarcastic way, George would often take himself to task before his brother for coming to life again, saying, "Dear Harry, I am George the Unlucky, though you have ceased to be Harry the Fortunate. Florac would have done much better not to pass his sword through that Indian's body and leave my scalp as an ornament for the fellow's belt. I say he would, sir! At White's, people would have respected you. Our mother would have wept over me as a defunct angel instead of being angry with me for again supplanting her favorite—you are her favorite, you deserve to be everybody's favorite. Only, if I had not come back, your favorite, Maria, would have insisted on marrying you. That is how the gods would have revenged themselves upon you for your prosperity."

"I never know whether you are laughing at me or yourself, George," Harry said. "I never know whether you are serious or jesting."

"Precisely my own case, Harry, my dear!" George replied.

"But this I know: there never was a better brother in the world; and never better people than the Lamberts."

"Never was truer word said!" cried George, taking his brother's hand.

"And if I'm unhappy, 'tis not your fault—nor theirs—nor perhaps mine, George," the younger continued. "'Tis fate, you see. 'Tis having nothing to do. I must work; and how, George? That is the question."

"We will see what our mother says. We must wait till we hear from her," George said.

"I say, George! Do you know, I don't think I should much like going back to Virginia?" Harry asked in a low, alarmed voice.

"What! In love with one of the lasses here?"

"Love 'em like sisters—with all my heart, of course, dearest, best girls! But, having come out of that business, thanks to you, I don't want to go back. No! No! It is not for that I fancy staying in Europe better than going home. But, you see, I don't fancy hunting, duck-shooting, tobacco-planting, whist-playing, and going to sermon, over and over again, for all my life, George. And what else is there to do at home? What on earth is there for me to do at all? That's what makes me miserable. It would not matter for you to be a younger son; you are so clever you would make your way anywhere. But for a poor fellow like me, what chance is there? Until I do something, George, I shall be miserable, that's what I shall!"

"Have I not always said so? Art thou not coming round to my opinion?"

"What opinion, George? You know pretty much whatever you think, I think, George!" the dutiful junior replied.

"That Florac had best have left the Indian to take my scalp, my dear!"

At which Harry burst away with an angry exclamation, and they continued to puff their pipes in friendly union.

They lived together, each going his own gait, with little intercourse save that of affection. Harry never ventured to meddle with George's books, sitting dumb as a mouse at the lodgings while his brother studied. They soon moved from the Court end of the town, Madame de Bernstein pishing and pshaing at their change of residence. George took a great fancy to frequenting Sir Hans Sloane's new reading-room and museum at Montagu House, taking cheerful lodgings in Southampton Row, Bloomsbury, overlooking the delightful fields toward Hampstead. Lord Wrotham's family coming to Mayfair, and Mr. Lambert having business detaining him in London, also changed houses, engaging furnished apartments in Soho, not far from the young men's dwelling. It was with the Lamberts that Harry, night after night, took refuge.

George was often with them too. As the acquaintance ripened, he frequented their house with increasing assiduity, finding their company more to his taste than Aunt Bernstein's polite circle of gamblers, Sir Miles Warrington's port and mutton, or the daily noise of the coffee-houses. Being strangers in London alike, he and the Lambert ladies partook of its pleasures together, visiting Vauxhall, Ranelagh, Marybone Gardens, the play, and the Tower, wherever there was honest amusement to be had. Martin Lambert loved that his children should have all the innocent pleasure he could procure, and Mr. George, of a generous disposition, liked to treat his friends, especially those who had been so kindly to his brother.

With all the passion of his heart, Mr. Warrington loved a play. He had never enjoyed this amusement in Virginia, only once or twice at Quebec, but when he came to London, where the two theaters were in their full glory, he thought he could never have enough of the delightful entertainment. Anything he liked, he naturally wished to share. No wonder he was eager to take his friends to the theater; the young countryfolk were not unwilling. Should it be Drury Lane or Covent Garden, ladies? There was Garrick and Shakespeare at Drury Lane. Yet, would it be believed, the ladies wanted to hear the famous new author whose piece was being played at Covent Garden?

At this time, a star of genius had risen, blazing with dazzling brilliance. The great Mr. John Home of Scotland had produced a tragedy, than which, since the days of the ancients, there had been nothing more classic and elegant. What had Mr. Garrick meant by refusing such a masterpiece for his theater? Say what you will about Shakespeare; in the works of that undoubted great poet—who had begun to grow vastly more popular in England since Monsieur Voltaire attacked him—there were many barbarisms that could not but shock a polite auditory. Whereas, Mr. Home, the modern author, knew how to be refined in the very midst of grief and passion. He represented death not merely as awful, but graceful and pathetic, never condescending to degrade the majesty of the
