The performances concluded, and our friends departed in a carriage for Mr. Warrington's lodging, where the Virginians had arranged an elegant supper. Mr. Warrington, eager to treat them with the utmost distinction, had secured the hospitality of the General and his wife, who gladly accepted the invitation of the two bachelors, delighted at the prospect of bringing joy to their young companions. The gathering comprised the General and Mrs. Lambert, their son recently returned from college, their two vibrant daughters, and Mr. Spencer of the Temple—a new acquaintance George had met at the coffee-house. All partook cheerfully of the landlady's fare, though the precise arrangement of their seating remains somewhat obscure to me. It seems, however, that Miss Theo found herself seated beside the chickens, while Mr. George Warrington shared the table with Miss Hetty and a ham, the latter dividing the attentions of Mr. Harry. Mrs. Lambert likely sat to George's right, leaving the three remaining seats for the General, his son, and the Templar to be deduced.

Mr. Spencer had attended the rival theatre, where he had previously introduced George to the greenroom. Conversation naturally turned to the play, with several members of the party insisting they had been thoroughly delighted.

"As for what our gentlemen say, sir," Mrs. Lambert exclaimed, addressing Mr. Spencer, "you must not believe a word of it. 'Tis a delightful piece, and my husband and Mr. George behaved as ill as possible."

"We laughed in the wrong places and wept when we ought to have cried," the General admitted. "That is the truth."

"You caused every soul in the boxes around us to glance about and cry 'Hush!' You made the pit shout, 'Silence in the boxes, yonder!' Such conduct I have never witnessed, and I quite blushed for you, Mr. Lambert!"

"Mamma thought it was a tragedy, and we thought it was merely fun," the General replied. "George and I behaved perfectly well, didn't we, Theo?"

"Not when I was looking your way, Papa!" Theo retorted. At this, the General asked, "Was there ever such a saucy baggage seen?"

"You know, sir, I did not speak until I was bid," Theo continued, modestly. "I confess I was deeply moved by the play, and by the beauty and acting of Mrs. Woffington. I was sorry that the poor mother should find her child and then lose him. I am sorry, too, Papa, if I ought not to have been sorry!" she added, offering a smile.

"Women are not so clever as men, you know, Theo," Hetty called out from the end of the table, casting a sly glance at Harry. "Next time we go to the play, please, brother Jack, pinch us when we ought to cry, or give us a nudge when it is right to laugh."

"I wish we could have seen the fight," General Lambert remarked. "The combat between little Norval and the gigantic Norwegian—that would have been rare sport. You should write, Jack, and suggest it to Mr. Rich, the manager."

"I have not seen that," Harry said gravely. "But I saw Slack and Broughton at Marybone Gardens!" He wondered if he had struck a witty remark, as the entire company laughed. "It would require no giant," he added, "to knock over yonder little fellow in the red boots. I, for one, could throw him over my shoulder."

"Mr. Garrick is a small man. But there are times when he appears a giant," Mr. Spencer observed. "How grand he was in *Macbeth*, Mr. Warrington! How awful that dagger scene was! You should have seen our host, ladies! I presented Mr. Warrington in the greenroom to Mr. Garrick and Mrs. Pritchard, and Lady Macbeth did him the honor of taking a pinch out of his box."

"Did the wife of the Thane of Cawdor sneeze?" the General asked in an awe-struck tone.

"She thanked Mr. Warrington in tones so hollow and tragic that he started back, nearly upsetting his rappee, for Macbeth sneezed thrice."

"Macbeth, Macbeth, Macbeth!" cried the General.

"And the great philosopher standing by Mr. Johnson said, 'You must mind, Davy, lest thy sneeze should awaken Duncan!' who, by the way, was conversing with the three witches as they sat against the wall."

"What! Have you been behind the scenes at the play? Oh, I would give worlds to go behind the scenes!" Theo exclaimed.

"And see the ropes pulled, and smell the tallow-candles, and look at the pasteboard gold, the tinsel jewels, and the painted old women, Theo? No. Do not look too close," the skeptical young host said demurely, drinking a glass of hock. "You were angry with your papa and me."

"Nay, George!" the girl cried.

"Nay? I say, yes! You were angry with us because we laughed when you were disposed to cry. If I may speak for you, sir, as well as myself," George said, bowing to his guest, the General Lambert, "I think we were not inclined to weep, like the ladies, because we stood behind the author's scenes of the play, as it were. Looking closely at the young hero, we saw how much of him was mere rant and tinsel; and as for the pale, tragical mother, her pallor was but white chalk, and her grief her pocket-handkerchief. Own now, Theo, you thought me very unfeeling?"

"If you find it out, sir, without my owning it—what is the good of my confessing?" Theo replied.

"Suppose I were to die?" George continued. "And you saw Harry in grief? You would be witnessing genuine affliction, a real tragedy; you would grieve too. But you would not be affected if you saw the undertaker in weepers and a black cloak!"

"Indeed, but I should, sir!" Mrs. Lambert declared. "And so, I promise you, would any daughter of mine."

"Perhaps we might find weepers of our own, Mr. Warrington," Theo suggested.

"Would you?" George cried, and his cheeks and Theo's flushed simultaneously with red; I suppose because they both noticed Hetty's bright young eyes watching them.

"The elder writers understood but little of the pathetic," Mr. Spencer, the Temple wit, remarked.

"What do you think of Sophocles and *Antigone*?" Mr. John Lambert called out.

"Faith, our wits trouble themselves little about him unless an Oxford gentleman reminds us of him! I did not mean to go back farther than Mr. Shakespeare, who, as you will all agree, does not understand the elegant and pathetic as well as the moderns. Has he ever approached Belvidera, or Monimia, or Jane Shore? Or can you find in his comic female characters the elegance of Congreve?" The Templar offered snuff to the right and left.

"I think Mr. Spencer himself must have tried his hand?" someone asked.

"Many gentlemen of leisure have. Mr. Garrick, I own, has had a piece of mine and returned it."

"And I confess that I have four acts of a play in one of my boxes," George said.

"I'll be bound to say it's as good as any of 'em," Harry whispered to his neighbor.

"Is it a tragedy or a comedy?" Mrs. Lambert asked.

"Oh, a tragedy, and two or three dreadful murders at least!" George replied.

"Let us play it, and let the audience look to their eyes! Yet my chief humor is for a tyrant," the General said.

"The tragedy, the tragedy! Go and fetch the tragedy this moment, Gumbo!" Mrs. Lambert called to the black servant. Gumbo made a low bow and said, "Tragedy? Yes, madam."

"In the great cowskin trunk, Gumbo," George said gravely.

Gumbo bowed and said, "Yes, sir," with still superior gravity.

"But my tragedy is at the bottom of I don't know how much linen, packages, books, and boots, Hetty."

"Never mind, let us have it, and fling the linen out of the window!" Miss Hetty cried.

"And the great cowskin trunk is at our agent's in Bristol: so Gumbo must get post-horses, and we can keep it up till he returns the day after tomorrow," George said.

The ladies groaned a comical "Oh!" and Papa, perhaps more seriously, said, "Let us be thankful for the escape. Let us be thinking of going home too. Our young gentlemen have treated us nobly, and we will all drink a parting bumper to Madam Esmond Warrington of Castlewood, in Virginia. Suppose, boys, you were to find a tall, handsome stepfather when you got home? Ladies as old as she have been known to marry before now."

"To Madam Esmond Warrington, my old schoolfellow!" Mrs. Lambert cried. "I shall write and tell her what a pretty supper her sons have given us: and, Mr. George, I won't say how ill you behaved at the play!" With this last toast, the company took leave; the General's coach and servant, with a flambeau, being in waiting to carry his family home.

After such an entertainment as that which Mr. Warrington had given, what could be more natural or proper than a visit from him to his guests, to inquire how they had reached home and rested? Why, their coach might have taken the open country behind Montague House, in the direction of Oxford Road, and been waylaid by footpads in the fields. The ladies might have caught cold or slept ill after the excitement of the tragedy. In a word, there was no reason why he should make any excuse at all to himself or them for visiting his kind friends; and he shut his books early at the Sloane Museum, and perhaps thought, as he walked away thence, that he remembered very little about what he had been reading.

Pray, what is the meaning of this eagerness, this hesitation, this pshawing and shilly-shallying, these doubts, this tremor as he knocks at the door of Mr. Lambert's lodgings in Dean Street, and surveys the footman who comes to his summons? Does any young man read? Does any old one remember? Does any wearied, worn, disappointed pulseless heart recall the time of its full beat and early throbbing? It is ever so many hundred years since some of us were young; and we forget, but do not all forget. No, madam, we remember with advantages, as Shakespeare's Harry promised his soldiers they should do if they survived Agincourt and that day of St. Crispin. Worn old chargers turned out to grass, if the trumpet sounds over the hedge, may we not kick up our old heels, and gallop a minute or so about the paddock, till we are brought up roaring? I do not care for clown and pantaloon now, and think the fairy ugly, and her verses insufferable: but I like to see children at a pantomime. I do not dance, or eat supper any more; but I like to watch Eugenio and Flirtilla twirling round in a pretty waltz, or Lucinda and Ardentio pulling a cracker. Burn your little fingers, children! Blaze out little kindly flames from each other's eyes! And then draw close together and read the motto (that old namby-pamby motto, so stale and so new!)—I say, let her lips read it, and his construe it; and so divide the sweetmeat, young people, and crunch it between you. I have no teeth. Bitter almonds and sugar disagree with me, I tell you; but, for all that, shall not bonbons melt in the mouth?

We followed John upstairs to the General's apartments and entered with Mr. George Esmond Warrington, who made a prodigious fine bow. There was only one lady in the room, seated near a window: there is not often much sunshine in Dean Street; the young lady in the window is no especial beauty: but it is spring-time, and she is blooming vernally. A bunch of fresh roses was flushing in her honest cheek. I suppose her eyes are violets. If we lived a hundred years ago, and wrote in the *Gentleman's* or the *London Magazine*, we should tell Mr. Sylvanus Urban that her neck was the lily, and her shape the nymph's: we should write an acrostic about her, and celebrate our Lambertella in an elegant poem, still to be read between a neat new engraved plan of the city of Prague and the King of Prussia's camp, and a map of Maryland and the Delaware counties.

Here is Miss Theo blushing like a rose. What could Mamma have meant an hour since by insisting that she was very pale and tired, and had best not come out to-day with the rest of the party? They were gone to pay their compliments to my Lord Wrotham's ladies, and thank them for the house in their absence; and Papa was at the Horse Guards. He is in great spirits. I believe he expects some command, though Mamma is in a sad tremor lest he should again be ordered abroad.

"Your brother and mine are gone to see our little brother at his school at the Chartreux. My brothers are both to be clergymen, I think," Miss Theo continued. She was assiduously hemming some article of boyish wearing apparel as she talked. A hundred years ago, young ladies were not afraid either to make shirts, or to name them. Mind, I don't say they were the worse or the better for that plain stitching or plain speaking: and have not the least desire, my dear young lady, that you should make puddings or I should black boots.

So Harry has been with them? "He often comes, almost every day," Theo said, looking up in George's face. "Poor fellow! He likes us better than the fine folks, who don't care for him now—now he is no longer a fine folk
