The loyal hearts of Britain bristled with a mixture of awe and indignation as they read of Mr. George Warrington's treatment of a gallant Prince, the beloved son of the greatest monarch and Captain-General of the British army. What an unfathomable favor had the youth spurned? What a golden ladder to promotion had he discarded? Will Esmond, whose tongue was a fountain of blasphemy, hurled his most venomous curses at his cousin's behavior, reveling in the thought that the confounded young Mohock was merely cutting his own throat. Cousin Castlewood offered a charitable defense, suggesting that a savage gentleman possessed the right to scalp himself if he chose, or perhaps that Mr. Warrington had heard too much of the war-whoop at Braddock's defeat and simply lacked the stomach for further fighting. Will rejoiced that the younger brother had gone to the deuce, and he took even greater pleasure in imagining the elder following close behind. Upon their first meeting, Will declared he would ensure Mr. George understood exactly what he thought of him.

"If you intend to insult George, at least ensure his brother Harry is out of hearing!" cried Lady Maria, a warning that seemed to summon fresh torrents of curses from Mr. Will regarding his twin kinsfolk.

"Ta, ta, ta!" my lord interjected, dismissing the squabbling. "We cannot be warriors all around the family!"

"I never heard your lordship claim to be one!" Maria retorted.

"Never, my dear; quite the opposite! Will is our champion, and one is sufficient for the house. So I dare say with the two Mohocks—George is the student, and Harry is the fighting man. When you intended to quarrel, Will, what a pity it was you had George instead of the other to your hand!"

"Your lordship's hand is famous—at piquet," Will's mother remarked.

"It is a pretty one," my lord replied, examining his fingers with a simpering air. "My Lord Hervey's glove and mine were of a size. Yes, my hand, as you say, is more fitted for cards than for war. Yours, my Lady Castlewood, is equally dexterous. How I bless the day when you bestowed it on my lamented father!" In this playful exchange of sarcasm, as in other games of skill, his lordship found satisfaction, possessing a cool head and the ability to outmaneuver his entire family.

Madame de Bernstein, upon hearing of Mr. Warrington's blunder, was furious, storming and scolding her household. She would have scolded George as well, but age had softened her resolve, and she harbored a lingering fear of her nephew, treating him with a respectful caution she once lacked. "You will never make your fortune at court, nephew!" she groaned when the young gentleman visited her shortly after his discomfiture.

"It was never my wish, madam," Mr. George replied in a stately tone.

"Your wish was to aid Harry? You might have been of service to your brother had you accepted the Duke's offer. Princes do not relish having their favors refused, and I do not wonder his Royal Highness was offended."

"General Lambert said the same," George confessed, flushing slightly. "And I see now that I was wrong. But you must remember I had never seen a court before, and I doubt I shall shine in one."

"I think possibly not, my good nephew," the aunt said, taking a pinch of snuff.

"And what then?" George asked. "I never sought that kind of glory, and I can find contentment without it. When his Royal Highness spoke to me so kindly, my thought was that I shall make a very bad soldier, while my brother would be excellent. He possesses a hundred qualities for the profession in which I am deficient; he would serve a commanding officer far better than I ever could. Say the Duke is in battle and his horse is shot, as my poor chief's was at home—would he not be better mounted on a beast of courage and strength to bear him anywhere, than on one that cannot carry his weight?"

"Au fait. His Royal Highness's charger must be a strong one, my dear!" the old lady observed.

"Expende Hannibalem," George muttered with a shrug. "Our Hannibal weighs no trifle."

"I do not quite follow you, sir, nor your Hannibal," the Baroness remarked.

"When Mr. Wolfe and Mr. Lambert remonstrated with me as you have done, madam," George rejoined with a laugh, "I made this same defense. I told them I offered the Prince the best soldier in the family, and the two gentlemen allowed my blunder had at least some excuse. Who knows but they may set me right with his Royal Highness? The taste I have had of battles reveals how little my genius inclines that way. We saw the Scotch play everyone discussed last night. When the hero, young Norval, spoke of longing to follow some warlike lord to the field, I thought to myself, 'how like my Harry is to him, except that he does not brag.' Harry is pining for a red coat now, and if we do not mind, he will take the shilling. He keeps the map of Germany perpetually before his eyes and follows the King of Prussia everywhere. He fears neither men nor gods. As for me, I love my books and quiet above all, preferring to read of battles in Homer or Lucan."

"Then what made a soldier of you at all, my dear? And why did you not send Harry with Mr. Braddock instead of going yourself?" Madame de Bernstein asked.

"My mother loved her younger son the best," George said darkly. "Besides, with the enemy invading our country, it was my duty, as the head of our family, to go on the campaign. Had I been a Scotchman twelve years ago, I should have been a..."

"Hush, sir! Or I shall be more angry than ever!" the old lady commanded, her face perfectly pleased.

George's explanation might appease Madame de Bernstein, an elderly woman whose principles we fear were somewhat loose; but to the loyal hearts of Sir Miles Warrington and his lady, the young man's conduct delivered a severe blow. "I should have thought," her ladyship said, "from my sister Esmond Warrington's letter, that my brother's widow was a woman of good sense and judgment, and that she had educated her sons in a becoming manner. But what, Sir Miles, what, my dear Thomas Claypool, can we think of an education that has resulted so lamentably for both these young men?"

"The elder seems to know a power of Latin, though, and speaks French and German too. I heard him with the Hanover Envoy at the Baroness's rout," Mr. Claypool noted. "The French he jabbered quite easily; and when he was at a loss for High Dutch, he and the Envoy began in Latin and talked away until the whole room stared."

"It is not language, but principles, Thomas Claypool!" the virtuous matron exclaimed. "What must Mr. Warrington's principles be when he could reject an offer made by his Prince? Can he speak High Dutch? So much the more ought he to have accepted his Royal Highness's condescension and made himself useful in the campaign! Look at our son, look at Miles!"

"Hold up thy head, Miley, my boy!" cried papa.

"I trust, Sir Miles, that as a member of the House of Commons and an English gentleman, you will attend his Royal Highness's levee tomorrow and say that if such an offer had been made to us for that child, we would have taken it, though our boy is but ten years of age."

"Faith, Miley, thou wouldst make a good little drummer or fifer!" papa replied. "Shouldst like to be a little soldier, Miley?"

"Anything, sir, anything! A Warrington ought to be ready at any moment to have himself cut in pieces for his sovereign!" the matron cried, pointing to the boy, who, upon comprehending his mother's proposal, protested with a loud roar before being removed by Screwby. In obedience to these conjugal orders, Sir Miles attended his Royal Highness's levee the next day, making a protest of his love and duty which the Prince graciously accepted, remarking:

"Nobody ever supposed that Sir Miles Warrington would ever refuse any place offered to him."

A compliment indeed, repeated everywhere by Lady Warrington as proof of how implicitly the august royal family could rely on the loyalty of the Warringtons.

Consequently, when this worthy couple saw George, they received him with a ghastly commiseration, the sort of pity our dear relatives sometimes extend when we have done something fatal or clumsy in life; when we have come badly out of a lawsuit; when we enter a room just as the company has been abusing us; when our banker has broken; or when, for our sad part, we have had to figure in the commercial columns of the London Gazette. Who does not know that face of pity? Whose dear relations have not so deplored him, not dead, but living? Not yours? Then, sir, if you have never been in scrapes; if you have never sown a handful of wild oats; if you have always been fortunate, good, and careful, and butter has never melted in your mouth, and an imprudent word has never escaped; if you have never sinned and repented, been a fool and been sorry—then, sir, you are a wiseacre who won't waste your time over an idle novel, and it is not *de te* that the fable is narrated.

It was not entirely just for Sir Miles to turn upon George and be angry with his nephew for refusing the promotion offered by his Royal Highness, for Sir Miles himself had agreed with George's view of pursuing a career quite other than military, a plan approved by Madam Esmond in her letters from Virginia. George had announced his intention to enter the Temple, qualifying himself for the magisterial and civil duties he would naturally fulfill. Nor could anyone applaud his resolution more cordially than his uncle Sir Miles, who introduced George to a lawyer of reputation, under whose guidance we may imagine the young gentleman reading leisurely. Madam Esmond from home signified her approval of her son's course, fully agreeing with Sir Miles (to whom and his lady she begged to send her grateful remembrances) that the British Constitution was the envy of the world and the proper object of every English gentleman's admiring study. The chief point to which George's mother objected was the notion that Mr. Warrington should sit down in the Temple dinner-ball, cutting at a shoulder of mutton and drinking small-beer out of tin pannikins by the side of rough students wearing gowns like the parish-clerk. George's loyal younger brother shared this repugnance. Anything was good enough for him, Harry said; he was a younger son and prepared to rough it. But George, in a gown, dining in a mess with three nobody's sons off dirty pewter platters! Harry could never relish this condescension on his brother's part, or fancy George in his proper place at any table except the high one; and he was sorry that a plan Madam Esmond hinted at in her letters was not feasible—namely, that an application should be made to the Master of the Temple, informing him that Mr. George Warrington was a gentleman of most noble birth and of great property in America, and ought only to sit with the very best company in the Hall. To Harry's discomfiture, when he communicated his own and his mother's ideas to the gentlemen's new coffee-house friend, Mr. Spencer, Mr. Spencer received the proposal with roars of laughter; and I cannot learn, from the Warrington papers, that any application was made to the Master of the Temple on this subject.

Besides his literary and historical pursuits, which were those he most especially loved, Mr. Warrington studied the laws of his country, attended the courts at Westminster, where he heard a Henley, a Pratt, a Murray, and those other great famous schools of eloquence and patriotism, the two houses of parliament.

Gradually, Mr. Warrington made acquaintance with some members of the House and the Bar. When they came to know him, they spoke of him as a young gentleman of good parts and good breeding, in terms so generally complimentary that his good uncle's heart relented toward him, and Dora and Flora began once more to smile upon him. This reconciliation dated from the time when his Royal Highness the Duke, after having been defeated by the French in the affair of Hastenbeck, concluded the famous capitulation with the French, which his Majesty George II. refused to ratify. His Royal Highness, as 'tis well known, flung up his commissions after this disgrace, laid down his commander's baton—which, it must be confessed, he had not wielded with much luck or dexterity—and never again appeared at the head of armies or in public life. The stout warrior would not allow a word of complaint against his father and sovereign to escape his lips; but, as he retired with his wounded honor and would have no interest or authority more, nor any places to give, it may be supposed that Sir Miles Warrington's anger against his nephew diminished as his respect for his Royal Highness diminished.

As our two gentlemen walked in St. James's Park one day with their friend Mr. Lambert, they met his Royal Highness in plain clothes and without a star, and made profound bows to the Prince, who was pleased to stop and speak to them.

He asked Mr. Lambert how he liked my Lord Ligonier, his new chief at the Horse Guards, and the new duties there in which he was engaged? And, recognizing the young men with that fidelity of memory for which his Royal race hath ever been remarkable, he said to Mr. Warrington:

"You did well, sir, not to come with me when I asked you in the spring."

"I was sorry, then, sir," Mr. Warrington said, making a very low reverence, "but I am more sorry now."

On which the Prince said, "Thank you, sir," and,
