The faithful Gumbo could find no solace in the departure of his beloved master. To judge by his initial tears and howls upon hearing the news of Mr. Harry's enlistment, one might have believed the negro's heart shattered at the separation. No wonder he sought sympathy among the maid-servants at Mr. Lambert's lodgings. Wherever that dusky youth appeared, he found comfort in the company of females. Their fair and tender bosoms possessed a capacity for pity that transcended prejudice; the darkness of Gumbo's complexion held no more repulsion for them than Othello's did for Desdemona. Indeed, Europe had never been so squeamish regarding Africa as in that certain respected quarter. Nay, some Africans—witness the Chevalier de St. Georges, for instance—had been notorious favorites with the fair sex.

In his humbler station, Mr. Gumbo found kinship among the Lambert servants, who wept freely in his company. The maids regarded him not merely as Mr. Harry's man, but as their brother. Hetty could not help laughing when she discovered Gumbo roaring because his master had gone a volunteer, as he termed it, and had not taken him along. He was ready to save Master Harry's life any day, and would have done so, even if it meant being cut into twenty thousand pieces, for Master Harry. Yet, nature required support, and he condescended to fortify it with large supplies of beer and cold meat in the kitchen. That he was greedy, idle, and prone to lying was certain; yet Hetty gave him half a crown and treated him with especial kindness. Her tongue, usually so pert, grew gentle now, as if it had never made a joke. She moved about the house meek and mum. She was humble to her mother, thankful to John and Betty when they waited at dinner, patient with Polly when the latter pulled her hair while combing it, long-suffering when Charley from school trod on her toes or deranged her workbox, and silent in her father's company. Oh, such a transmogrified little Hetty! If her father had ordered her to roast the leg of mutton or walk to church arm-in-arm with Gumbo, she would have curtseyed and said, "Yes, if you please, dear papa!" Leg of mutton! What sort of meal were some poor volunteers having, with cannonballs flying about their heads? Church! When it came to the prayer in time of war, oh, how her knees smote together as she knelt, hiding her head in the pew! She held her head down when the parson read, "Thou shalt do no murder," from the communion rail, fancying he must be looking right at her. How she thought of all travelers by land or by water! How she sickened as she ran to the paper to read if there was news of the Expedition! How she watched her father when he came home from his Ordnance Office, searching his face for good or bad tidings! Was he well? Was he made a General yet? Was he wounded and made a prisoner? Ah me! Or, perhaps, were both his legs taken off by one shot, like that pensioner they had seen in Chelsea Garden the other day? She would go on wooden legs all her life if his could but bring him home safely; at least, she ought never to rise from her knees until he was returned. "Haven't you heard of people, Theo," she said, "whose hair has grown grey in a single night? I shouldn't wonder if mine did—I shouldn't wonder in the least." And she looked in the glass to ascertain that phenomenon.

"Hetty dear, you used not to be so nervous when papa was away in Minorca," remarked Theo.

"Ah, Theo! One may very well see that George is not with the army, but safe at home," rejoined Hetty; whereat the elder sister blushed and looked very pensive. After all, if Mr. George had been in the army, that would have been another pair of boots. Meanwhile, let us not harrow anyone's kind feelings further, but state that Harry was, for the present, as safe as any officer of the Life Guards at Regent's Park Barracks.

The first expedition in which our gallant volunteer was engaged may be called successful, but certainly not glorious. The British Lion, or any other lion, cannot always have a worthy enemy to combat, or a battle-royal to deliver. Suppose he goes forth in quest of a tiger who won't come, and lays his paws on a goose, and gobbles him up? Lions, we know, must live like any other animals. But suppose, advancing into the forest in search of the tiger aforesaid, and bellowing his challenge of war, he espies not one but six tigers coming towards him? This manifestly is not his game at all. He puts his tail between his royal legs and retreats into his own snug den as quickly as he may. Were he to attempt to fight six tigers, you might write that Lion down an Ass.

Now, Harry Warrington's first feat of war was in this wise. He and about 13,000 other fighting men embarked in various ships and transports on the 1st of June from the Isle of Wight, and at daybreak on the 5th the fleet stood in to the Bay of Cancale in Brittany. For a while, he and the gentlemen volunteers had the pleasure of examining the French coast from their ships, whilst the Commander-in-Chief and the Commodore reconnoitered the bay in a cutter. Cattle were seen, and some dragoons who trotted off into the distance; and a little fort with a couple of guns had the audacity to fire at his Grace of Marlborough and the Commodore in the cutter. By two o'clock the whole British fleet was at anchor, and signal was made for all the grenadier companies of eleven regiments to embark on board flat-bottomed boats and assemble round the Commodore's ship, the Essex. Meanwhile, Mr. Howe, hoisting his broad pennant on board the Success frigate, went in as near as possible to shore, followed by the other frigates, to protect the landing of the troops. Now, with Lord George Sackville and General Dury in command, the gentlemen volunteers, the grenadier companies, and three battalions of guards pulled to shore.

The gentlemen volunteers could do no heroic deed upon this occasion, because the French, who should have stayed to fight them, ran away. The frigates having silenced the fire of the little fort which had disturbed the reconnaissance of the Commander-in-Chief, the army presently assaulted it, taking the whole garrison prisoner and shooting him in the leg. Indeed, he was but one old gentleman who gallantly had fired his two guns, and who told his conquerors, "If every Frenchman had acted like me, you would not have landed at Cancale at all."

The advanced detachment of invaders took possession of the village of Cancale, where they lay upon their arms all night. Our volunteer was joked by his comrades about his eagerness to go out upon the war-path and bring in two or three scalps of Frenchmen. None such, however, fell under his tomahawk; the only person slain on the whole day being a French gentleman who was riding with his servant and was surprised by volunteer Lord Downe, marching in the front with a company of Kingsley's. My Lord Downe offered the gentleman quarter, which he foolishly refused, whereupon he, his servant, and the two horses were straightway shot.

Next day the whole force was landed and advanced from Cancale to St. Malo. All the villages were emptied through which the troops passed, and the roads were so narrow in many places that the men had to march single file, and might have been shot down from behind the tall leafy hedges had there been any enemy to disturb them.

At nightfall the army arrived before St. Malo and were saluted by a fire of artillery from that town, which did little damage in the darkness. Under cover of this, the British set fire to the ships, wooden buildings, pitch and tar magazines in the harbor, and made a prodigious conflagration that lasted the whole night.

This feat was achieved without any attempt on the part of the French to molest the British force. But, as it was confidently asserted that there was a considerable French force in the town of St. Malo, though they wouldn't come out, his Grace the Duke of Marlborough and my Lord George Sackville determined not to disturb the garrison, marched back to Cancale again—and so got on board their ships.

If this were not a veracious history, don't you see that it would have been easy to send our Virginian on a more glorious campaign? Exactly four weeks after his departure from England, Mr. Warrington found himself at Portsmouth again and addressed a letter to his brother George, with which the latter ran off to Dean Street so soon as ever he received it.

"Glorious news, ladies!" cried he, finding the Lambert family all at breakfast. "Our champion has come back. He has undergone all sorts of dangers, but has survived them all. He has seen dragons—upon my word, he says so."

"Dragons! What do you mean, Mr. Warrington?"

"But not killed any—he says so, as you shall hear. He writes:

"'DEAREST BROTHER—I think you will be glad to hear that I am returned, without any commission as yet; without any wounds or glory; but, at any rate, alive and hearty. On board our ship, we were almost as crowded as poor Mr. Holwell and his friends in their Black Hole at Calcutta. We had rough weather, and some of the gentlemen volunteers, who prefer smooth water, grumbled not a little. My gentlemen's stomachs are dainty; and after Braund's cookery and White's kick-shaws, they don't like plain sailor's rum and biscuit. But I, who have been at sea before, took my rations and can of flip very contentedly, being determined to put a good face on everything before our fine English macaronis and show that a Virginia gentleman is as good as the best of 'em. I wish, for the honor of old Virginia, that I had more to brag about. But all I can say in truth is that we have been to France and come back again. Why, I don't think even your tragic pen could make anything of such a campaign as ours has been. We landed on the 6th at Cancale Bay, we saw a few dragons on a hill...'

"There! Did I not tell you there were dragons?" asked George, laughing.

"Mercy! What can he mean by dragons?" cried Hetty.

"Immense, long-tailed monsters, with steel scales on their backs, who vomit fire and gobble up a virgin a day. Haven't you read about them in *The Seven Champions*?" said Papa. "Seeing St. George's flag, I suppose, they slunk off."

"I have read of 'em," said the little boy from Chartreux, solemnly. "They like to eat women. One was going to eat Andromeda, you know, Papa; and Jason killed another who was guarding the apple-tree."

"... A few dragons on a hill," George resumed, "who rode away from us without engaging. We slept under canvas. We marched to St. Malo and burned ever so many privateers there. And we went on board ships again, without ever crossing swords with an enemy or meeting any except a few poor devils whom the troops plundered. Better luck next time! This hasn't been very much nor particularly glorious; but I have liked it for my part. I have smelt powder, besides a good deal of rosin and pitch we burned. I've seen the enemy; have slept under canvas, and been dreadfully crowded and sick at sea. I like it. My best compliments to dear Aunt Lambert, and tell Miss Hetty I wasn't very much frightened when I saw the French horse.—Your most affectionate brother, H. E. WARRINGTON."

We hope Miss Hetty's qualms of conscience were allayed by Harry's announcement that his expedition was over and that he had so far taken no hurt. Far otherwise. Mr. Lambert, in the course of his official duties, had occasion to visit the troops at Portsmouth and the Isle of Wight, and George Warrington bore him company. They found Harry vastly improved in spirits and health from the excitement produced by the little campaign, quite eager and pleased to learn his new military duties, active, cheerful, and healthy, and altogether a different person from the listless, moping lad who had dawdled in London coffee-houses and Mrs. Lambert's drawing-room. The troops were under canvas; the weather was glorious, and George found his brother a ready pupil in a fine, brisk open-air school of war. Not a little amused, the elder brother, arm-in-arm with the young volunteer, paced the streets of the warlike city, recalled his own brief military experiences of two years back, and saw here a much greater army than that ill-fated one of which he had shared the disasters. The expedition, such as we have seen it, was certainly not glorious, and yet the troops and the nation were in high spirits with it. We were said to have humiliated the proud Gaul. We should have vanquished as well as humbled him had he dared to appear. What valour, after all, is like British valour? I dare say some such expressions have been heard in later times. Not that I would hint that our people brag much more than any other, or more now than formerly. Have not these eyes beheld the battle-grounds of Leipzig, Jena, Dresden, Waterloo, Blenheim, Bunker's Hill, New Orleans? What heroic nation has not fought, has not conquered, has not run away, has not bragged in its turn? Well, the British nation was much excited by the glorious victory of St. Malo. Captured treasures were sent home and exhibited in London. The people were so excited that more laurels and more victories were demanded, and the enthusiastic army went forth to seek some.

With this new expedition went a volunteer so distinguished that we must give him precedence of all other amateur soldiers or sailors. This was our sailor
