The human heart recoils from the thought of separation, and so I shall spare you the description of Harry Warrington's sorrow as he prepares to depart. Are there not thousands of men in the same predicament? Did not Mr. Wolfe have a mother to kiss—his brave father having passed away during his son's absence at the siege of Louisbourg—and a beloved sweetheart to hold in a final embrace? Did not the stout Admiral Holmes, before sailing his squadron westward aboard *The Dublin*, bid farewell to Mrs. Holmes and his daughters? Was Admiral Saunders, who departed the following day, immune to human feeling? Away went William and his crew of jovial sailors, cutting through the tumbling waves, while poor Black-eyed Susan stood on the shore, watching the vessel shrink until it vanished into the sunset.

It faded into the West. Night fell darkly over the ocean. They were gone, yet their hearts remained at home for a while longer. In silence, with a tenderness beyond expression, each man pondered those he had left behind. What a chorus of pitiful prayers rose to the Father, from the sea and the shore, on that night of parting: by the vacant bedside where a wife knelt in tears; around the hearth where mothers and children poured out their supplications; or on the deck, where the sailor gazed upward at the stars as the ship cleaved the roaring midnight waters. Tomorrow, the sun would rise upon our common life again, and we would resume our daily tasks of toil and duty.

George accompanied his brother, staying with him at Portsmouth while they waited for a favorable wind. He shook Mr. Wolfe's hand, looked upon his pale face one last time, and watched the vessels depart amidst the clamor of bells and the thunder of cannon from the shore. The next day, George returned to his home, to that occupation which is surely one of the most selfish and absorbing in the world, to which nearly every man of thirty has apprenticed himself. A pang of sadness struck him as he peered into the lodgings and saw the little room Harry had occupied, noting the half-burned papers still lingering in the grate. Soon, however, he was on his way to Dean Street again, whispering by the fitful firelight to his clinging sweetheart. She was exceedingly happy—oh, so happy!—at his return, though she felt ashamed of it. Was it not heartless to be so glad when poor Hetty was so melancholy? Poor little Hetty! Indeed, it was selfish to rejoice while she suffered. It made one quite wretched to witness her distress. "Don't, sir! Well, I ought to be wretched, and it is very, very wicked of me if I am not," said Theo, and one could understand her soft-hearted repentance. What she meant by "Don't" was unclear; I had noted the room was dark and the fire burned fitfully, and "Don't" was likely uttered in one of those shadowy moments. Servants entered with supper and lights; the family arrived, and conversation became general. The destination of the fleet was now known to all. The force aboard was deemed sufficient to defeat the French in Canada, and under an officer like Wolfe, to rectify the blunders of previous campaigns. He looked dreadfully ill, indeed, but possessed a great soul within a feeble body. The ministers and the country placed their highest hopes in him. After supper, as was custom, Mr. Lambert gathered his modest household, of whom George Warrington formed a significant part; as he prayed for all travelers by land and water, Theo and her sister knelt together. Thus, as the ship sped farther into the West, these fond thoughts pursued it; the night passed, and the sun rose.

A day or two more, and everyone returned to their books or usual work. As for George Warrington, that celebrated dramatist was busy with another composition. When the tragedy of *Carpezan* had run some thirty or forty nights, other persons of genius took possession of the theater.

There may have been those who wondered how the town could be so fickle as to tire of such a masterpiece, unable to bear seeing the actors in other costumes reciting other men's verses. But George, of a skeptical turn of mind, accepted the fate of his tragedy philosophically, pocketing the proceeds with quiet satisfaction. From Mr. Dodsley, the bookseller, he received the customary hundred pounds; from the theater manager, two hundred or more; and with such praise from critics and friends, he set to work preparing another piece, hoping to achieve even greater success.

Over these studies and other charming pursuits, months passed. Happy times! The happiest season of youth and life, when love is first spoken and returned; when the dearest eyes shine daily with welcome, and the fondest lips never tire of whispering sweet secrets; when the parting glance accompanying "Good night!" offers delightful promise of tomorrow; when the heart overflows with love and happiness, leaving nothing to spare for the world; when days close with glad prayers and open with joyful hopes; when doubt seems cowardice, misfortune impossible, and poverty merely a sweet trial of constancy! Theo's elders, thankfully recalling their own prime, sat softly by to witness this pretty comedy performed by their young people. In one of his later letters, dutifully written to his wife during a temporary absence, George Warrington recorded how he had looked up at the windows of the dear old house in Dean Street, wondering who sat in the chamber where he and Theo had been so happy.

Meanwhile, we may learn how time passed and what occupied our friends through extracts from George's letters to his brother.

"From the old window opposite Bedford Gardens, August 20, 1759.

"Why have you returned to rugged rocks, bleak shores, burning summers, and nipping winters at home, when you might have been cropping laurels in Germany? Kingsley's are returning covered with them as Jack-a-Green on May-day. Our six regiments did wonders; our horse would have done too, had my Lord George Sackville only allowed it. But when Prince Ferdinand shouted 'Charge!' his lordship could not hear, or could not translate the German word for 'Forward,' and so we only beat the French, without utterly annihilating them as we might have, had Lord Granby or Mr. Warrington commanded. My lord has returned to town and is shouting for a Court-Martial. He held his head high enough in prosperity; in misfortune, he displays such a constancy of arrogance that one almost admires him. He looks as if he rather envied poor Mr. Byng, and the fact that he was not shot was a *manque d'égards* toward him.

"The Duke has received notice to prepare for departure from this world of grandeur, victories, downfalls, and disappointments. An attack of palsy has visited His Royal Highness, and *pallida mors* has just peeped in at his door, saying, 'I will call again.' Tyrant as he was, this prince has been noble in disgrace; and no king has ever had a truer servant than ours has found in his son. Why do I always favor the losing side, and am I disposed to revolt against the winners? Your famous Mr. P----, your chief's patron and discoverer, I have heard speak in the House of Commons twice or thrice. I revolt against his magniloquence. I wish some little David would topple that swelling giant. His thoughts and language are always attitudinizing. I like Barry's manner best, though the other is the more awful actor.

"*Pocahontas* is progressing well. Barry likes his part as Captain Smith; and though he insists he wear a red coat with blue facings and an epaulet, I fancy dressing him exactly like one of the pictures of Queen Elizabeth's gentlemen at Hampton Court: with a ruff, a square beard, and square shoes. 'And Pocahontas—would you like her to be tattooed?' asks Uncle Lambert. Hagan's part as the warrior who loves her, and seeing her partiality for the captain, nobly rescuing him from death, I trust will prove a hit. A strange fish is this Hagan: his mouth full of stage-plays and rant, but good, honest, and brave, if I do not err. He is angry at having been cast recently for Sir O'Brallaghan in Mr. Macklin's new farce, *Love A-la-mode*. He says he does not care to disgrace his tongue with imitations of that rascal's brogue. As if there were any need for imitation, when he has such an admirable twang of his own!

"Shall I tell you? Shall I hide the circumstance? Shall I hurt your feelings? Shall I set you in a rage of jealousy and cause you to ask leave to return to Europe? Know then, that though *Carpezan* is long since dead, cousin Maria is forever coming to the playhouse. Tom Spencer has spied her out night after night in the gallery, and she comes on the nights when Hagan performs. Quick, Burroughs, Mr. Warrington's boots and portmanteau! Order a chaise and four for Portsmouth immediately! The letter I burned one morning at breakfast (I may let the cat out of the bag now that puss has such a prodigious way to run) was from cousin M., hinting that she wished me to tell no tales about her: but I cannot help whispering to you that Maria is currently busy consoling herself as fast as possible. Shall I spoil the sport? Shall I tell her brother? Is the affair any business of mine? What have the Esmonds done for you and me but win our money at cards? Yet I like our noble cousin. It seems to me that he would be good if he could—or rather, he would have been once. He has been set on a wrong path of life, from which 'tis now probably too late to rescue him. O *beati agricolae*! Our Virginia was dull, but let us thank Heaven we were bred there. We were made little slaves, but not slaves to wickedness, gambling, or bad male and female company. It was not until my poor Harry left home that he fell among thieves. I mean thieves *en grand*, such as waylaid him and stripped him on English highroads. I consider you none the worse because you were the unlucky one and had to deliver your purse. And now you are going to retrieve yourself, make a good name, and kill more 'French dragons,' becoming a great commander. Our mother will talk of her son the Captain, the Colonel, the General, and have his picture painted with all his stars and epaulets, while poor I shall be but a dawdling poetaster, or, if we may hope for the best, a snug placeman with a little box at Richmond or Kew, and a half-score of little picaninnies who will come to bob curtseys at the garden-gate when their uncle the General rides up on his great charger, his aide-de-camp's pockets filled with gingerbread for the nephews and nieces. 'Tis for you to brandish the sword of Mars. As for me, I look forward to a quiet life: a quiet little home, a quiet little library full of books, and a little *Some one dulce ridentem, dulce loquentem* on the other side of the fire as I scribble away at my papers. I am so pleased with this prospect, so utterly contented and happy, that I feel afraid lest it should escape me; and even to my dearest Hal, I am shy of speaking of my happiness. What is ambition to me with this certainty? What do I care for wars, with this beatific peace smiling near?

"Our mother's friend, Mynheer Van den Bosch, has been away on a tour to discover his family in Holland, and, strange to say, has found one. Miss (who was intended by maternal solicitude to be a wife for your worship) has had six months at Kensington School and is coming out with a hundred pretty accomplishments to complete her as a perfect fine lady. Her papa brought her to make a curtsey in Dean Street, and a mighty elegant curtsey she made. Though she is scarce seventeen, no dowager of sixty can be more at her ease. She conversed with Aunt Lambert on an equal footing, treated the girls as chits—to Hetty's wrath and Theo's amusement. She talked politics with the General and the last routs, dresses, operas, fashions, and scandal with such perfect ease that, but for a blunder or two, you might have fancied Miss Lydia was born in Mayfair. At the Court end of the town she will live, she says, and has no patience with her father, who has a lodging in Monument Yard. For those who love a brown beauty, a prettier little *mignonne* creature cannot be seen. But my taste, you know, dearest brother, and..."

Here follows a page of raptures and quotations of verse, which, out of regard for the reader and the writer's memory, the editor of these pages declines to reprint. Gentlemen and ladies of a certain age may remember the time when they indulged in these rapturous follies on their own accounts; when the praises of the charmer were forever warbling from their lips or trickling from their pens; when the flowers of life were in full bloom, and all the birds of spring were singing. The twigs are now bare, perhaps, and the leaves have fallen; but, for all that, shall we not remember the vernal time? As for you, young people, whose May (or April, is it?) has not commenced yet, you need not be detained over other folks' love-rhapsodies; depend on it, when your spring-season arrives, kindly Nature will warm all your flowers into bloom and rouse your glad bosoms to pour out their full song.
