In the annals of Miss Lydia's adventures, we must first pause to unravel a cryptic sentence in Mr. Warrington's correspondence regarding Lady Maria Esmond, a puzzle that might still baffle the unsophisticated reader. How, indeed, could virtuous minds anticipate such a secret? How could innocent youths imagine that a woman of noble lineage, ancient pedigree, and mature judgment—a woman we witnessed ardently enamored merely a dozen months prior—would so utterly lose her sense of propriety as to fall in love with a man of humble origins and many years her junior, and subsequently wed him against the world's will? Or rather, not openly against the world, but behind its back; for Parson Sampson privately bound the indissoluble knot for the pair within his Mayfair chapel.

Cease your condemnation, however. Did Lady Maria's past foolish infatuation with her young cousin preclude her from loving another? Must men alone possess the privilege of changing affections, while women are censured for seizing occasional solace? No invective is more crude or unphilosophical than Hamlet's rebuke to his mother regarding her second marriage. The truth likely lies elsewhere: that tender, clinging creature simply needed something to hold onto, and with Hamlet senior removed, she entwined herself around Claudius. Indeed, we have known females so determined to attach themselves that they can wind around two gentlemen simultaneously. Why forbid marriage tables after funeral feasts? If you offered grace for yesterday's banquet, does that prevent hunger today? Your natural appetite for tonight's feast proves you will likely crave dinner tomorrow at eight. I, for my part, when Flirtilla or Jiltissa favored me (may the reader imagine these were women of ravishing beauty and high rank), always remembered that a time would come when they would love someone else. We are served *à la russe*, consuming dishes one by one, like guests in Polyphemus's cave. *Tis hodie mihi, cras tibi*: there are anthropophagites who devour dozens of us—the old, the young, the tender, the tough, the plump, the lean, the ugly, the beautiful—with no escape; one by one, as fate decrees, we vanish down their omnivorous throats. Recall Lady Ogresham! We all remember last year how she devoured poor Tom Kydd: seized him, consumed him, picked his bones, and discarded them. Now Ned Suckling lies in her den, quivering and fascinated. He draws closer; she trails nearer. Soon there will be feeble squeaks for pity, and—*hobblegobble*—he will disappear! Alas, it is pity too. I knew Maria Esmond had lost her heart many times before Harry Warrington found it; yet I fancied he would keep it, that she would bewail misfortune and preserve her love in decorous celibacy. If, in a paroxysm of senile folly, I fell in love tomorrow, I would still try to believe I held the fee-simple of my charmer's heart—not merely a tenancy in a short lease of a battered apartment where wine glasses are clouded by scores of lips and sofas stained by the last lodger's boots. Dear nymph! To be beloved and beautiful! Suppose I harbored a fleeting passion for Glycera (whose complexion was indeed as pure as splendent Parian marble); suppose you fancied Telephus, with his low collars and absurd neck—those follies are over, are they not? We love each other forever now, don't we? Yes, eternally; and Glycera may go to Bath, and Telephus take his *cervicem roseam* to Jack Ketch, *n'est-ce pas*?

No. We never think of changing, my dear. However winds blow or time flies, our potage, now piping hot, will never grow cold. Passing fancies we may have indulged in former days; truly, your infatuation for Telephus (do not frown so, my darling, worsening the wrinkles on your brow)—it was the talk of the town. As for Glycera, she behaved confoundedly ill to me. Well, well, now that we understand each other, our hearts are united forever, and we can look upon Sir Cresswell Cresswell and snap our fingers at his wig. But this Maria of the last century possessed an ill-regulated mind. You, my love, who know the world, understand that much must have passed in this lady's career that would not bear the light or edify the telling. You know (not that I imply you have experience, but you have heard people say—you have heard your mother say) that an old flirt, having played the fool with one passion, will play the fool with another; that flirting is like drinking, and when the brandy is gone, Glycera, who has taken to drinking, will fall upon gin. So, if Maria Esmond found a successor for Harry Warrington and set up a new sultan in the precious empire of her heart, what could you expect? That territory was like the Low Countries, accustomed to conquest and forever open to invasion.

Maria's current enslaver was none other than Mr. Geoghegan or Hagan, the young actor who performed in George's tragedy. His tones were thrilling, his eye bright, his mien noble; he looked so beautiful in his gilt leather armor and large buckled periwig, uttering the poet's glowing verses, that the lady's heart yielded to him, just as Ariadne's yielded to Bacchus when her affair with Theseus ended. The young Irishman was deeply touched and elated by the highborn damsel's partiality. He might have preferred a Lady Maria Hagan more tender in years, but one more tender in disposition was difficult to find. She clung to him closely. She retired to his humble lodgings in Westminster with him when it became necessary to disclose their marriage, even as her furious relatives disowned her.

General Lambert brought the news home from Whitehall one day, making merry with his family. In those homely times, a joke was none the worse for being broad; a fine lady would laugh at a jolly page of Fielding and weep over a letter of Clarissa, which would make your present ladyship's eyes start from your head with horror. The merry General uttered all sorts of waggeries upon this marriage: upon George's role in bringing it about; upon Barry's jealousy when he heard of it. He vowed it was cruel that cousin Hagan had not selected George as groomsman; that the first child should be named Carpezan or Sybilla, after the tragedy, and so forth. They would not quite keep a coach, but might acquire a chariot and pasteboard dragons from Mr. Rich's theatre. The baby might be christened in Macbeth's caldron; and Harry and Harlequin ought certainly to be godfathers.

"Why shouldn't she marry him if she likes him?" asked little Hetty. "Why should he not love her because she is a little old? Mamma is a little old, and you love her none the worse. When you married my mamma, sir, I have heard you say you were very poor; and yet you were very happy, and nobody laughed at you!" Thus this impudent little person spoke, unaware of Lady Maria Esmond's previous follies due to her tender age.

So her family has deserted her? George described their wrath: how Lady Castlewood went into mourning; how Mr. Will swore he would have the rascal's ears; how furious Madame de Bernstein was, the angriest of all. "It is an insult to the family," said haughty little Miss Hett; "and I can fancy how ladies of that rank must be indignant at their relative's marriage with a person of Mr. Hagan's condition; but to desert her is a very different matter."

"Indeed, my dear child," cried mamma, "you are talking of what you do not understand. After Lady Maria's conduct, no respectable person can go to see her."

"What conduct, mamma?"

"Never mind," cried mamma. "Little girls cannot be expected to know, nor ought they to be too curious to inquire, what Lady Maria's conduct has been! Suffice it, miss, that I am shocked her ladyship should ever have been here; and I say again, no honest person should associate with her!"

"Then, Aunt Lambert, I must be whipped and sent to bed," said George, with mock gravity. "I own to you (though I did not confess sooner, seeing that the affair was not mine) that I have been to see my cousin the player, and her ladyship his wife. I found them in very dirty lodgings in Westminster, where the wretch has the shabbiness to keep not only his wife, but his old mother, and a little brother, whom he puts to school. I found Mr. Hagan, and came away with a liking, and almost a respect for him, although I own he has made a very improvident marriage. But how improvident some folks are about marriage, aren't they, Theo?"

"Improvident, if they marry such spendthrifts as you," said the General. "Master George found his relations, and I'll be bound to say he left his purse behind him."

"No, not the purse, sir," said George, smiling tenderly. "Theo made that. But I am bound to own it came empty away. Mr. Rich is in great dudgeon. He says he hardly dares have Hagan on his stage and fears a riot, such as Mr. Garrick had about the foreign dancers. This is to be a fine gentleman's riot. The macaronis are furious and vow they will pelt Mr. Hagan and cudgel him afterwards. My cousin Will, at Arthur's, has taken his oath he will have the actor's ears. Meanwhile, as the poor man does not play, they have cut off his salary; and without his salary, this luckless pair of lovers have no means to buy bread and cheese."

"And you took it to them, sir? It was like you, George!" said Theo, worshipping him with her eyes.

"It was your purse took it, dear Theo!" replied George.

"Mamma, I hope you will go and see them tomorrow!" prayed Theo.

"If she doesn't, I shall get a divorce, my dear!" cried papa. "Come and kiss me, you little wench—that is, *avec la bonne permission de monsieur mon beau-fils*."

"Monsieur mon beau fiddlestick, papa!" said Miss Lambert, and I have no doubt she complied with the paternal orders. And this was the first time George Esmond Warrington, Esquire, was ever called a fiddlestick.

Any man, even in our time, who makes an imprudent marriage knows how he must run the gauntlet of the family, undergoing abuse, scorn, wrath, and pity. If your respectable family cries out because you marry the curate's daughter, one in ten of his charming children; or because you engage yourself to the young barrister whose only present pecuniary resources come from the court he reports, and who will have to pay his Oxford bills out of your slender fortune—if your friends cry out for such engagements, fancy the feelings of Lady Maria Hagan's friends, and even those of Mr. Hagan's, upon the announcement of this marriage.

First, there is old Mrs. Hagan. Her son has kept her dutifully and in tolerable comfort ever since he left Trinity College at his father's death and appeared as Romeo at Crow Street Theatre. His salary has sufficed of late years to keep the brother at school, help the sister who went out as a companion, and provide fire, clothing, tea, dinner, and comfort for the old clergyman's widow. And now, forsooth, a fine lady with extravagant habits must come and take possession of the humble home, sharing the scanty loaf and mutton! Were Hagan not a high-spirited fellow and the old mother very much afraid of him, I doubt whether my lady's life at the Westminster lodgings would have been comfortable. It was perhaps selfish to take a place at that small table and in poor Hagan's narrow bed. But Love, in some passionate and romantic dispositions, never regards consequences or measures accommodation. Who has not experienced that frame of mind? What thrifty wife has not seen and lamented her husband in that condition, when, with a heightened color and a deuce-may-care smile, he comes home announcing he has asked twenty people to dinner next Saturday? He does not know whom exactly; he does know the dining-room will only hold sixteen. Never mind! Two of the prettiest girls can sit upon young gentlemen's knees; others won't come; there's sure to be plenty! In the intoxication of love, people venture upon this dangerous housekeeping; they do not calculate the resources of their dining-table or those inevitable butchers' and fishmongers' bills brought to the ghastly housekeeper at the beginning of the month.

Yes: it was somewhat selfish of my Lady Maria to seat herself at Hagan's table, taking the cream from the milk, the wings of the chickens, and the best half of everything where there was only enough before; and no wonder the poor old mother-in-law was disposed to grumble. But what was her outcry compared to the clamor at Kensington among Lady Maria's noble family? Think of the talk and scandal all over the town! Think of the titters and whispers of the ladies attending the Princess's court, where Lady Fanny had a place; of the jokes of Mr. Will's brother-officers at the usher's table; of the waggery in the daily prints and magazines; of the comments of outraged prudes; of the laughter of the clubs and the sneers of the ungodly! Upon receiving the news, Madame Bernstein had fits and fled to the solitude of her dear rocks at Tunbridge Wells, where she did not see above forty people a night at cards. My lord refused to see his sister; and the Countess, in mourning, as we have said, waited upon one of her patronesses, a gracious Princess, who was pleased to condole with her upon the disgrace and calamity which had befallen her house. For one, two, three whole days the town was excited and amused by the scandal; then came other news—a victory in Germany, doubtful accounts from America, a general
