The petty skirmish between George and his cousin cast a long shadow over George's social calendar, effectively halting his visits to Bloomsbury. Mr. Will, emboldened by the binding over to the peace, became even more assiduous in his attentions, his behavior so outrageously forward that George found himself constantly restraining his hands from striking his cousin. Yet, amidst this tension, the artless Lydia possessed a peculiar way of receiving her friends. Six weeks prior, she had been madly jealous of George's preference for another; now, she seized every opportunity to compliment Theo. "Miss Theo is such a quiet, gentle creature," Lyddy declared with a beaming smile, "I am certain George is just the husband for her. How fortunate that horrible quarrel was prevented! The constables arrived just in time. It is quite ridiculous to hear Mr. Esmond cursing and swearing, and the sheer rage he was in at being disappointed of his duel!"

"But the arrival of the constables saved your valuable life, dear Mr. George," Lyddy continued, her voice softening. "And I am sure Miss Theo ought to bless them forever." She paused, her eyes twinkling with mischief. "You won't stop and meet Mr. Esmond at dinner today? You don't like being in his company? He can't do you any harm; and I am sure you will do him none."

Kind speeches like these, delivered by a little girl to a gentleman with such strange inadvertence in the presence of other men and ladies, were unlikely to render Mr. Warrington eager for the society of the young American lady.

For several days, George's meeting with Mr. Will remained unknown in Dean Street, for he wished to spare those kind folks the disturbance of his quarrel. However, once the ladies were made aware of the incident, a great flurry ensued. "You were actually going to take a fellow-creature's life, and you came to see us, and said not a word!" Theo exclaimed, her face pale with shock. "Oh, George, it was shocking!"

"My dear," George pleaded, his voice tight, "he had insulted me and my brother. Could I let him call us both cowards and sit by saying, 'Thank you'?"

The General sat by, looking very grave. "You know you think, papa, it is a wicked and un-Christian practice," Theo reminded him, "and have often said you wished gentlemen would have the courage to refuse!"

"To refuse? Yes," Mr. Lambert said, still glum.

"It must require a prodigious strength of mind to refuse," added Jack Lambert, looking as gloomy as his father, "and I think if any man were to call me a coward, I should be apt to forget my orders."

"You see brother Jack is with me!" cried George.

"I must not be against you, Mr. Warrington," Jack said.

"Mr. Warrington!" cried George, turning very red.

"Would you, a clergyman, have George break the Commandments and commit murder, John?" Theo asked, aghast.

"I am a soldier's son, sister," the young divine replied dryly. "Besides, Mr. Warrington has committed no murder at all. We must soon be hearing from Canada, father. The great question of the supremacy of the two races must be tried there ere long!" He turned his back on George as he spoke, and the latter eyed him with wonder.

Hetty, looking rather pale at this original remark from her brother, was called out of the room by some artful pretext of her sister. George started up and followed the retreating girls to the door.

"Great powers, gentlemen!" he cried, returning to the room. "I believe, on my honour, you are giving me the credit of shirking this affair with Mr. Esmond!" The clergyman and his father exchanged glances.

"A man's nearest and dearest are always the first to insult him," George flashed out.

"You mean to say, 'Not guilty?' God bless thee, my boy!" cried the General. "I told thee so, Jack." He rubbed his hand across his eyes, blushed, and wrung George's hand with all his might.

"Not guilty of what, in heaven's name?" asked Mr. Warrington.

"Nay," said the General. "Mr. Jack, here, brought the story. Let him tell it. I believe 'tis a damned lie, with all my heart." Uttering this wicked expression, the General fairly walked out of the room.

The Rev. J. Lambert looked uncommonly foolish.

"And what is this—this damned lie, sir—that somebody has been telling of me?" George asked, grinning at the young clergyman.

"To question the courage of any man is always an offence to him," Mr. Lambert said stiffly. "And I rejoice that yours has been belied."

"Who told the falsehood, sir, which you repeated?" bawled out Mr. Warrington. "I insist on the man's name!"

"You forget you are bound over to keep the peace," Jack said.

"Curse the peace, sir! We can go and fight in Holland. Tell me the man's name, I say!"

"Fair and softly, Mr. Warrington!" cried the young parson. "My hearing is perfectly good. It was not a man who told me the story which, I confess, I imparted to my father."

"What?" George asked, the truth suddenly occurring. "Was it that artful, wicked little vixen in Bloomsbury Square?"

"Vixen is not the word to apply to any young lady, George Warrington!" Lambert exclaimed. "Much less to the charming Miss Lydia. She is artful—the most innocent of Heaven's creatures! She is wicked—that angel! With unfeigned delight that the quarrel should be over, and with devout gratitude to think that blood consanguineous should not be shed, she spoke in terms of the highest praise of you for declining this quarrel, and of the deepest sympathy with you for taking the painful but only method of averting it."

"What method?" demanded George, stamping his foot.

"Why, of laying an information, to be sure!" said Mr. Jack. On this, George burst forth into language much too violent for polite repetition and highly uncomplimentary to Miss Lydia.

"Don't utter such words, sir!" cried the parson, who, it seemed, now took his turn to be angry. "Do not insult, in my hearing, the most charming, the most innocent of her sex! If she has been mistaken in her information regarding you, and doubted your willingness to commit what, after all, is a crime—for a crime homicide is, and of the most awful description—you, sir, have no right to blacken that angel's character with foul words. And, innocent yourself, should respect the most innocent as she is the most lovely of women! Oh, George, are you to be my brother?"

"I hope to have that honour," answered George, smiling. He began to perceive the other's drift.

"What, then, what—though 'tis too much bliss to be hoped for by sinful man—what, if she should one day be your sister? Who could see her charms without being subjugated by them? I own that I am a slave. I own that those Latin Sapphics in the September number of the Gentleman's Magazine, beginning *Lydicae quondam cecinit venustae* (with an English version by my friend Hickson of Corpus), were mine. I have told my mother what hath passed between us, and Mrs. Lambert also thinks that the most lovely of her sex has deigned to look favourably on me. I have composed a letter—she another. She proposes to wait on Miss Lydia's grandpapa this very day, and to bring me the answer, which shall make me the happiest or the most wretched of men! It was in the unrestrained intercourse of family conversation that I chanced to impart to my father the sentiments which my dear girl had uttered. Perhaps I spoke slightingly of your courage, which I don't doubt—by Heaven, I don't doubt: it may be, she has erred, too, regarding you. It may be that the fiend jealousy has been gnawing at my bosom, and—horrible suspicion!--that I thought my sister's lover found too much favour with her. I would have all my own. Ah, dear George, who knows his faults? I am as one distracted with passion. Confound it, sir! What right have you to laugh at me? I would have you to know that *risu inepto*..."

"What, have you two boys made it up?" cried the General, entering at this moment, in the midst of a roar of laughter from George.

"I was giving my opinion to Mr. Warrington upon laughter, and upon his laughter in particular," said Jack Lambert, in a fume.

"George is bound over to keep the peace, Jack! Thou canst not fight him for two years; and between now and then, let us trust you will have made up your quarrel. Here is dinner, boys! We will drink absent friends, and an end to the war, and no fighting out of the profession!"

George pleaded an engagement as a reason for running away early from his dinner, and Jack must have speedily followed him. For when the former, after transacting some brief business at his own lodgings, came to Mr. Van den Bosch's door in Bloomsbury Square, he found the young parson already in parley with a servant there.

"His master and mistress had left town yesterday," the servant said.

"Poor Jack! And you had the decisive letter in your pocket?" George asked of his future brother-in-law.

"Well, yes," Jack owned, holding the document. "And my mother has ordered a chair, and was coming to wait on Miss Lyddy," he whispered piteously as the young men lingered on the steps.

George had a note in his pocket for the young lady, which he had not cared to mention to Jack. In truth, his business at home had been to write a smart note to Miss Lyddy, with a message for the gentleman who had brought her that funny story of his giving information regarding the duel! The family being absent, George did not choose to leave his note. "If cousin Will has been the slander-bearer, I will go and make him recant," George thought. "Will the family soon be back?" he blandly asked.

"They are gone to visit the quality," the servant replied. "Here is the address on this paper;" and George read, in Miss Lydia's hand, "The box from Madam Hocquet's to be sent by the Farnham Flying Coach; addressed to Miss Van den Bosch, at the Right Honourable the Earl of Castlewood's, Castlewood, Hants."

"Where?" cried poor Jack, aghast.

"His lordship and their ladyships have been here often," the servant said, with much importance. "The families is quite intimate."

This was very strange; for, in the course of their conversation, Lyddy had owned but to one single visit from Lady Castlewood.

"And they must be a-going to stay there some time, for Miss have took a power of boxes and gowns with her!" the man added. And the young men walked away, each crumpling his letter in his pocket.

"What was that remark you made?" George asked of Jack, at some exclamation of the latter. "I think you said—"

"Distraction! I am beside myself, George! I—I scarce know what I am saying," groaned the clergyman. "She is gone to Hampshire, and Mr. Esmond is gone with her!"

"Othello could not have spoken better! and she has a pretty scoundrel in her company!" said Mr. George. "Ha! here is your mother's chair!" Indeed, at this moment poor Aunt Lambert came swinging down Great Russell Street, preceded by her footman. "'Tis no use going farther, Aunt Lambert!" cried George. "Our little bird has flown."

"What little bird?"

"The bird Jack wished to pair with:—the Lyddy bird, aunt. Why, Jack, I protest you are swearing again! This morning 'twas the Sixth Commandment you wanted to break; and now—"

"Confound it! leave me alone, Mr. Warrington, do you hear?" growled Jack, looking very savage; and away he strode far out of the reach of his mother's bearers.

"What is the matter, George?" asked the lady.

George, who had not been very well pleased with brother Jack's behaviour all day, said: "Brother Jack has not a fine temper, Aunt Lambert. He informs you all that I am a coward, and remonstrates with me for being angry. He finds his mistress gone to the country, and he bawls, and stamps, and swears. O fie! Oh, Aunt Lambert, beware of jealousy! Did the General ever make you jealous?"

"You will make me very angry if you speak to me in this way," said poor Aunt Lambert from her chair.

"I am respectfully dumb. I make my bow. I withdraw," said George, with a low bow, and turned towards Holborn. His soul was wrath within him. He was bent on quarrelling with somebody. Had he met cousin Will that night, it had gone ill with his sureties.

He sought Will at all his haunts, at Arthur's, at his own house. There Lady Castlewood's servants informed him that they believed Mr. Esmond had gone to join the family in Hants. He wrote a letter to his cousin:

"My dear, kind cousin William," he wrote, "you know I am bound over, and would not quarrel with any one, much less with a dear, truth-telling, affectionate kinsman, whom my brother insulted by caning. But if you can find any one who says that I prevented a meeting the other day by giving information, will you tell your informant that I think it is not I but somebody else is the coward? And I write to Mr. Van den Bosch by the same post, to inform him and Miss Lyddy that I find some rascal has been telling them
