It is a familiar tale from our childhood fairy books that at every christening and wedding, someone is inevitably disappointed and vows vengeance. Thus, we need not marvel that Cousin Will should curse and rage with such energy upon hearing of his brother's engagement to the colonial heiress. Initially, Will fled the house in a fury, swearing he would never return. Yet, nobody, not even the swearer himself, truly believed in the permanence of Master Will's oaths. After a day or two, this unrepentant prodigal returned to the paternal home. The fumes of the marriage feast proved too alluring; he could not afford to resign his knife and fork at the Castlewood table. He came back to drink and eat there in token of revenge, pledging the young bride in a bumper while muttering perdition beneath his breath. He offered responses of smothered maledictions as her father gave her away in the chapel, and as my lord vowed to love, honour, and cherish her.

Will was not the only grumbler regarding that marriage. Mr. Warrington heard no end of abuse directed at my lady and her grandfather. The old gentleman's City friends, his legal adviser, the Dissenting clergyman at whose chapel they had first arrived in England, and poor Jack Lambert, the orthodox young divine whose eloquence he had hoped to exert privately, were all bitter against the little lady's treachery. Each had a story of being enslaved, encouraged, and then jilted by the young American. The lawyer, who held such an accurate list of her properties, estates, moneys, slaves, and ships, was ready to vow that the whole account was false—that there was no such place as New York or Virginia, or at any rate, that Mr. Van den Bosch possessed no land there. He claimed there was no such thing as a Guinea trade and that the negroes were merely black falsehoods invented by the wily old planter. The Dissenting pastor moaned over his stray lambing, questioning if such a little, wily, mischievous monster could truly be called a lamb. Poor Jack Lambert ruefully acknowledged to his mother the possession of a lock of black hair, which he bedewed with tears and apostrophised in quite unclerical language. As for Mr. William Esmond, he, with the shrieks and curses in which he always freely indulged, even under his sister-in-law's own pretty little nose when under strong emotion, called Acheron to witness that out of that region there did not exist such an artful young devil as Miss Lydia. He swore she was an infernal female Cerberus and called down all the wrath of this world and the next upon his swindling rascal of a brother, who had cajoled him with fair words and filched his prize from him.

"Why," said Mr. Warrington when Will expatiated on these matters, "if the girl is such a she-devil as you describe her, you are all the better for losing her. If she intends to deceive her husband and give him a dose of poison, as you say, how lucky for you that you are not the man! You ought to thank the gods, Will, instead of cursing them, for robbing you of such a fury, and can't be better revenged on Castlewood than by allowing him her sole possession."

"All this was very well," Will Esmond said; but, not unjustly, remarked that his brother was not the less a scoundrel for having cheated him out of the fortune which he expected to get, and which he had risked his life to win.

George Warrington was at a loss to know how his cousin had been made to risk his precious existence—on which, perhaps, a rope's end had been a fitting termination—on which Will Esmond, with the utmost candour, told his kinsman how the little Cerbera had actually caused the meeting between them, which was interrupted somehow by Sir John Fielding's men. He recounted how she was always saying that George Warrington was a coward for ever sneering at Mr. Will, and the latter doubly a poltroon for not taking notice of his kinsman's taunts; how George had run away and nearly died of fright in Braddock's expedition. "Deuce take me," said Will, "I never was more surprised, cousin, than when you stood to your ground so coolly in Tottenham Court Fields yonder, for me and my second offered to wager that you would never come!"

Mr. Warrington laughed and thanked Mr. Will for this opinion of him. "Though," said he, "cousin, 'twas lucky for me the constables came up, or you would have whipped your sword through my body in another minute. Didn't you see how clumsy I was as I stood before you? And you actually turned white and shook with anger!"

"Yes, curse me," said Mr. Will, who turned very red this time, "that's my way of showing my rage; and I was confoundedly angry with you, cousin! But now 'tis my brother I hate, and that little devil of a Countess—a countess! a pretty countess, indeed!" And with another rumbling cannonade of oaths, Will saluted the reigning member of his family.

"Well, cousin," said George, looking him queerly in the face, "you let me off easily, and I dare say I owe my life to you, or at any rate a whole waistcoat, and I admire your forbearance and spirit. What a pity that a courage like yours should be wasted as a mere court usher! You are a loss to his Majesty's army. You positively are!"

"I never know whether you are joking or serious, Mr. Warrington," growled Will.

"I should think very few gentlemen would dare to joke with you, cousin, if they had a regard for their own lives or ears!" cried Mr. Warrington, who loved this grave way of dealing with his noble kinsman and used to watch, with a droll interest, the other choking his curses, grinding his teeth because afraid to bite, and smothering his cowardly anger.

"And you should moderate your expressions, cousin, regarding the dear Countess and my lord your brother," Mr. Warrington resumed. "Of you they always speak most tenderly. Her ladyship has told me everything."

"What everything?" cried Will, aghast.

"As much as women ever do tell, cousin. She owned that she thought you had been a little *épris* with her. What woman can help liking a man who has admired her?"

"Why, she hates you, and says you were wild about her, Mr. Warrington!" said Mr. Esmond.

"Spretae injuria formae, cousin!"

"For me—what's for me?" asked the other.

"I never did care for her, and hence, perhaps, she does not love me. Don't you remember that case of the wife of the Captain of the Guard?"

"Which Guard?" asked Will.

"My Lord Potiphar," said Mr. Warrington.

"Lord Who? My Lord Falmouth is Captain of the Yeomen of the Guard, and my Lord Berkeley of the Pensioners. My Lord Hobart had 'em before. Suppose you haven't been long enough in England to know who's who, cousin!" remarked Mr. William.

But Mr. Warrington explained that he was speaking of a Captain of the Guard of the King of Egypt, whose wife had persecuted one Joseph for not returning her affection for him. On which Will said that, as for Egypt, he believed it was a confounded long way off; and that if Lord What-d'ye-call's wife told lies about him, it was like her sex, who he supposed were the same everywhere.

Now the truth is, that when he paid his marriage-visit to Castlewood, Mr. Warrington had heard from the little Countess her version of the story of differences between Will Esmond and herself. And this tale differed, in some respects, though he was far from saying it was more authentic than the ingenuous narrative of Mr. Will. The lady was grieved to think how she had been deceived in her brother-in-law. She feared that his life about the court and town had injured those high principles which all the Esmonds are known to be born with; that Mr. Will's words were not altogether to be trusted; that a loose life and pecuniary difficulties had made him mercenary, blunted his honour, perhaps even impaired the high chivalrous courage "which we Esmonds, cousin," the little lady said, tossing her head, "which we Esmonds must always possess—leastways, you and me, and my lord, and my cousin Harry have it, I know!" says the Countess. "Oh, cousin George! and must I confess that I was led to doubt of yours, without which a man of ancient and noble family like ours isn't worthy to be called a man! I shall try, George, as a Christian lady, and the head of one of the first families in this kingdom and the whole world, to forgive my brother William for having spoke ill of a member of our family, though a younger branch and by the female side, and made me for a moment doubt of you. He did so. Perhaps he told me ever so many bad things you had said of me."

"I, my dear lady!" cried Mr. Warrington.

"Which he said you said of me, cousin, and I hope you didn't, and heartily pray you didn't; and I can afford to despise 'em. And he paid me his court, that's a fact; and so have others, and that I'm used to; and he might have prospered better than he did perhaps (for I did not know my dear lord, nor come to value his great and eminent qualities, as I do out of the fulness of this grateful heart now!), but, oh! I found William was deficient in courage, and no man as wants that can ever have the esteem of Lydia, Countess of Castlewood, no more he can! He said 'twas you that wanted for spirit, cousin, and angered me by telling me that you was always abusing of me. But I forgive you, George, that I do! And when I tell you that it was he was afraid—the mean skunk!--and actually sent for them constables to prevent the match between you and he, you won't wonder I wouldn't value a feller like that—no, not that much!" and her ladyship snapped her little fingers. "I say, noblesse oblige, and a man of our family who hasn't got courage, I don't care not this pinch of snuff for him—there, now, I don't! Look at our ancestors, George, round these walls! Haven't the Esmonds always fought for their country and king? Is there one of us that, when the moment arrives, ain't ready to show that he's an Esmond and a nobleman? If my eldest son was to show the white feather, 'My Lord Esmond!' I would say to him (for that's the second title in our family), 'I disown your lordship!'" And so saying, the intrepid little woman looked round at her ancestors, whose effigies, depicted by Lely and Kneller, figured round the walls of her drawing-room at Castlewood.

Over that apartment, and the whole house, domain, and village, the new Countess speedily began to rule with an unlimited sway. It was surprising how quickly she learned the ways of command; and, if she did not adopt those methods of precedence usual in England among great ladies, invented regulations for herself, and promulgated them, and made others submit. Having been bred a Dissenter, and not being over-familiar with the Established Church service, Mr. Warrington remarked that she made a blunder or two during the office (not knowing, for example, when she was to turn her face towards the east, a custom not adopted, I believe, in other Reforming churches besides the English); but between Warrington's first bridal visit to Castlewood and his second, my lady had got to be quite perfect in that part of her duty, and sailed into chapel on her cousin's arm, her two footmen bearing her ladyship's great Prayer-book behind her, as demurely as that delightful old devotee with her lackey, in Mr. Hogarth's famous picture of "Morning," and as if my Lady Lydia had been accustomed to have a chaplain all her life. She seemed to patronise not only the new chaplain, but the service and the church itself, as if she had never in her own country heard a Ranter in a barn. She made the oldest established families in the country—grave baronets and their wives—worthy squires of twenty descents, who rode over to Castlewood to pay the bride and bridegroom honour—know their distance, as the phrase is, and give her the pas. She got an old heraldry book; and a surprising old maiden lady from Winton, learned in politeness and genealogies, from whom she learned the court etiquette (as the old Winton lady had known it in Queen Anne's time); and ere long she jabbered gules and sables, bends and saltires, not with correctness always, but with a wonderful volubility and perseverance. She made little progresses to the neighbouring towns in her gilt coach-and-six, or to the village in her chair, and asserted a quasi-regal right of homage from her tenants and other clodpoles. She lectured the parson on his divinity; the bailiff on his farming; instructed the astonished housekeeper how to preserve and pickle; would have taught the great London footmen to jump behind the carriage, only it was too high for her little ladyship to mount; gave the village gossips instructions how to nurse and take care of their children long before she had one herself; and as for physic, Madam Esmond in Virginia was not more resolute about her pills and draughts than Miss Lydia, the earl's new bride. Do you remember the story of the Fisherman and the Genie, in the Arabian Nights? So one wondered with regard to this lady, how such a prodigious genius could have been corked down into such a little bottle as
