"You, Captain Miles Warrington, possess the rare distinction of winning the favor of a lady—indeed, of several ladies, including the Duchess of Devonshire, Mrs. Crew, Mrs. Fitzherbert, the Queen of Prussia, the Goddess Venus, and Mademoiselle Hillisberg of the Opera. Let us not concern ourselves with the specific identity. Now, if you have secured a lady's good graces, do you invariably proceed to the mess to recount the details?"

"Not such a fool, Squire!" replied the Captain, examining his sideburns in the mirror.

"Have you, Miss Theo, disclosed every word spoken to Mr. Joe Blake, junior, in the shrubbery this morning?"

"Joe Blake, indeed!" cried Theo junior.

"And you, mademoiselle? Regarding that scented billet-doux delivered under Sir Thomas's frank, have you revealed its entire contents? Observe how she blushes! As crimson as the curtain, I swear! No, mademoiselle, we all possess our secrets" (the Squire added, executing his finest French bow).

"No, Theo, there was nothing in the shrubbery—merely nuts, my child! No, Miles, my son, we do not reveal everything, even to the most indulgent of fathers—and if I recount what transpired in a landau on the Hampstead Road on the twenty-fifth of May, 1760, may the Chevalier Ruspini extract every tooth from my head!"

"Pray tell, papa!" urged mamma. "Or, since Jobson, who drove us, is now in your service, perhaps you will summon him from the stables! I insist upon your telling!"

"What is, then, this mystery?" asked mademoiselle, in her charming French accent, addressing my wife.

"Eh, ma fille!" whispered the lady. "Thou wouldst ask me what I said? I said 'Yes!'—behold, that is all I said." Thus, it was my wife who had betrayed us, not I; and this was the entirety of our conversation as the carriage, faster than I deemed prudent, galloped toward Hampstead and returned swiftly. Theo had not agreed to defy her honored parents—such a notion was unthinkable. Yet, we would marry no other; not even the Prince of Wales himself could command her hand. Her heart had been given away with her father's consent—nay, his order—it was not hers to reclaim. Such a benevolent father must eventually relent; and if George kept his promise—whether now, in twenty years, or in another world—she knew she would never break hers.

Hetty's face beamed with delight when, upon my brief interview concluding, she observed Theo's countenance wearing a sweet tranquility. "All the doctor's medicine has not done her so much good," the devoted sister remarked. The girls departed home following their act of disobedience. I relinquished the position I had held during a fleeting period of happiness beside my dear invalid. Hetty skipped back into her seat, and Charley mounted to his box. He later informed me that it was a remarkably dull, stupid sermon he had attended. The little chap was too orthodox to appreciate dissenting preachers' sermons.

Hetty was not the sole family member to notice her sister's altered demeanor and improved spirits. I am told that upon the girls' return, their mother embraced both, especially the invalid, with more than usual ardor. "There was nothing like a country ride," Aunt Lambert declared, "for restoring her dear Theo. She had traveled the road to Hampstead, had she? She must undertake another ride tomorrow. Heaven be praised, my Lord Wrotham's horses were at our orders three or four times weekly, and the sweet child might avail herself of them!" As for the notion that Mr. Warrington might have encountered the children during their drive, Aunt Lambert never once entertained it—at least, she never spoke of it. I leave it to anyone interested to conjecture whether Mrs. Lambert could possibly have suspected that her daughter and her sweetheart might ever reunite. Do women assist one another in matters of love? Do women scheme, intrigue, devise little plans, utter little falsehoods, create amorous opportunities, hang up the rope-ladder, coax, wheedle, mystify the guardian or Abigail, and divert their attention while Strephon and Chloe coo in the twilight or whisk away in the postchaise to Gretna Green? My dear young folks, some individuals are of this nature; and some kind souls, having loved tenderly and truly in their own time, continue thereafter to be kindly and tenderly disposed toward their young successors as they commence playing the same delightful game.

Miss Prim does not. If she hears of two young persons attached to one another, she snarls at them as fools or imagines every conceivable evil. Because she possesses a humpback herself, she seeks to bite everyone else's. I believe if she witnessed a pair of turtles cooing in a wood, she would cast her eyes downward or throw a stone to frighten them; yet I am speaking, you see, young ladies, of your grandmother, Aunt Lambert, who was one great syllabub of human kindness. Moreover, regarding the affair currently under discussion, how am I ever to determine whether she knew anything concerning it or not?

Thus, all she tells Theo upon her return home is, "My child, the country air has done you all the good in the world, and I hope you will take another drive tomorrow, and another, and another, and so on."

"Do you not think, papa, the ride has done the child wonderful good, and must she not be made to go out in the air?" Aunt Lambert asks the General when he arrives for supper.

"Yes, certainly, if a coach-and-six will do his little Theo good, she shall have it," Lambert replies, "or he will drag the landau up Hampstead Hill himself if there are no horses;" and so the good man would have freely spent his guineas, his breath, or his blood to grant his child pleasure. He was charmed by his girl's altered countenance; she picked at a piece of chicken with appetite; she drank a little negus, which he prepared for her; indeed, it seemed superior to the kind doctor's best medicine, which, God knows, had hitherto been of little benefit. Mamma was gracious and happy. Hetty was radiant and rident. It was quite like an evening at home at Oakhurst. Never for months past, never since that fatal, cruel day that no one spoke of, had they spent an evening so delightful.

However, if the other women chose to coax and cajole the good, simple father, Theo herself was too honest to sustain that sweet and fond delusion for long. When, for the third or fourth time, he returned to the delightful theme of his daughter's improved health and asked, "What has done it? Is it the country air? Is it the Jesuit's bark? Is it the new medicine?"

"Can't you think, dear, what it is?" she said, laying a hand upon her father's, with a tremor in her voice, perhaps, but eyes that were quite open and bright.

"And what is it, my child?" asked the General.

"It is because I have seen him again, papa!" she replied.

The other two women turned pale, and Theo's heart too began to palpitate, her cheek whitening as she continued to gaze into her father's terrified face.

"It was not wrong to see him," she continued more quickly; "it would have been wrong not to tell you."

"Great God!" groaned the father, drawing his hand back, with such dreadful grief in his countenance that Hetty ran to her almost swooning sister, clasped her to her heart, and cried out rapidly, "Theo knew nothing of it, sir! It was my doing—it was all my doing!"

Theo lay on her sister's neck, kissing it twenty, fifty times.

"Women, women! Are you playing with my honour?" cried the father, bursting forth with a fierce exclamation.

Aunt Lambert sobbed wildly, "Martin! Martin! Don't say a word to her!" Hetty called out again, falling back herself staggering toward the wall, for Theo had fainted upon her shoulder.

I was taking my breakfast the next morning with whatever appetite I might possess when my door opened and my faithful black announced, "General Lambert." Immediately, by the General's face, I saw that the transaction of the previous day was known to him. "Your accomplices did not confess," the General said as soon as my servant had left us, "but sided with you against their father—a proof of how desirable clandestine meetings are. It was from Theo herself I heard that she had seen you."

"Accomplices, sir!" I said (perhaps not unwilling to turn the conversation from the real point at issue). "You know how fondly and dutifully your young people regard their father. If they side against you in this instance, it must be because justice is against you. A man like you is not going to set up *sic volo sic jubeo* as the sole law in his family!"

"Psha, George!" cried the General. "For though we are parted, God forbid I should desire that we should cease to love each other. I had your promise that you would not seek to see her."

"Nor did I go to her, sir," I said, turning red, no doubt; for though this was truth, I own it was untrue.

"You mean she was brought to you?" said Theo's father, in great agitation. "Is it behind Hester's petticoat that you will shelter yourself? What a fine defense for a gentleman!"

"Well, I won't screen myself behind the poor child," I replied. "To speak as I did was an attempt at evasion, and I am ill-accustomed to dissemble. I did not infringe the letter of my agreement, but I acted against the spirit of it. From this moment I annul it altogether."

"You break your word given to me!" cried Mr. Lambert.

"I recall a hasty promise made suddenly at a moment of extreme excitement and perturbation. No man can be forever bound by words uttered at such a time; and what is more, no man of honor or humanity, Mr. Lambert, would try to bind him."

"Dishonor to me! sir," exclaimed the General.

"Yes, if the phrase is to be shuttlecocked between us!" I answered hotly. "There can be no question about love, or mutual regard, or difference of age, when that word is used: and were you my own father—and I love you better than a father, Uncle Lambert—I would not bear it! What have I done? I have seen the woman whom I consider my wife before God and man, and if she calls me I will see her again. If she comes to me, here is my home for her, and the half of the little I have. 'Tis you, who have no right, having made me the gift, to resume it. Because my mother taunts you unjustly, are you to visit Mrs. Esmond's wrong upon this tender, innocent creature? You profess to love your daughter, and you can't bear a little wounded pride for her sake. Better she should perish away in misery than an old woman in Virginia should say that Mr. Lambert had schemed to marry one of his daughters. Say that to satisfy what you call honor and I call selfishness, we part, we break our hearts well nigh, we rally, we try to forget each other, we marry elsewhere? Can any man be to my dear as I have been? God forbid! Can any woman be to me what she is? You shall marry her to the Prince of Wales tomorrow, and it is cowardice and treason. How can we, how can you, undo the promises we have made to each other before Heaven? You may part us: and she will die as surely as if she were Jephthah's daughter. Have you made any vow to Heaven to compass her murder? Kill her if you conceive your promise so binds you: but this I swear, that I am glad you have come, so that I may here formally recall a hasty pledge which I gave, and that, call me when she will, I will come to her!"

No doubt this speech was made with the flurry and agitation belonging to Mr. Warrington's youth, and with the firm conviction that death would infallibly carry off one or both of the parties if their worldly separation was inevitably decreed. Who does not believe his first passion eternal? Having watched the world since, and seen the rise, progress, and—alas, that I must say it—decay of other amours, I may smile now as I think of my own youthful errors and ardors; but if it be a superstition, I had rather hold it; I had rather think that neither of us could have lived with any other mate, and that, of all its innumerable creatures, Heaven decreed these special two should be joined together.

"We must come, then, to what I had fain have spared myself," said the General in reply to my outbreak; "to an unfriendly separation. When I meet you, Mr. Warrington, I must know you no more. I must order—and they will not do other than obey me—my family and children not to recognize you when they see you, since you will not recognize in your intercourse with me the respect due to my age, the courtesy of gentlemen. I had hoped so far from your sense of honor, and the idea I had formed of you, that in my present great grief and perplexity, I should have found you willing to soothe and help me as far as you might—for, God knows, I have need of everybody's sympathy. But instead of help, you fling obstacles in my way. Instead of a friend—a gracious Heaven pardon me!—I find in you an enemy! An enemy to the peace of my home and the honor of my children, sir! And as such I shall treat you, and know how to deal with you when you molest me!"

Waving his hand to me and putting on his hat, Mr. Lambert hastily quitted my apartment.

I was confounded and believed, indeed, there was war between us. The brief happiness of
