We who had participated in that guilty morning felt a treble guilt when we witnessed the profound effect our actions had wrought upon him, the man we loved and revered above all others. The shock inflicted upon the good man was strange, yet pitiful to behold for those who had delivered it. His beloved child had deceived and defied him; indeed, I confess now, my dear, that neither we nor anyone else could possibly repeat such a deed. His entire family had conspired against him. Oh, dear, kind friend and father! We know you have pardoned our transgression in that Heaven where you dwell among purified spirits who learned on earth the art of loving and forgiving. For that man, love and forgiveness were natural duties; beneficence flowed from him like a gentle stream, accompanied by a sweet, smiling humility. To wound either was to become savage and brutal, akin to torturing a child or striking a nursing mother. Once the deed was done, all of us, the guilty ones, groveled in the dust before the man we had injured.

I shall pass over the scenes of forgiveness, reconciliation, and our shared worship, concluding with the final separation when the good man departed for his government, leaving the ship to sail away before us, carrying him from the shore where I and Theo stood hand in hand—horribly abashed, silent, and burdened by guilt. My wife did not join me until her father had departed. During the interval between our marriage ceremony and his leaving, she remained at home, occupying her accustomed place beside her father and by her sister's side. He was as kind as ever, yet the women were almost speechless among themselves; Aunt Lambert, for once, was unkind and fretful in her temper; and little Hetty was feverish and strange, muttering, "I wish we were gone. I wish we were gone." Though admitted to the house and forgiven, I slunk away during those final days, seeing my wife only for a minute or two in the street or within the confines of her family. She was not truly mine until they were gone. We traveled to Winchester and Hampton for what may be termed our wedding—a dismal business indeed. For a while, we felt utterly lonely, grieving for our dear father as if we had buried him or driven him to the grave through our undutifulness.

I instructed Sampson to announce our marriage in the newspapers. (My wife used to hang her head low before the poor fellow afterwards.) I took Mrs. Warrington back to my old lodgings in Bloomsbury, where there was ample room for us, and our modest married life began. I wrote a letter home to my mother in Virginia, omitting all particulars save that Mr. Lambert was about to depart for his government and that, bound in honor, I intended to fulfill my promise to his dearest daughter. I also stated my intention to complete my studies for the Bar, qualifying myself for employment at home or in any colony. My good Mrs. Mountain answered this letter, acting on the desire of Madam Esmond, who deemed it best for the sake of peace that my communications be conducted through her. I found my relatives in a fury that was perfectly amusing to witness. The butler's face, as he curtly declared, "Not at home," at my uncle's house in Hill Street, was a blank tragedy that might have been studied by Garrick himself. My poor little wife rested on my arm, and we tripped away, laughing at the fellow's cold reception, only to encounter my lady in a street stoppage in her carriage. I removed my hat and made her the lowest possible bow, affectionately inquiring after my dear cousins. "I—I wonder you dare look me in the face!" Lady Warrington gasped out. "Nay, don't deprive me of that precious privilege!" I replied. "Move on, Peter," she screamed to her chairman. "Your ladyship would not impale your own husband's flesh and blood!" I retorted. She rattled the glass of her chair in a fury. I kissed my hand, removed my hat, and performed another of my finest bows.

Walking shortly afterward in Hyde Park with my dearest companion, I met my little cousin exercising on horseback with a groom behind him. As soon as he saw us, he galloped up, the groom powdering afterwards and bawling, "Stop, Master Miles, stop!"

"I am not to speak to my cousin," said Miles, "but telling you to send my love to Harry is not speaking to you, is it? Is that my new cousin? I'm not told not to speak to her. I'm Miles, cousin, Sir Miles Warrington Baronet's son, and you are very pretty!" "Now, duee now, Master Miles," said the groom, touching his hat to us, and the boy trotted away laughing, glancing back over his shoulder. "You see how my relations have determined to treat me," I said to my partner. "As if I married you for your relations!" said Theo, her eyes beaming with joy and love into mine. Ah, how happy we were! How brisk and pleasant the winter! How snug the kettle by the fire, where the abashed Sampson sometimes came to make the punch; how delightful the night at the theatre, for which our friends had procured tickets, and where we daily expected our new play of *Pocahontas* would rival the successes of all former tragedies.

The fickle old aunt of Clarges Street, who had received me on my first coming to London with my wife in a burst of scorn, mollified presently. As soon as she came to know Theo—who she had previously pronounced an insignificant little country-faced chit—she fell utterly in love with her, inviting her to tea and supper every day whenever there was no other company. "As for company, my dears," she would say, "I don't ask you. You are no longer *du monde*. Your marriage has put that entirely out of the question." Thus she would have us come to amuse her, entering and exiting by the back stairs. My wife was fine lady enough to feel only amused at this reception; and I must do justice to the Baroness's domestics, for had we been duke and duchess, we could not have been received with more respect. Madame de Bernstein was very much tickled and amused by my story of Lady Warrington and the chair. I acted it for her, recounting anecdotes of the pious Baronet's lady and her daughters, which pleased the mischievous, lively old woman.

The Dowager Countess of Castlewood, now established in her house at Kensington, gave us that kind of welcome which genteel ladies extend to their poorer relatives. We visited her ladyship's drawing rooms at Kensington once or twice; but, losing more money at cards and spending more on coach-hire than I cared to afford, we speedily gave up those entertainments. I dare say we were no more missed or regretted than other people in the fashionable world who are carried by death, debt, or other accident out of the polite sphere. My Theo did not in the least regret this exclusion. She had made her appearance at one of these gatherings, attired in some little ornaments her mother had left behind, which the good lady set some store by; but I thought her own white neck far prettier than these poor twinkling stones. There were dowagers whose wrinkled old bones blazed with rubies and diamonds, which I am sure they would gladly have exchanged for her modest parure of beauty and freshness. Not a soul spoke to her—except, to be sure, Beau Lothair, a friend of Mr. Will's, who prowled about Bloomsbury afterwards and even sent my wife a billet. I met him in Covent Garden shortly after and promised to break his ugly face if ever I saw him in the neighborhood of my lodgings, and Madam Theo was molested no further.

The only relative who came to see us (Madame de Bernstein never came; she sent her coach for us sometimes, or made inquiries regarding us by her woman or her major-domo) was our poor Maria, who, with her husband, Mr. Hagan, often took a share of our homely dinner. Then we had friend Spencer from the Temple, who admired our Arcadian felicity and gently asked for our sympathy regarding his less fortunate loves; and twice or thrice the famous Doctor Johnson came in for a dish of Theo's tea. A dish? A pailful! "And a pail the best thing to feed him, sar!" said Mr. Gumbo, indignantly; for the Doctor's appearance was not pleasant, nor his linen particularly white. He snorted, grew red, and sputtered while feeding; he flung his meat about and bawled out in contradiction, annoying my Theo, whom he professed to admire greatly, by declaring every time he saw her, "Madam, you do not love me; I see by your manner you do not love me; though I admire you, and come here for your sake. Here is my friend Mr. Reynolds that shall paint you: he has no ceruse in his paint-box that is as brilliant as your complexion." And so Mr. Reynolds, a most perfect and agreeable gentleman, would have painted my wife; but I knew what his price was and did not choose to incur that expense. I wish I had now, for the sake of the children, that they might see what yonder face was like some fifty years ago. To me, madam, 'tis the same now as ever; and your ladyship is always young!

What annoyed Mrs. Warrington with Dr. Johnson more than his contradictions, sputterings, and dirty nails was, I think, an unfavorable opinion he formed of my new tragedy. Hagan once proposed that he should read some scenes from it after tea.

"Nay, sir, conversation is better," said the Doctor. "I can read for myself, or hear you at the theatre. I had rather hear Mrs. Warrington's artless prattle than your declamation of Mr. Warrington's decasyllables. Tell us about your household affairs, madam, and whether his Excellency your father is well, and whether you made the pudding and the butter sauce. The butter sauce was delicious!" (He loved it so well that he had kept a large quantity in the bosom of a very dingy shirt.) "You made it as though you loved me. You helped me as though you loved me, though you don't."

"Faith, sir, you are taking some of the present away with you in your waistcoat," said Hagan, with much spirit.

"Sir, you are rude!" bawled the Doctor. "You are unacquainted with the first principles of politeness, which is courtesy before ladies. Having received a university education, I am surprised that you have not learned the rudiments of politeness. I respect Mrs. Warrington. I should never think of making personal remarks about her guests before her!"

"Then, sir," said Hagan, fiercely, "why did you speak of my theatre?"

"Sir, you are saucy!" roared the Doctor.

"De te fabula," said the actor. "I think it is your waistcoat that is saucy. Madam, shall I make some punch in the way we make it in Ireland?"

The Doctor, puffing and purple in the face, wiped the dingy shirt with a still more dubious pocket-handkerchief, which he then applied to his forehead. After this exercise, he blew a hyperborean whistle, as if to blow his wrath away. "It is de me, sir—though, as a young man, perhaps you need not have told me so."

"I drop my point, sir! If you have been wrong, I am sure I am bound to ask your pardon for setting you so!" said Mr. Hagan, with a fine bow.

"Doesn't he look like a god?" said Maria, clutching my wife's hand; and indeed Mr. Hagan did look like a handsome young gentleman. His color had risen; he had put his hand to his breast with a noble air; Chamont or Castalio could not present himself better.

"Let me make you some lemonade, sir; my papa has sent us a box of fresh limes. May we send you some to the Temple?"

"Madam, if they stay in your house, they will lose their quality and turn sweet," said the Doctor. "Mr. Hagan, you are a young sauce-box, that's what you are! Ho! ho! It is I have been wrong."

"Oh, my lord, my Polidore!" bleated Lady Maria when she was alone in my wife's drawing-room:

"'Oh, I could hear thee talk for ever thus,
Eternally admiring,—fix and gaze
On those dear eyes, for every glance they send
Darts through my soul, and fills my heart with rapture!'"

"Thou knowest not, my Theo, what a pearl and paragon of a man my Castalio is; my Chamont, my—oh, dear me, child, what a pity it is that in your husband's tragedy he should have to take the horrid name of Captain Smith!"

Upon this tragedy not only my literary hopes, but much of my financial prospects were founded. My brother's debts were to be discharged, my mother's drafts from home duly honored, my own expenses paid, which, though moderate, were not inconsiderable—pretty nearly the whole of my patrimony had been spent, and this auspicious moment I must choose for my marriage! I could raise money on my inheritance; that was not impossible, though certainly costly. My mother could not leave her eldest son without a maintenance, whatever our quarrels might be. I had health, strength, good wits, some friends, and reputation—above all, my famous tragedy, which the manager had promised to perform, and upon the proceeds of this I counted for my present support. What becomes of the arithmetic of youth? How do we then calculate that a hundred pounds is a maintenance and a thousand a fortune? How did I dare play against Fortune with such odds? I succeeded, I remember, in convincing my dear General, and he left home convinced that his son-in-law had for the present necessity at least a score of hundred pounds at his command. He and his dear Molly had begun life with less
