I have already confessed my feelings as an elderly man regarding that rash leap into matrimony, which I persuaded my dear partner to take when we were both barely out of our teens. As a husband and father—with a proper sense of the necessity for mutton chops and the baker's bill, surrounded by a pack of impudent children who might run off to Scotland tomorrow citing our own example—I know I ought to sit in my easy chair, wear a demure air, and offer myself as a warning to imprudent youth.

Yet, truth be told, the married life my relatives prophesied so gloomily has disappointed them. It has had its trials, but I recall them without bitterness; its passionate griefs, which time, by God's ordinance, has soothed; its days of poverty, which we endured to the wonder of our sympathizing kin; and its precious rewards, so great I scarce dare whisper them to this page, save with awful respect to the One Ear to which all men offer their prayers. To marry without a competence is wrong, a crime against social codes; but do not thousands commit this crime yearly trusting only in Heaven, health, and labor? Are young people not to take hope into account, nor begin housekeeping until the cellar is stocked and the strong-box full? The world would stop multiplying if the laws regulating the genteel were made universal. Our gentlefolk tremble in silk stockings waiting for a bridge; the poor do not fear to wet their bare feet in the brook and trust to fate. Who would consign his daughter to poverty? Who would counsel his son to remove the beloved girl from comfort and subject her to debt and misery? I look at my own wife and ask pardon for imposing such a task upon one so gentle. I think of the trials she endured and am thankful for the unfailing love and constancy with which God blessed her. On this question, I am no fair judge: my own marriage was so imprudent and yet so happy that I dare not counsel the young. I have endured poverty, but found it tolerable; had I not, I could never have known the kindness of friends, the delight of gratitude, or the joys accompanying a scanty meal. Much superfluous pity is thrown upon the decent poor. Good-natured fine folks, stepping from sunshine into narrow obscurity, were blinded while we saw cheerfully; they stumbled over obstacles none to us, surprised at our resignation in drinking small beer and saying grace over cold mutton.

My father-in-law, the good General, married his Molly when a subaltern with a purse scarce better than my own. They had their ups and downs. I think, though my wife will never confess it, they married without asking parents' leave. At all events, so pleased were they with their luck that they did not grudge their children's hardships. When I made my pecuniary statements to Mr. Lambert, I was anxious to deceive both of us. Believing me master of two thousand pounds, he went to Jamaica easy in mind regarding his daughter's comfort. After outfitting the family, the worthy man went away not much richer than his son-in-law; a few trinkets, some lace from Aunt Lambert, and twenty new guineas in a purse made by her mother and sisters were Theo's portion. But in valuing my stock, I counted as a good debt a sum my honoured mother never acknowledged until her death. She argued my disbursements were for the estate meant for me, while money she could spare was for my poor brother, who had nothing. The good lady emphasized in many letters that he would have been sole heir but for a half-hour's accident of birth. Now he distinguishes himself in the service of his king. To purchase his promotion was, she supposed, his brother's duty. When I finished my bar-studies and dramatic amusements, Madam Esmond informed me I was welcome to return home to the place my birth entitled me. She communicated this more than once through Mountain, before news of my marriage reached her.

There is no need to recall her expressions of maternal indignation when informed of my step. On the pacification of Canada, my dear Harry asked leave and visited Virginia. He wrote describing his reception and the splendid entertainments my mother made in his honor. Castlewood, uninhabited since our departure for Europe, was thrown open to colonial friends; the friend of Wolfe and soldier of Quebec was received with becoming honor. Some dismal quarrels ensued because Harry persisted in maintaining his friendship with Colonel Washington of Mount Vernon, whose praises Harry never tired of singing. Indeed, I allow the gentleman every virtue; in the struggles terminating fatally for England a few years since, I can admire as well as his warmest friends General Washington's glorious constancy.

If these battles between Harry and our mother were frequent, as his letters described, I wondered why he continued at home. One reason suggested itself, which I scarcely liked to communicate to Mrs. Warrington; for we had both talked over our dear little Hetty's romantic attachment for my brother, wondering he had never discovered it. I need not say my gentleman found some young lady at home more to his taste than our dear Hester, accounting for his prolonged stay.

Presently came a letter from him, not a full confession but an admission of this fact. A person was described, unnamed—a Being all beauty and perfection. My wife asked to see the letter; I showed it with a very sad face. To my surprise, she read it without exhibiting corresponding sorrow.

"I have thought of this before, my love," I said. "I feel with you for your disappointment regarding poor Hetty."

"Ah! poor Hetty," says Theo, looking down at the carpet.

"It would never have done," says I.

"No—they would not have been happy," sighs Theo.

"How strange he never should have found out her secret!" I continued.

She looked me full in the face with an odd expression. "Pray, what does that look mean?" I asked.

"Nothing, my dear—nothing! only I am not surprised!" says Theo, blushing.

"What," I ask, "can there be another?"

"I am sure I never said so, George," says the lady, hurriedly. "But if Hetty has overcome her childish folly, ought we not all to be glad? Do you gentlemen suppose that you only are to fall in love and grow tired, indeed?"

"What!" I say, with a strange commotion of my mind. "Do you mean to tell me, Theo, that you ever cared for any one but me?"

"Oh, George," she whimpers, "when I was at school, there was—one of the boys of Doctor Backhouse's school, who sate in the loft next to us; and I thought he had lovely eyes, and I was so shocked when I recognised him behind the counter at Mr. Grigg's the mercer's, when I went to buy a cloak for baby, and I wanted to tell you, my dear, and I didn't know how!"

I went to see this creature with the lovely eyes, having made my wife describe the fellow's dress. I saw a little bandy-legged wretch in a blue camlet coat, with red hair tied with a dirty ribbon, about whom I forbore generously even to reproach my wife; nor will she ever know that I have looked at the fellow, until she reads the confession in this page. If our wives saw us as we are, I thought, would they love us as they do? Are we as much mistaken in them as they in us? I look into one candid face at least, and think it never has deceived me.

Lest I should encourage my young people to an imitation of my own imprudence, I will not tell them with how small a capital Mrs. Theo and I commenced life. The unfortunate tragedy brought us nothing; though reviewers, since its publication of late, have spoken not unfavourably of its merits, and Mr. Kemble himself has done me the honour to commend it. Our kind friend Lord Wrotham was for having the piece published by subscription, sending me a bank-note requesting a hundred copies for his friends; but I was always averse to that method of levying money, preferring my poverty sine dote, and locked up my manuscript with my poor girl's verses inserted at the first page. I know not why the piece should have given offence at court, except that an actor who had run off with an earl's daughter performed a principal part; but I was told that sentiments I put into the mouths of some Indian characters, declaiming against ambition and British desire of rule, were pronounced dangerous and unconstitutional, taking away my little hope of royal favour.

What was to be done? A few months after the failure of the tragedy, counting up the remains of my fortune, I concluded I must beat a retreat from my pretty apartments in Bloomsbury, giving warning to our good landlady that my wife's health required lodgings in the country. But we went no farther than Lambeth, our faithful Gumbo and Molly following us; and here, though as poor as might be, we were waited on by a maid and a lackey in livery, like folks of condition. Kind relatives cried out against our extravagance; indeed, are they not the people who find our faults out and proclaim them to the world?

Returning home from London, whither I had visited some booksellers, I recognised the family arms and livery on a grand gilt chariot before a public-house near our lodgings. Loitering inhabitants gathered round, looking with awe at the footmen, resplendent in the sun, quaffing blazing pots of beer. I found my Lady Castlewood seated opposite my wife in our little apartment, whence we had a bright prospect of the river covered with barges, and the ancient towers and trees of the Archbishop's palace. Mrs. Theo, with a droll way of describing persons, narrated the particulars of her ladyship's conversation.

"I have been here this ever-so-long," says the Countess, "gossiping with cousin Theo, while you have been away at the coffee-house, I dare say, making merry with your friends. Guess she must find it rather lonely here, with nothing to do but work them little caps and hem them frocks. Never mind, dear; reckon you'll soon have a companion who will amuse you when cousin George is away! What a nice lodging you have got here! Our new house is twenty times as big, covered with gold from top to bottom; but I like this quite as well. Bless you, being rich is no better than being poor. When we lived to Albany, and I did most all the work myself, scoured the rooms, boiled the kettle, helped the wash, and all, I was just as happy as I am now. We only had one old negro to keep the store. Why don't you sell Gumbo, cousin George? He ain't no use here idling and dawdling about, and making love to the servant-girl. Fogh! guess they ain't particular, these English people!" So she talked, rattling on with perfect good-humour, until her hour for departure came; when she produced a fine repeating watch and said it was time to pay a call upon her Majesty at Buckingham House. "And mind you come to us, George," says her ladyship, waving a little parting hand out of the gilt coach. "Theo and I have settled all about it."

"Here, at least," said I, when the laced footmen had clambered up behind the carriage and our magnificent little patroness had left us—"here is one who is not afraid of our poverty, nor ashamed to remember her own."

"Ashamed!" said Theo, resuming her lilliputian needlework. "To do her justice, she would make herself at home in any kitchen or palace in the world. She has given me and Molly twenty lessons in housekeeping. She says, when she was at home to Albany, she roasted, baked, swept the house, and milked the cow." (Madam Theo pronounced the word cow archly in our American way, imitating her ladyship's accent very divertingly.)

"And she has no pride," I added. "It was good-natured of her to ask us to dine with her and my lord. When will Uncle Warrington ever think of offering us a crust again, or a glass of his famous beer?"

"Yes, it was not ill-natured to invite us," says Theo, slily. "But, my dear, you don't know all the conditions!" Then my wife, still imitating the Countess's manner, laughingly informed me. "She took out her pocket-book and told me," says Theo, "what days she was engaged abroad and at home. On Monday she received a Duke and a Duchess, with several members of my lord's house. On Tuesday came more earls, two bishops, and an ambassador. 'Of course you won't come on them days?' says the Countess. 'Now you are so poor, you know, that fine company ain't no good for you. Lord bless you! father never dines on our company days! he don't like it; he takes a bit of cold meat anyways.' On which," says Theo, laughing, "I told her that Mr. Warrington did not care for any but the best of company, and proposed that she should ask us on some day when the Archbishop of Canterbury dined with her, and his Grace must give us a lift home in his coach to Lambeth. And she is an economical little person, too," continues Theo. "'I thought of bringing with me some of my baby's caps and things, which his lordship has outgrown, but they may be wanted again, you know, my dear.' And so we lose that addition to our wardrobe," says Theo, smiling, "and Molly and I must do our best without her ladyship's charity. 'When people are poor, they are poor,' the Countess said, with her usual outspokenness, 'and must get on the best they can. What we shall do for that poor Maria, goodness only knows! we can't ask her to see us as we can you, though you are so poor: but an earl's daughter to marry a play-actor! La, my dear, it's dreadful: his Majesty and the Princess have both spoken of it! Every other noble family in this kingdom as has ever heard of it pities us; though I have a plan for helping those poor unhappy people, and have
