When my mother learned of my decision to remain at home, I suspect she was hardly pleased. It is likely she withdrew her financial support with the intent to starve me into submission, forcing a return to Virginia and a life of dependence beneath her roof. Yet, we never resolved the monetary dispute between us until her dying day. She simply cut off my allowance; I said not a word, but managed to survive without her aid. I never heard her express repentance for this injustice, nor acknowledge her error, except through Harry's private communications to me later. In subsequent meetings, Madam Esmond displayed a profound gentleness and an unusual respect for my wife, perhaps intending for me to interpret this as a tacit admission of her past wrongs. However, she offered no apology, and I asked for none.

With Harry provided for—a matter I could not begrudge—all of my mother's savings and frugal schemes ultimately benefited me, as her heir. Time, once a scarce commodity, had become abundant. A few guineas might have been more useful to me in my youth than the hundreds that eventually fell into my lap when I no longer needed them. By the time we met again, the era of necessity had long passed. I possessed plenty, and she could only add to my store. No doubt she suffered internally, thinking of the hunger my children endured and the strangers who had to relieve the very necessity her proud heart had created. Was she prouder than I? A soft word of explanation between us might have secured a reconciliation years prior, but neither of us spoke. When I commit a wrong and later recognize it, I love to ask pardon; yet, to my own pride, this act is merely an apology for having been wanting to myself. Thus, I rarely debase myself to perform a meanness. How do men feel whose entire lives are constructed of lies, schemes, and subterfuges? What company do they keep when alone? Daily, I observe men whose every smile is an artifice and every wink a hypocrisy. Does such a fellow wear a mask even in his own privacy, before his own conscience? If I choose to overlook an injury, I fear it is not born of a Christian spirit of forgiveness, but because I can afford to remit the debt and disdain to demand a settlement. One or two sweet souls I have known, perhaps tried, to whom forgiveness comes naturally, like a plant growing in its native soil. I know how to remit, I say, not forgive. I wonder if proud men are proud of being proud.

Consequently, I showed no sign of submission toward my parent in Virginia, and we remained estranged for years, exchanging only brief notes—perhaps announcing a birth or similar trivialities—between my wife and her. Following our initial troubles in America regarding the Stamp Act, misfortunes befell me in London as well. Though I stood on the Tory side in that quarrel, believing the Imperial Government had a right to levy taxes in the colonies, I published a sharp letter to a member of the House of Burgesses in Virginia. In it, I freely handled the habitual insolence of the mother country toward the colonies, expressing sentiments so disagreeable to those in power that I was stripped of my position as hackney-coach licenser. This terrified my uncle, who could never bear to love people in disgrace. He had grown to cherish my wife and my little boy deeply, but toward me personally, he held a pitying contempt that always amused me. He possessed a natural scorn for poverty and a corresponding love for success and fortune. Any opinion deviating from the regular track shocked him, and all truth-telling made him turn pale. Yet, he must have retained some warmth of heart and genuine love for kin; despite the dreadful shocks I gave him, he continued to see Theo and the child (and me, offering a mournful recognition when we met). Broken-hearted by my free-spokenness, he did not refuse to speak to me as he had during our first differences, viewing me instead as a melancholy lost creature, past all worldly help or hope. Never mind; I must cast about for a new scheme of life. At this juncture, the repayment of Harry's debt to me enabled me to live, at least for months, perhaps years. O strange fatuity of youth! I often say. How was it that we dared to be so poor and so little cast down?

At this time, His Majesty's royal uncle, the Duke of Cumberland, fell and perished in a fit. Strangely enough, his death occasioned a remarkable change in my fortune. My poor Sir Miles Warrington never missed a court ceremony to which he could introduce himself. He was at every drawing-room, christening, ball, and funeral. If ever a prince or princess was ailing, his coach was at their door. Leicester Fields, Carlton House, Gunnersbury—all were the same to him, and nothing satisfied him now but attending the stout Duke's funeral. He caught a severe cold and inflammation of the throat from standing bareheaded in the rain at this funeral. One morning, before I had even heard of his illness, a lawyer waited upon me at my lodgings in Bloomsbury and saluted me by the name of Sir George Warrington.

Party strife and fear of the future were now over. We laid the poor gentleman beside his little son in the family churchyard, where so many of his race repose. Little Miles and I were the chief mourners. An obsequious tenantry bowed and curtseyed before us, doing their utmost to conciliate my honor and my worship. The dowager and her daughter withdrew to Bath shortly thereafter, and I and my family took possession of the house, of which I have been master for thirty years. Be not too eager, O my son! Have but a little patience, and I too shall sleep under those yew-trees, and the people will be tossing up their caps for Sir Miles.

The records of a prosperous country life are easily and briefly told. The steward's books reveal what rents were paid and forgiven, what crops were raised, and in what rotation. They note what visitors came and how long they stayed; what pensioners my wife had, and how they were doctored, relieved, and died; what year I served as sheriff, and how often the hounds met near us. All these are narrated in our house journals, which any of my heirs may read who choose to take the trouble. We could not afford the fine mansion in Hill Street that my predecessor had occupied, but we took a smaller house in which, however, we spent more money. We made not half the show, with liveries, equipages, and plate, for which my uncle had been famous. Yet our beer was stronger, and my wife's charities were perhaps more costly than those of the Dowager Lady Warrington. No doubt she thought there was no harm in spoiling the Philistines; for she made us pay unconscionably for the goods she left behind in our country-house, and I submitted to most of her extortions with unutterable good humor. What value she imagined the potted plants in her greenhouses bore! What price she set upon that horrible old spinet she left in her drawing-room! And the framed pieces of worsted-work, performed by the accomplished Dora and the lovely Flora—if they had been masterpieces of Titian or Vandyck, to be sure, my lady dowager could hardly have valued them at a higher price. But though we paid so generously, though we were, I may say without boast, far kinder to our poor than ever she had been, for a while we held the very worst reputation in the county, where all sorts of stories had been told to my discredit. I thought I might perhaps succeed to my uncle's seat in Parliament, as well as to his landed property; but I found, I knew not how, that I was voted to be a person of very dangerous opinions. I would not bribe; I would not coerce my own tenants to vote for me in the election of '68. A gentleman came down from Whitehall with a pocket-book full of bank-notes, and I found that I had no chance against my competitor.

Bon Dieu! Now that we were at ease regarding worldly means—now that obedient tenants bowed and curtseyed as we went to church; that we drove to visit our friends or neighboring towns in the great family coach drawn by four fat horses—did we not often regret poverty, and the dear little cottage at Lambeth where Want was ever prowling at the door? Did I not long to be bear-leading again, and vow that translating for booksellers was not such very hard drudgery? When we went to London, we made sentimental pilgrimages to all our old haunts. I dare say my wife embraced all her landladies. You may be sure we asked all the friends of those old times to share the comforts of our new home with us. The Reverend Mr. Hagan and his lady visited us more than once. His appearance in the pulpit at B------(where he preached very finely, as we thought) caused an awful scandal there. Sampson came too, another unlucky Levite, and was welcome as long as he would stay among us. Mr. Johnson talked of coming, but he put us off once or twice. I suppose our house was dull. I know that I myself would be silent for days, and fear that my moodiness must often have tried the sweetest-tempered woman in the world who lived with me. I did not care for field sports. The killing of one partridge was so like killing another that I wondered how men could pass days after days in the pursuit of that kind of slaughter. Their fox-hunting stories would begin at four o'clock, when the tablecloth was removed, and last till supper-time. I sat silent and listened: day after day I fell asleep. No wonder I was not popular with my company.

What admission is this I am making? Here was the storm over, the rocks avoided, the ship in port, and the sailor not overcontented? Was Susan, whom I had sighed for during the voyage, not the beauty I expected to find? In the first place, Susan and all the family can look in William's logbook, and so, madam, I am not going to put my secrets down there. No, Susan, I never had secrets from thee. I never cared for another woman. I have seen more beautiful, but none that suited me as well as your ladyship. I have met Mrs. Carter and Miss Mulso, and Mrs. Thrale and Madam Kaufmann, and the angelical Gunnings, and Her Grace of Devonshire, and a host of beauties who were not angelic, by any means; and I was not dazzled by them. Nay, young folks, I may have led your mother a weary life and been a very Bluebeard over her, but then I had no other heads in the closet. Only, the first pleasure of taking possession of our kingdom over, I own I began to be quickly tired of the crown. When the captain wears it, His Majesty will be a very different Prince. He can ride a-hunting five days in the week and find the sport amusing. I believe he would hear the same sermon at church fifty times and not yawn more than I do at the first delivery. But sweet Joan, beloved Baucis! Being thy faithful husband and true lover always, thy Darby is rather ashamed of having been testy so often! And, being arrived at the consummation of happiness, Philemon asks pardon for falling asleep so frequently after dinner. There came a period of my life, when having reached the summit of felicity, I was quite tired of the prospect I had there: I yawned in Eden and said, "Is this all? What, no lions to bite? no rain to fall? no thorns to prick you in the rose-bush when you sit down?—only Eve, for ever sweet and tender, and figs for breakfast, dinner, supper, from week's end to week's end!" Shall I make my confessions? Hearken! Well, then, if I must make a clean breast of it.

* * * * *

Here three pages are torn out of Sir George Warrington's MS. book, for which the editor is sincerely sorry.

I know the theory and practice of the Roman Church; but, being bred of another persuasion (and skeptical and heterodox regarding that), I can't help doubting the other, too, and wondering whether Catholics, in their confessions, confess all? Do we Protestants ever do so; and has education rendered those other fellow-men so different from us? At least, amongst us, we are not accustomed to suppose Catholic priests or laymen more frank and open than ourselves. Which brings me back to my question—does any man confess all? Does yonder dear creature know all my life, who has been the partner of it for thirty years? Who, whenever I have told her a sorrow, has been ready with the best of her gentle power to soothe it; who has watched when I did not speak, and when I was silent has been silent herself, or with the charming hypocrisy of woman has worn smiles and an easy appearance so as to make me imagine she felt no care, or would not even ask to disturb her lord's secret when he seemed to indicate a desire to keep it private? Oh, the dear hypocrite! Have I not watched her hiding the boys' peccadilloes from papa's anger? Have I not known her cheat out of her housekeeping to pay off their little extravagances; and talk to me with an artless face, as if she did not know that our revered captain had had dealings with the gentlemen of Duke's Place, and our learned collegian, at the end of his terms, had very pressing reasons for sporting his oak (as the phrase is) against some of the University tradesmen? Why, from the very earliest days, thou wise woman, thou wert for ever concealing something from me—this one stealing jam from the cupboard; that one getting into disgrace at school; that naughty rebel (put on the caps, young folks, according to the fit) flinging an inkstand at mamma in a rage, whilst I was told the gown and the carpet were spoiled by accident. We all hide from one another. We have all secrets. We are all alone. We sin by ourselves, and, let us trust, repent too. Yonder dear woman would give her foot to spare mine a twinge of the gout; but, when I have the fit, the pain
