The plea of our mother, tender and urgent as it was, possessed a power to soften even the hardest hearts, yet it found us resolute in our refusal to depart immediately. We spoke of a swift journey to Virginia, of securing the entire cabin of the *Young Rachel* for our comfort. Yet, nature intervened with a cruel necessity: our child fell ill, rendering the voyage perilous for her, and from whom a mother could never sever her bond. Thus, the *Young Rachel* sailed that year without us. The following year brought another obstacle, this time in the form of my worship's first onset of the gout—a malady that occupied me significantly, though it later served to clear my wits and enliven my spirits. But now, a far sadder cause for delay presented itself in the tragic tidings from Jamaica.

Some two years after our establishment at the Manor, our dear General returned from his government. He came back a little richer in worldly goods than when he departed, yet he bore a loss for which no wealth could offer solace; indeed, after this blow, he showed little desire to remain in the West Indies. My Theo's poor mother—the most tender and affectionate friend I have ever known, save for one—had died abroad of the fever. Her final regret was that she should not live to witness our children and ourselves in prosperity.

"She sees us, though we do not see her; and she thanks you, George, for having been good to her children," her husband said softly.

We feared he would not long survive to join her. His love for her had been the happiness and the business of his entire life; to be away from her seemed to him a cessation of living. It was pitiable to watch the good man as he sat with us. My wife, through her demeanor and countless gestures, constantly recalled her mother to the bereaved widower's heart. Whatever cheer we could muster for him in his calamity, we offered freely; yet, especially, little Hetty became his chief support and consolation. She had refused more than one advantageous match in the Island, as the General told us, and upon her return to England, the heir of Lord Wrotham had laid himself at her feet. But she loved best to stay with her father, Hetty declared. As long as he was not tired of her, she cared for no husband.

"Nay," we said when this last great match was proposed, "let the General stay six months with us at the Manor here, and you can have him at Oakhurst for the other six."

But Hetty declared her father could never bear Oakhurst again now that her mother was gone; and she would marry no man for his coronet and money—not she! The General, when we discussed this matter gravely, remarked that the child had no desire for marriage, possibly due to some disappointment in early life of which she never spoke. We, respecting her feelings, remained equally silent. By this time, my brother Lambert held a college living near Winchester and a wife to adorn his parsonage. We professed a moderate liking for this lady, welcoming her when she came to us, though our affection was limited. Mrs. Jack was a chatterbox of a woman, prone to speaking her mind freely and priding herself excessively on her skill in inflicting pain upon her friends.

"My dear Sir George," she was pleased to say, "I have often told our dear Theo that I wouldn't have a pretty sister in my house to make tea for Jack when I was upstairs, always at hand when needed in the kitchen or nursery, and always dressed neat and in her best when I was likely making pies or puddings. I have every confidence in Jack, of course. I should like to see him look at another woman, indeed! And so I have in Jemima, but they don't come together in my house when I'm upstairs—that I promise you! And so I told my sister Warrington."

"Am I to understand," the General asked, "that you have done my Lady Warrington the favor to warn her against her sister, my daughter Miss Hester?"

"Yes, pa, of course I have. A duty is a duty, and a woman is a woman, and a man is a man, as I know very well. Don't tell me! He is a man. Every man is a man, with all his sanctified airs!"

"You yourself have a married sister, with whom you were staying when my son Jack first had the happiness of making your acquaintance?" the General remarked.

"Yes, of course I have a married sister; everyone knows that, and I have been as good as a mother to her children!"

"And am I to gather from your conversation that your attractions proved a powerful temptation for your sister's husband?"

"Law, General! I don't know how you can go for to say I ever said any such thing!" cried Mrs. Jack, red and voluble.

"Don't you perceive, my dear madam, that it is you who have insinuated as much, not only regarding yourself, but regarding my own two daughters?"

"Never, never, never, as I'm a Christian woman! And it's most cruel of you to say so, sir. And I do say a sister is best out of the house, that I do! And as Theo's time is coming, I warn her, that's all."

"Have you discovered, my good madam, whether my poor Hetty has stolen any of the spoons? When I came to breakfast this morning, my daughter was alone, and there must have been a score of pieces of silver on the table."

"Law, sir! Who ever said a word about spoons? Did I ever accuse the poor dear? If I did, may I drop down dead at this moment on this hearth-rug! And I ain't used to be spoke to in this way. And me and Jack have both remarked it; and I've done my duty, that I have." With that, Mrs. Jack flounced out of the room, in tears.

"And has the woman had the impudence to tell you this, my child?" the General asked when Theo, who was a little delicate, came to the tea-table.

"She has told me every day since she has been here. She comes into my dressing-room to tell me. She comes to my nursery and says, 'Ah, I wouldn't have a sister prowling about my nursery, that I wouldn't.' Ah, how pleasant it is to have amiable and well-bred relatives, say I."

"Thy poor mother has been spared this woman," groaned the General.

"Our mother would have made her better, papa," said Theo, kissing him.

"Yes, dear." And I saw that both of them were at their prayers.

Yet it must be owned that loving one's relatives is not always an easy task, nor is living with one's neighbors always amusing. From Jack Lambert's demeanor the next day, I could see his wife had given him her version of the conversation. Jack was sulky, though not dignified; he was angry, yet his anger did not diminish his appetite. He preached a sermon for us that was entirely stupid. Little Miles, once more in sables, sat at his grandfather's side, his little hand placed in that of the kind old man.

Should he stay and keep house for us during our Virginian trip? The housekeeper should be placed under the full domination of Hetty. The butler's keys should be handed over to him; for Gumbo, whom I did not think with an overly good grace, was to come with us to Virginia. Having, it must be noted, united himself with Mrs. Molly in the bonds of matrimony, he had peopled a cottage in my park with sundry tawny Gumbos. Under the care of our good General and his daughter, we left our house. We traveled to London, and thence to Bristol, where our obsequious agent declared he would offer up prayers for our prosperity and vowed that children so beautiful as ours—we had an infant by this time to accompany Miles—were never seen on any ship before. We made a voyage without accident.

How strange the feeling was as we landed from our boat at Richmond! A coach and a host of negroes were there in waiting to receive us; and hard by, a gentleman on horseback, with negroes in our livery, sprang from his horse and rushed up to embrace us. Not a little charmed were both of us to see our dearest Hal. He rode with us to our mother's door. Yonder she stood on the steps to welcome us, and Theo knelt down to ask her blessing.

Harry rode in the coach with us as far as our mother's house but would not, as he said, spoil sport by entering with us. "She sees me," he owned, "and we are pretty good friends; but Fanny and she are best apart; and there is no love lost between 'em, I can promise you. Come over to me at the Tavern, George, when thou art free. And tomorrow I shall have the honor to present her sister to Theo. 'Twas only from happening to be in town yesterday that I heard the ship was signalled, and waited to see you. I have sent a negro boy home to my wife, and she'll be here to pay her respects to my Lady Warrington." After this brief greeting, Harry jumped out of the carriage, leaving us to meet our mother alone.

Since I parted from her, I had seen much fine company, and Theo and I had paid our respects to the King and Queen at St. James's; but we had seen no stater person than this who welcomed us. Raising my wife from her knee, he embraced her and led her into the house. 'Twas a plain, wood-built place with a gallery round, as our Virginian houses are; but if it had been a palace with a little empress inside, our reception could not have been more courteous. There was old Nathan, still the major-domo, a score of kind black faces grinning welcome. Some whose names I remembered as children were grown out of remembrance, to be sure, to become buxom lads and lasses; and some I had left with black pates were now grizzling with snowy polls; and some who were born since my time were peering at doorways with their great eyes and little naked feet. It was, "I'm little Sip, Master George!" and "I'm Dinah, Sir George!" and "I'm Master Miles's boy!" said a little chap in a new livery and boots of nature's blacking. Ere the day was over, the whole household found a pretext to pass before us, grinning, bowing, and making us welcome. I don't know how many repasts were served to us. In the evening, my Lady Warrington had to receive all the gentry of the little town, which she did with perfect grace and good humor, while I shook hands with a few old acquaintances—old enemies I was going to say; but I had come into a fortune and was no longer a naughty prodigal. Why, a drove of fatted calves was killed in my honor! My poor Hal was of the entertainment, but gloomy and crestfallen. His mother spoke to him, but it was as a queen to a rebellious prince, her son who was not yet forgiven. We two slipped away from the company and went up to the rooms assigned to me; but there, as we began a free conversation, our mother, taper in hand, appeared with her pale face. Did I want anything? Was everything quite as I wished it? She had peeped in at the dearest children, who were sleeping like cherubs. How she did caress them and delight over them! How she was charmed with Miles's dominating airs and the little Theo's smiles and dimples! "Supper is just coming on the table, Sir George. If you like our cookery better than the tavern, Henry, I beg you to stay." What a different welcome there was in the words and tone addressed to each of us! Hal hung down his head and followed to the lower room.

A clergyman begged a blessing on the meal. He touched with not a little art and eloquence upon our arrival at home, upon our safe passage across the stormy waters, upon the love and forgiveness which awaited us in the mansions of the Heavenly Parent when the storms of life were over.

Here was a new clergyman, quite unlike some whom I remembered about us in earlier days, and I praised him, but Madam Esmond shook her head. She was afraid his principles were very dangerous; she was afraid others had adopted those dangerous principles. Had I not seen the paper signed by the burgesses and merchants at Williamsburg the year before—the Lees, Randolphs, Bassets, Washingtons, and the like, and oh, my dear, that I should have to say it, our name, that is, your brother's (by what influence I do not like to say), and this unhappy Mr. Belman's who begged a blessing last night?

If there had been quarrels in our little colonial society when I left home, what were these to the feuds I found raging on my return? We had sent the Stamp Act to America and been forced to repeal it. Then we must try a new set of duties on glass, paper, and what not, and repeal that Act too, with the exception of a duty on tea. From Boston to Charleston, the tea was confiscated. Even my mother, loyal as she was, gave up her favorite drink; and my poor wife would have had to forgo hers, but we had brought a quantity for our private drinking on board ship, which had paid four times as much duty at home. Not that I for my part would have hesitated about paying duty. The home Government must have some means of revenue, or its pretensions to authority were idle. They say the colonies were tried and tyrannized over; I say the home Government was tried and tyrannized over. 'Tis but an affair of argument and history, now; we tried the question, and were beat; and the matter is settled as completely as the conquest of Britain by the Normans. And all along, from conviction I trust, I own to have taken the British side of the quarrel.

In that brief and unfortunate experience of war which I had had in my early life, the universal cry of the army and well-affected persons was that Mr
