What a perverse law of Fate it seems to place me perpetually in the minority. Should a motion be brought forward to surrender this realm to the Pretender of Rome or the Grand Turk, and submit it to the new sovereign's faith, it would surely pass, for I would certainly vote against it. Yet, here in Virginia, I found myself disagreeing with everyone, as was my wont. The Patriots branded me a Tory; the Tories declared me a dangerous Republican. The times were utterly out of joint. Oh, cursed spite! Before a year had passed since I arrived in Virginia, I longed to be back by the banks of the Waveney. But the aspect of affairs was so fraught with peril that I could not abandon my mother, a solitary woman, to face the coming war and disaster, nor would she leave the country at such a critical juncture, nor should a man of spirit forsake it. At His Excellency's table, amidst the plentiful claret, many of the well-affected agreed upon a vow, raising countless brimming bumpers in its honor. "No!" cried the sentiment. "It is *statue signum*, *signifer*! We Cavaliers will all rally round it." And at these moments, our Governor spoke with the courage of the bravest.

Of all my acquaintances in Virginia, Madam Esmond proved the most consistent. Our gentry had flocked to Williamsburg in droves, and many proposed treating Her Excellency, the Governor's lady, to a ball upon the news of the Boston Port Bill. Immediately, the House of Burgesses adopted an indignant protest against Parliament's measure, decreeing a solemn day of fasting and humiliation throughout the country, with prayers to Heaven to avert the calamity of civil war. Meanwhile, the invitation to my Lady Dunmore had already been issued and accepted. The gentlemen resolved that their ball should proceed on the appointed evening, and that sackcloth and ashes should be assumed only several days later.

"A ball!" exclaimed Madam Esmond. "I shall go to a ball given by a set of rebels who intend to publicly insult His Majesty a week hence! I would sooner die!" She wrote to the stewards of the occasion stating that, viewing the dangerous state of the country, she could not conceive of attending.

What was her surprise, then, the next time she rode abroad in her chair, to be cheered by a hundred voices, white and black alike, shouting "Huzzah, Madam!" and "Heaven bless your ladyship!" They evidently mistook her patriotic resolve for a refusal born of principle. To ensure there was no misunderstanding, she leaned from the chair and cried out, "God save the King!" as loudly as she could. The people echoed her cry. Everyone cried "God save the King" in those days. On the night of the entertainment, my poor Harry, as a Burgess and one of the feast's givers, donned his red coat of Wolfe's—which he was soon to exchange for another color—and departed with Madam Fanny to the ball. My Lady Warrington and her humble servant, being strangers in the country and essentially English, were permitted by Madam to attend the assembly from which she, of course, absented herself. I had the honor of dancing a country-dance with the lady of Mount Vernon, whom I found a most lively, pretty, and amiable partner; yet I must confess that my wife's praises of her were received with a very grim acceptance by my mother when Lady Warrington recounted the evening's events. Could not Sir George Warrington have danced with my Lady Dunmore or her daughters, or with anyone but Mrs. Washington? To be sure, the Colonel thought so highly of himself and his wife that he undoubtedly considered her the grandest lady in the room; and she, who remembered him as a road-surveyor earning a guinea a day! Well, indeed! There was no measuring the pride of these provincial upstarts, and as for this gentleman, my Lord Dunmore's partiality for him had evidently turned his head. I do not know about Mr. Washington's pride, but I know that my good mother never could be brought to love him or anything that was his.

She was no better pleased with him for attending the ball than with his conduct three days later, when the day of fasting and humiliation arrived, and he attended the service performed by our new clergyman. She invited Mr. Belman to dinner that day, along with sundry colonial authorities. The clergyman excused himself. Madam Esmond tossed her head and said he might do as he liked. She made a parade of a dinner; she lit her house at night while the rest of the city lay in darkness and gloom; she begged Mr. Hardy, one of His Excellency's aides-de-camp, to sing "God save the King," to which the people in the street outside listened, thinking it part of some religious service Madam was celebrating. But then she called for "Britons, strike home!" which the simple young gentleman, fresh from Europe, began to perform. Instantly, a great yell arose in the street, and a large stone, flung from some rebellious hand, plumped into the punch-bowl before me, scattering it and its contents across our dining-room.

My mother went to the window, nothing daunted. I can see her rigid little figure now, standing with a tossed-up head, outstretched frilled arms, and the twinkling stars for a background, singing in chorus, "Britons, strike home! strike home!" The crowd before the palings shouted and roared, "Silence! for shame! go back!" but she would not go back, not she. "Fling more stones, if you dare!" said the brave little lady. More might have come, but some gentlemen issuing from the Raley Tavern interposed themselves between her and the mob. "You mustn't insult a lady," said a voice I think I knew. "Huzza, Colonel! Hurrah, Captain! God bless your honour!" cried the people in the street. Thus, the enemies were pacified.

My mother, protesting that the whole disturbance was over, would have had Mr. Hardy sing another song, but he gave a sickly grin and said, "he really did not like to sing to such accompaniments," and the concert for that evening was ended; though I am bound to say that some scoundrels returned at night, frightening my poor wife almost out of her wits and breaking every single window in the front of our tenement. "Britons, strike home!" was a little too much; Madam should have contented herself with "God save the King." Militia was drilled, bullets cast, supplies of ammunition gathered, and cunning plans devised to disappoint the royal ordinances; but, to be sure, "God save the King" was the cry everywhere. In reply to my objections to the gentlemen-patriots—"Why, you are scheming for a separation; you are bringing down upon you the inevitable wrath of the greatest power in the world!"—the answer to me was always, "We mean no separation at all; we yield to no men in loyalty; we glory in the name of Britons," and so forth. Powder-barrels were heaped in the cellar, the train laid, but Mr. Fawkes remained persistent in his dutiful petitions to King and Parliament, meaning no harm, not he! 'Tis true that when I spoke of the power of our country, I imagined she would exert it; that she would not expect to overcome three million fellow-Britons on their own soil with a few battalions, a half-dozen generals from Bond Street, and a few thousand mercenaries hired from Germany. As if we wanted to insult the thirteen colonies as well as subdue them, we must set upon them these hordes of Hessians and murderers from the Indian wigwams. Was our great quarrel not to be fought without *tali auxilio* and *istis defensoribus*? Ah! 'Tis easy, now that we are worsted, to look over the map of the great empire wrested from us and show how we ought not to have lost it. Long Island ought to have exterminated Washington's army; he ought never to have emerged from Valley Forge except as a prisoner. The South was ours after the battle of Camden, but for the inconceivable meddling of the Commander-in-Chief at New York, who paralyzed the exertions of the only capable British General who appeared during the war and sent him into that miserable cul-de-sac at York Town, whence he could only issue defeated and a prisoner. Oh, for a week more! A day more, an hour more of darkness or light! In reading over our American campaigns from their unhappy commencement to their inglorious end, now that we can see the enemy's movements and conditions as clearly as our own, I fancy we can see how an advance, a march, might have put enemies into our power who had no means to withstand it, and changed the entire issue of the struggle. But it was ordained by Heaven, and for the good, as we can now have no doubt, of both empires, that the great Western Republic should separate from us: and the gallant soldiers who fought on her side, their indomitable and heroic Chief above all, had the glory of facing and overcoming, not only veteran soldiers amply provided and inured to war, but wretchedness, cold, hunger, dissensions, and treason within their own camp, where all must have gone to rack but for the pure, unquenchable flame of patriotism that burned forever in the bosom of the heroic leader. What constancy, what magnanimity, what surprising persistence against fortune! Washington before the enemy was no better nor braver than hundreds who fought with him or against him (who has not heard the repeated sneers against "Fabius" in which his factious captains indulged?), but Washington the Chief of a nation in arms, doing battle with distracted parties; calm in the midst of conspiracy; serene against the open foe before him and the darker enemies at his back; Washington inspiring order and spirit into troops hungry and in rags; stung by ingratitude but betraying no anger, and ever ready to forgive; in defeat invincible, magnanimous in conquest, and never so sublime as on that day when he laid down his victorious sword and sought his noble retirement:—here indeed is a character to admire and revere; a life without a stain, a fame without a flaw. *Quando invenies parem?* In that more extensive work, which I have planned and partly written on the subject of this great war, I hope I have done justice to the character of its greatest leader. [And I trust that in the opinions I have recorded regarding him, I have shown that I also can be just and magnanimous towards those who view me personally with no favor. For my brother Hal, being at Mount Vernon and always eager to bring me and his beloved Chief on good terms, showed His Excellency some of the early sheets of my History. General Washington (who read but few books and had not the slightest pretensions to literary taste) remarked, "If you will have my opinion, my dear General, I think Sir George's projected work, from the specimen I have of it, is certain to offend both parties."—G. E. W.] And this from the sheer force of respect which his eminent virtues extorted. With the young Mr. Washington of my own early days, I had not the honor to enjoy much sympathy: though my brother, whose character is much more frank and affectionate than mine, was always his fast friend in early times, when they were equals, as in latter days when the General, as I do own and think, was all mankind's superior.

I have mentioned the contrariety in my disposition, and perhaps in my brother's, which somehow placed us on the wrong sides in the quarrel that ensued, raging for five years until the mother country was fain to acknowledge her defeat. Harry should have been the Tory, and I the Whig. Theoretically, my opinions were very much more liberal than those of my brother, who, especially after his marriage, became what our Indian nabobs call a Bahadoor—a person ceremonious, stately, and exacting respect. When my Lord Dunmore talked about liberating the negroes to induce them to join the King's standard, Hal was for hanging the Governor and the Black Guards (as he called them) whom His Excellency had crimped. "If you, gentlemen, are fighting for freedom," said I, "sure the negroes may fight, too." On which Harry roared out, shaking his fist, "Infernal villains, if I meet any of 'em, they shall die by this hand!" And my mother agreed that this idea of a negro insurrection was the most abominable and parricidal notion which had ever sprung up in her unhappy country. She at least was more consistent than brother Hal. She would have black and white obedient to the powers that be; whereas Hal could only admit that freedom was the right of the latter color.

As proof of her argument, Madam Esmond and Harry too would point to an instance in our own family in the person of Mr. Gumbo. Having obtained his freedom from me as a reward for his admirable love and fidelity when times were hard, Gumbo, on his return to Virginia, was scarce a welcome guest in his old quarters among my mother's servants. He was free, and they were not; he was, as it were, a center of insurrection. He gave himself no small airs of protection and consequence among them, bragging of his friends in Europe ("at home," as he called it) and his doings there; and for a while he brought the household around to listen to him and admire him, like a monkey who had seen the world. Now, Sady, Hal's boy, who went to America of his own desire, was not free. Hence jealousies between him and Mr. Gum, and battles in which they both practiced the noble art of boxing and butting, which they had learned at Marybone Gardens and Hockley-in-the-Hole. Nor was Sady the only jealous person: almost all my mother's servants hated Signor Gumbo for the airs he gave himself; and I am sorry to say that our faithful Molly, his wife, was as jealous as his old fellow-servants. The blacks could not pardon her for having demeaned herself so far as to marry one of their kind. She met
