Once my visit to my brother concluded, and my wife and young child had returned to our maternal home at Richmond, I turned my attention to the Governor, who was residing at his country estate near Williamsburg. It was urgent that I confer with him regarding the open preparations for war, which were becoming evident not only within our province but across the colonies. History would later record the names of the gentlemen appointed as Delegates to the General Congress in Philadelphia, but at the time, the political landscape was fractured. In Massachusetts, the populace and royal troops faced one another in near-open hostility; in Maryland and Pennsylvania, we clung to the hope of a loyal spirit; and in the Carolinas and Georgia, the mother country could still count on staunch adherence. We, in Virginia, prided ourselves on our ancient loyalty, despite our scarcity of troops. Our gentry boasted descent from the Cavaliers, and surrounding the Governor were swarms of loud, confident Loyalists, eager to draw their swords and scatter the "rascally rebels."

In these heated councils, I was forced to endure many harsh words directed at my poor Harry. The consensus among the Governor's circle was that his wife had led him to these extreme anti-British views, and that he was infatuated by his attachment to the gentleman of Mount Vernon—George Washington—who was, they claimed, dragging him deeper into a desperate course of resistance. "This is your friend," the men around his Excellency sneered, "the man you favored, who shared your hospitality!" While much of this was true, what the eager Loyalists termed treachery was, in reality, a testament to the desperate desire of Mr. Washington and others to exhaust every chance of reconciliation before risking the terrible alternative of revolt. We, the faithful, would remain loyal; the unconquerable power of England would be exerted, and the misguided provinces punished. With what cheers we toasted His Majesty's health! We vowed to die in defense of his rights and await a Prince of his Royal house to govern our dominions. In the midst of this exaltation, hope, fury, and anxiety, I felt compelled to intercede for my brother.

I wrote to Hal with little hope, reiterating arguments I had used countless times. My mother also employed her authority, assailing him with Scripture texts and threats of divine punishment for disobedience to the powers that be. She hinted, I fear, at his subjection to his wife—the worst possible argument in such a controversy. Though she did not show me her own letter, she displayed his reply. To my surprise, Mr. Hal answered with scores of texts of his own, composing a neat, temperate, and elegant response that I believed his wife could scarcely have penned. Indeed, he had enlisted the services of Mr. Belman, the New Richmond clergyman, who had adopted strong Whig opinions and preached sermons against Hagan, our faction's ally. Belman seemed to have the better of the dispute.

My exhortations, like my mother's, proved futile. Hal ignored my letters. Pressed further by the Government's friends, I wrote imprudently promising to visit him at Fanny's Mount within the week. Upon arrival, I found only my sister, who received me cordially but informed me that Hal had ridden far into the countryside toward the Blue Mountains to inspect horses, with no indication of when he would return. Realizing there was no hope, I remarked to her, "My dear, judging by the signs of the times, the train laid for years must soon be ignited. Harry is riding away. God knows to what end."

"The Lord prosper the righteous cause, Sir George," she replied.

"Amen, with all my heart. You and he speak as Americans; I as an Englishman. Tell him from me that should anything happen to our mother, I have enough in England for myself and mine, and shall resign all our lands here in Virginia to him."

"You don't mean that, George?" she cried, her eyes brightening. "Well, to be sure, it is but right and fair. Why should you, the eldest by an hour, possess everything—a palace and lands in England, the plantation here, the title, and children—while my poor Harry has none? Yet it is generous of you... handsome and proper. And you do not take after your mother in this, Sir George, not at all. Give my love to sister Theo!" She offered me her cheek to kiss before I departed. With a woman like Fanny guiding him, how could I ever hope to convert my brother?

Disappointed, I rode back to the Governor, who agreed it was time to arm earnestly against the impending shock. His Court of Officials was agitated, savage in their abuse of the "wicked Whigs," and loud in their shouts for Old England, yet all were eager for the day when they could ride down their enemies hand-to-hand. I left with the thanks of his Excellency in Council, pledged to raise a body of men to defend the Crown. Thus began the corps known as the Westmoreland Defenders, of which I was appointed Colonel. The announcement in the Government Gazette drew officers readily, but recruits were slow to arrive and quick to vanish. Nevertheless, friend Hagan eagerly offered himself as chaplain, Madam Esmond provided our colors, and my old tutor, little Mr. Dempster, who had fought on the Jacobite side in Scotland, ventured into the Carolinas to recruit among the descendants of his banished comrades, who remained fiercely loyal to the Crown.

Meanwhile, Hal's expedition led him far beyond the Blue Mountains to Annapolis, Baltimore, and finally Philadelphia, where the second General Congress sat. The almanacs recorded the turning point: Lexington had fallen, and the first shots of the war for independence were fired. We still professed loyalty to His Majesty, yet we declared our determination to die or be free. Twenty thousand loyal petitioners assembled around Boston with arms and cannon seized from government stores. Benedict Arnold began his infamous career with the daring capture of two forts. Generals from London marched to aid General Gage, but the British commenced their campaign of conquest with the glorious blunder of Breed's Hill. Fortifying themselves, they watched the rebel armies while Congress deliberated on who should command the confederated forces.

History records the fortunate choice of the nation. Among the Virginian regiments marching to join the new General-in-Chief was one commanded by Henry Esmond Warrington, Esq., formerly a Captain in His Majesty's service, accompanied by his brave little wife. I was glad she had left Virginia; had she remained, our mother would inevitably have joined the fray, sparing our family the terror of civil war.

The rush of farmers and country folk flowed toward the northern army, flattered by the selection of a Virginian gentleman for principal command. The provinces reacted with a thrill of wrath to the blood spilled at Lexington, yelling denunciations against the "bloody British invader." Yet the invader was merely doing his duty, met by men resisting the seizure of their own property. People did not weigh their words when angry; the colonists had chosen their side, determined to test their strength against the domineering mother country. Breed's Hill became a symbol, a mountain where Liberty, Victory, and Glory burned on its summit. Farmers and ploughmen could withstand these dreaded troops; doctors, lawyers, and civilians could outgeneral famous officers! If Britons could conquer the world, surely their children across the Atlantic could match them. Indeed, I cannot decide which deserves the palm for bravery or vainglory.

For the most part, the people around us sided with the revolution. Sir George Warrington found his regiment of Westmoreland Defenders thinly manned at the outset, and woefully diminished thereafter, not only due to news of battles from the north but because of the conduct of our Lord Governor. It had been agreed in countless meetings that he would plant the King's standard and summon loyal gentlemen to rally around it. I could recall the names of many gentlemen, now smug officers of the United States Government, who once prayed to perish under the folds of their country's flag or roared challenges to the "traitors" absent with the rebel army. But let bygones be bygones. Public history records that his lordship, a Scottish peer and the Sovereign's representative, who so loudly invited all lieges to join the King's standard, was the first to pocket it and flee to his ships. He would not leave them unless as a pirate at midnight to burn and destroy.

We loyal gentry remained on shore, committed to our cause, subject only to greater danger due to the weakness and cruelty of our supposed leader. It was early June; our orchards and gardens bloomed with summer plenty. A week prior, I had exchanged compliments with his Excellency in Williamsburg, devising plans to make good head against rebellion, shaking hands heartily, with *vincere aut mori*—to conquer or die—as the last words on our lips. Our family was gathered at Richmond, discussing the prospects in the north and the quarrels between the Assembly and the Governor, when our ghostly Hagan rushed into our parlour. "Have we heard the news of the Governor?" he asked.

"Has he dissolved the Assembly again, and put that scoundrel Patrick Henry in irons?" queried Madam Esmond.

"No such thing! His lordship, with his lady and family, left their palace privately at night. They are aboard a man-of-war off York, whence my lord sent a despatch begging the Assembly to continue sitting, announcing he had only quit his Government House out of fear of the people's fury."

What was to become of the sheep now that the shepherd had fled? No entreaties were more pathetic than those of the gentlemen of the House of Assembly, who guaranteed their Governor security if he would land, imploring him to appear to transact necessary business. No: the man-of-war was his seat of government, and he demanded his House of Commons wait upon him there. This was erecting the King's standard with a vengeance. Our Governor had abandoned us; the Assembly ruled in his stead; a rabble followed the fugitive Viceroy to his ships. A mob of negroes deserted the plantations to join this other deserter. He and his black allies landed here and there in darkness, emulating our opponents in their alacrity to seize and burn. He invited runaway negroes and sent ambassadors to Indians to join his standard. When he came ashore, it was to burn and destroy; when the people resisted, as at Norfolk and Hampton, he retreated to his ships.

Even my mother, after this miserable flight of our chief, was scared by the aspect of affairs, doubting the rebellion's suppression. The arming of negroes, in her opinion, was the most cowardly blow of all. Many loyal gentry were ruined and robbed. A score of our worst hands deserted Richmond and Castlewood to flee to the Governor's fleet; some were slain, and a couple hung by the enemy for plunder. Because her property was wantonly injured and His Majesty's chief officer an imbecile, would Madam Esmond desert the cause of Royalty and Honour? My good mother was never so prodigiously dignified, loudly and enthusiastically loyal, as after hearing of our Governor's lamentable defection. The people around her, though of different minds, listened to her speeches without unkindness. Her oddities were known far and wide, and many young wags smoked her, drawing out her stories of her father the Marquis and her family's splendor. Yet, alongside her oddities, her charities and kindness were remembered, earning her a sneaking regard from many a rebel.

As for the Colonel of the Westmoreland Defenders, though his command dwindled utterly after his chief's outrageous conduct, I escaped serious danger. After the Governor burned the stores at Hampton and issued his proclamation calling negroes to his standard, I boarded his ship to remonstrate with him. I implored him to return to Williamsburg, where hundreds, perhaps thousands, would defend him to the last extremity. My behavior indicated such clear contempt for his conduct that his lordship flew into a rage, declaring me a rebel like all the rest, and ordering me under arrest on his own ship. In my capacity as a militia officer, wearing a red coat to show I wore the King's color, I begged for an immediate court-martial. Turning to two officers present, I requested they remember all that had passed. These gentlemen, undoubtedly sharing my view of the chief's behavior, ensured my interview ended with me going ashore unaccompanied by a guard.

The story spread among the Whig gentry, embellished in the telling. I had spoken my mind manfully; no Whig could have uttered sentiments more liberal. When riots broke out in Richmond and Loyalists sought refuge on the ships, my mother's property and house were never endangered, nor her family insulted. We were still at the stage where reconciliation seemed possible. "Ah! if all the Tories were like you," a distinguished Whig once told me, "we and the people at home should soon come together again." This was before the famous Fourth of July and the Declaration that rendered reconciliation impossible. Afterwards, when parties grew rancorous, motives much less creditable were assigned for my conduct. It was said I chose to be a Liberal Tory because I was a cunning fox wishing to keep my estate regardless of the outcome. And this, I am bound to say, is the opinion regarding my humble self which has obtained in very high quarters at home, where a profound regard for one's own interest is often supposed to dictate conduct during unhappy troubles.

There were two or three persons who knew I had no mercenary motives regarding my resolution to cede my life-interest in our American property to my brother. It was not worth while to undeceive others; what was life worth if a man were forced to feel himself a *la piste* of all calumnies? I do not know exactly why my mother, that notorious Loyalist, was left undisturbed in her house at Castlewood for several years, save for occasional quartering of Continental troops. I can only guess the cause. Madam Fanny, after a campaign before Boston, returned to Fanny's Mount, leaving her Colonel behind. My modest Hal, until the war's conclusion, accepted no higher rank, believing he could be more useful commanding a regiment than a division. Remarkably, after her return, Madam Fanny's old asperity toward my mother seemed removed, replaced by affection for her and all
