In Which We Both Fight and Run Away

What utility is there in a Colonel without a regiment? The Governor and Council, who had once paraded such extravagant gratitude for endowing me with my commission, were nowhere to be seen. They had fled to the safety of their ships, leaving behind a trail of piracy and arson on the shore. Lord Dunmore's black allies had scattered his own kin; and beyond these negroes summoned to arms, rumors flew that he had dispatched envoys to the Southern Indians, promising them a descent in numbers to tomahawk our people into submission. "And these are to be our allies!" I told my mother, exchanging a grim look with her, the memory of that savage whose face had glared over mine, and whose knife had been at my throat when Florac struck him down on Braddock's Field, returning with ghastly clarity. We fortified Castlewood as best we could, yet it was the red men and the blacks, not the rebels, that filled us with dread. I had never seen my mother lose her courage until she recounted the particulars of our father's death in an Indian raid more than forty years prior. One night, seeing figures move before our house, the good lady refused all persuasion that they were anything but savages; she sank to her knees, crying, "The Lord have mercy upon us! The Indians—the Indians!"

Lord Dunmore's negro allies vanished aboard his ships or wherever pay and plunder awaited them; the painted heroes from the South never appeared, though I confess I looked upon my mother's grey head, my wife's brown hair, and our child's golden ringlets with a horrible pang of doubt, fearing they might fall victims to this ruffian war. It was we who fought with such weapons and enlisted these allies! Yet, dare I not set myself up as an interpreter of Providence, pointing out the special finger of Heaven as many are wont to do, I would say that our employment of these Indians and German mercenaries brought their own retribution upon us in this war. In the field, where the mercenaries were attacked by the Provincials, they yielded, and it was triumphing over them that so raised the spirit of the Continental army; and the murder of one woman, Miss McCrea, by a half-dozen drunken Indians, did more harm to the Royal cause than the loss of a battle or the destruction of regiments.

Now that the Indian panic had subsided, Madam Esmond's courage returned, and she became seriously uneasy at the danger I ran by remaining in Virginia. "What harm can they do me, a poor woman?" she asked. "If I have one son, a Colonel without a regiment, I have another with a couple of hundred Continentals behind him in Mr. Washington's camp. If the Royalists come, they will let me off for your sake; if the rebels appear, I shall have Harry's passport. I do not wish, sir, I do not like that your delicate wife and this dear little baby should be here, increasing the risk of all of us! We must have them away to Boston or New York. Do not talk of defending me! Who will think of hurting a poor, harmless, old woman? If the rebels come, I shall shelter behind Mrs. Fanny's petticoats, and shall be much safer without you in the house than in it." She said this partly because it was reasonable, but more so because she was determined to remain in the land where her father was buried and where she was born. She was living backwards, so to speak. She had seen the new generation, blessed them, and bade them farewell. She belonged to the past, to old days and memories.

While we debated the Boston scheme, news came that the British had evacuated that luckless city altogether, never having ventured to attack Mr. Washington in his camp at Cambridge, though he lay there for many months without powder at our mercy. They waited until he procured ammunition, seized and fortified Dorchester Heights, which commanded the town, and out of which the whole British army and colony were obliged to beat a retreat. That the King's troops won the battle of Bunker's Hill, there is no more doubt than that they beat the French at Blenheim; but through the war, their chiefs seemed constantly afraid of assaulting entrenched Continentals afterwards. Else, why, from July to March, hesitate to strike an almost defenseless enemy? Why the hesitation at Long Island, when the Continental army was in our hand? Why that astonishing timorousness of Howe before Valley Forge, where the relics of a force starving, sickening, and in rags could scarcely man the lines, which they held before a great, victorious, and perfectly appointed army?

As the hopes and fears of the contending parties rose and fell, it was curious to mark the altered tone of the partisans of either. When the news of the evacuation of Boston reached us in the country, every little Whig in the neighborhood made his bow to Madam and advised her to a speedy submission. She did not carry her loyalty quite so openly as heretofore, flaunting her flag in the faces of the public, but she never swerved. Every night and morning in private, poor Hagan prayed for the Royal Family in our own household, and on Sundays any neighbors were welcome to attend the service, where my mother acted as a very emphatic clerk, and the prayer for the High Court of Parliament under our most religious and gracious King was very stoutly delivered. The brave Hagan was a parson without a living, as I was a Militia Colonel without a regiment. Hagan had continued to pray stoutly for King George in Williamsburg, long after his Excellency our Governor had run away; but on coming to church one Sunday to perform his duty, he found a corporal's guard at the church-door, who told him that the Committee of Safety had put another divine in his place and requested he keep a quiet tongue in his head. He told the men to "lead him before their chiefs"—our honest friend always loved tall words and tragic attitudes—and accordingly was marched through the streets to the Capitol, with a chorus of white and colored blackguards at the skirts of his gown. He had an interview with Messrs. Henry and the new State officers, confronting the robbers, as he said, in their den. Of course, he intended to make an heroic speech before these gentlemen (and was one of many men who perhaps would have no objection to be made martyrs, so that they might be roasted *coram populo*, or tortured in a full house), but Mr. Henry was determined to give him no such chance. After keeping Hagan three or four hours waiting in an anteroom in the company of negroes, when the worthy divine entered the new chief magistrate's room with an undaunted mien and began a prepared speech with—"Sir, by what authority am I, a minister of the----" "Mr. Hagan," says the other, interrupting him, "I am too busy to listen to speeches. And as for King George, he has henceforth no more authority in this country than King Nebuchadnezzar. Mind you that, and hold your tongue, if you please! Stick to King John, sir, and King Macbeth; and if you will send round your benefit-tickets, all the Assembly shall come and hear you. Did you ever see Mr. Hagan on the boards, when you was in London, General?" And, so saying, Henry turned round upon Mr. Washington's second in command, General Lee, who was now come into Virginia upon State affairs, and our shamefaced good Hagan was bustled out of the room, reddening, and almost crying with shame. After this event, we thought that Hagan's ministrations were best confined to us in the country, and removed the worthy pastor from his restive lambs in the city.

The selection of Virginians to the very highest civil and military appointments of the new government bribed and flattered many of our leading people, who, otherwise, and but for the outrageous conduct of our government, might have remained faithful to the Crown and made good head against the rising rebellion. But, although we Loyalists were gagged and muzzled, though the Capitol was in the hands of the Whigs, and our vaunted levies of loyal recruits so many Falstaff's regiments for the most part, the faithful still kept intelligences with one another in the colony and with our neighbors. Although we did not rise, and although we ran away, and although, in examination before committees, justices, and so forth, some of our frightened people gave themselves Republican airs and vowed perdition to kings and nobles, yet we knew each other pretty well. According as the chances were more or less favorable to us, the master more or less hard, we concealed our colors, showed our colors, half showed our colors, or downright apostatised for the nonce, and cried, "Down with King George!" Our negroes bore about, from house to house, all sorts of messages and tokens. Endless underhand plots and schemes were engaged in by those who could not afford the light. The battle over, the neutrals came and joined the winning side, shouting as loudly as the patriots. The runaways were not counted. Will any man tell me that the signers and ardent well-wishers of the Declaration of Independence were not in a minority of the nation, and that the minority did not win? We knew that a part of the defeated army of Massachusetts was about to make an important expedition southward, upon the success of which the very greatest hopes were founded. I, for one, being anxious to make a movement as soon as there was any chance of activity, had put myself in communication with the ex-Governor Martin of North Carolina, whom I proposed to join, with three or four of our Virginian gentlemen, officers of that notable corps of which we only wanted privates. We made no particular mystery about our departure from Castlewood; the affairs of Congress were not going so well yet that the new government could afford to lay any particular stress or tyranny upon persons of a doubtful way of thinking. Gentlemen's houses were still open; and in our southern fashion we would visit our friends for months at a time. My wife and I, with our infant and a fitting suite of servants, took leave of Madam Esmond on a visit to a neighboring plantation. We went thence to another friend's house, and then to another, till finally we reached Wilmington, in North Carolina, which was the point at which we expected to stretch a hand to the succours which were coming to meet us.

Ere our arrival, our brother Carolinian Royalists had shown themselves in some force. Their encounters with the Whigs had been unlucky. The poor Highlanders had been no more fortunate in their present contest in favor of King George than when they had drawn their swords against him in their own country. We did not reach Wilmington until the end of May, by which time we found Admiral Parker's squadron there, with General Clinton and five British regiments on board, whose object was a descent upon Charleston.

The General, to whom I immediately made myself known, seeing that my regiment consisted of Lady Warrington, our infant whom she was nursing, and three negro servants, received us at first with a very grim welcome. But Captain Horner of the *Sphinx* frigate, who had been on the Jamaica station and received, like all the rest of the world, many kindnesses from our dear Governor there when he was stationed there, eagerly received her on board when he heard that my wife was General Lambert's daughter, and gave up his best cabin to our service; and so we were refugees, too, like my Lord Dunmore, having waved our flag, to be sure, and pocketed it, and slipped out at the back door. From Wilmington we bore away quickly to Charleston, and in the course of the voyage and our delay in the river, previous to our assault on the place, I made some acquaintance with Mr. Clinton, which increased to a further intimacy. It was the King's birthday when we appeared in the river; we determined it was a glorious day for the commencement of the expedition.

It did not take place for some days after, and I leave out, purposely, all descriptions of my Penelope parting from her Hector, going forth on this expedition. In the first place, Hector is perfectly well (though a little gouty), nor has any rascal of a Pyrrhus made a prize of his widow: and in times of war and commotion, are not such scenes of woe and terror, and parting, occurring every hour? I can see the gentle face yet over the bulwark, as we descend the ship's side into the boats, and the smile of the infant on her arm. What old stories, to be sure! Captain Miles, having no natural taste for poetry, you have forgot the verses, no doubt, in Mr. Pope's *Homer*, in which you are described as parting with your heroic father; but your mother often read them to you as a boy, and keeps the gorget I wore on that day somewhere amongst her dressing-boxes now.

My second venture at fighting was no more lucky than my first. We came back to our ships that evening thoroughly beaten. The madcap Lee, whom Clinton had faced at Boston, now met him at Charleston. Lee, and the gallant garrison there, made a brilliant and most successful resistance. The fort on Sullivan's Island, which we attacked, was a nut we could not crack. The fire of all our frigates was not strong enough to pound its shell; the passage by which we moved up to the assault of the place was not fordable, as those officers found—Sir Henry at the head of them, who was always the first to charge—who attempted to wade it. Death by shot, by drowning, by catching my death of cold, I had braved before I returned to my wife; and our frigate being aground for a time and got off with difficulty, was agreeably cannonaded by the enemy until she got off her bank.

A small incident in the midst of this unlucky struggle was the occasion of a subsequent intimacy which arose between me and Sir Harry Clinton, and bound me to that most gallant officer during the period in which it was my fortune to follow the war. Of his qualifications as a leader there may be many opinions: I fear to say, regarding a man I heartily respect and admire, there ought only to be one. Of his personal bearing and his courage there can be no doubt; he was always eager to show it; and whether at the final charge on Breed's Hill, when at
