CHAPTER XIII.

DESPAIR.


Was it? Tragedies as unpremeditated as this had doubtless occurred, and
inconsistencies in character shown themselves in similar impetuosities,
from the beginning of time up till now. Yet there was not a man present,
with or without the memory of Bartow's pantomime, which, as you will
recall, did not tally at all with this account of Mr. Adams's violent
end, who did not show in a greater or less degree his distrust and
evident disbelief in this tale, poured out with such volubility before
them.

The young man, gifted as he was with the keenest susceptibilities,
perceived this, and his head drooped.

"I shall add nothing to and take nothing from what I have said," was his
dogged remark. "Make of it what you will."

The inspector who was conducting the inquiry glanced dubiously at Mr.
Gryce as these words left Thomas Adams's lips; whereupon the detective
said:

"We are sorry you have taken such a resolution. There are many things
yet left to be explained, Mr. Adams; for instance, why, if your brother
slew himself in this unforeseen manner, you left the house so
precipitately, without giving an alarm or even proclaiming your
relationship to him?"

"You need not answer, you know," the inspector's voice broke in. "No man
is called upon to incriminate himself in this free and independent
country."

A smile, the saddest ever seen, wandered for a minute over the
prisoner's pallid lips. Then he lifted his head and replied with a
certain air of desperation:

"Incrimination is not what I fear now. From the way you all look at me I
perceive that I am lost, for I have no means of proving my story."

This acknowledgment, which might pass for the despairing cry of an
innocent man, made his interrogator stare.

"You forget," suggested that gentleman, "that you had your wife with
you. She can corroborate your words, and will prove herself, no doubt,
an invaluable witness in your favor."

"My wife!" he repeated, choking so that his words could be barely
understood. "Must she be dragged into this--so sick, so weak a woman? It
would kill her, sir. She loves me--she----"

"Was she with you in Mr. Adams's study? Did she see him lift the dagger
against his own breast?"

"No." And with this denial the young man seemed to take new courage.
"She had fainted several moments previously, while the altercation
between my brother and myself was at its height. She did not see the
final act, and--gentlemen, I might as well speak the truth (I have
nothing to gain by silence), she finds it as difficult as you do to
believe that Mr. Adams struck himself. I--I have tried with all my arts
to impress the truth upon her, but oh, what can I hope from the world
when the wife of my bosom--an angel, too, who loves me--oh, sirs, she
can never be a witness for me; she is too conscientious, too true to her
own convictions. I should lose--she would die----"

Mr. Gryce tried to stop him; he would not be stopped.

"Spare me, sirs! Spare my wife! Write me down guilty, anything you
please, rather than force that young creature to speak----"

Here the inspector cut short these appeals which were rending every
heart present. "Have you read the newspapers for the last few days?" he
asked.

"I? Yes, yes, sir. How could I help it? Blood is blood; the man was my
brother; I had left him dying--I was naturally anxious, naturally saw my
own danger, and I read them, of course."

"Then you know he was found with a large cross on his breast, a cross
which was once on the wall. How came it to be torn down? Who put it on
his bosom?"

"I, sir. I am not a Catholic but Felix was, and seeing him dying without
absolution, without extreme unction, I thought of the holy cross, and
tore down the only one I saw, and placed it in his arms."

"A pious act. Did he recognize it?"

"I cannot say. I had my fainting wife to look after. She occupied all my
thoughts."

"I see, and you carried her out and were so absorbed in caring for her
you did not observe Mr. Adams's valet----"

"He's innocent, sir. Whatever people may think, he had nothing to do
with this crime----"

"You did not observe him, I say, standing in the doorway and watching
you?"

Now the inspector knew that Bartow had not been standing there, but at
the loophole above; but the opportunity for entrapping the witness was
too good to lose.

Mr. Adams was caught in the trap, or so one might judge from the beads
of perspiration which at that moment showed themselves on his pale
forehead. But he struggled to maintain the stand he had taken, crying
hotly:

"But that man is crazy, and deaf-and-dumb besides! or so the papers give
out. Surely his testimony is valueless. You would not confront me with
him?"

"We confront you with no one. We only asked you a question. You did not
observe the valet, then?"

"No, sir."

"Or understand the mystery of the colored lights?"

"No, sir."

"Or of the plate of steel and the other contrivances with which your
brother enlivened his solitude?"

"I do not follow you, sir." But there was a change in his tone.

"I see," said the inspector, "that the complications which have
disturbed us and made necessary this long delay in the collection of
testimony have not entered into the crime as described by you. Now this
is possible; but there is still a circumstance requiring explanation; a
little circumstance, which is, nevertheless, one of importance, since
your wife mentioned it to you as soon as she became conscious. I allude
to the half dozen or more words which were written by your brother
immediately preceding his death. The paper on which they were written
has been found, and that it was a factor in your quarrel is evident,
since she regretted that it had been left behind you, and he--Do you
know where we found this paper?"

The eyes which young Adams raised at this interrogatory had no
intelligence in them. The sight of this morsel of paper seemed to have
deprived him in an instant of all the faculties with which he had been
carrying on this unequal struggle. He shook his head, tried to reach out
his hand, but failed to grasp the scrap of paper which the inspector
held out. Then he burst into a loud cry:

"Enough! I cannot hold out, with no other support than a wicked lie. I
killed my brother for reasons good as any man ever had for killing
another. But I shall not impart them. I would rather be tried for murder
and hanged."

It was a complete breakdown, pitiful from its contrast with the man's
herculean physique and fine, if contracted, features. If the end, it was
a sad end, and Mr. Gryce, whose forehead had taken on a deep line
between the eyebrows, slowly rose and took his stand by the young man,
who looked ready to fall. The inspector, on the contrary, did not move.
He had begun a tattoo with his fingers on the table, and seemed bound to
beat it out, when another sudden cry broke from the young man's lips:

"What is that?" he demanded, with his eyes fixed on the door, and his
whole frame shaking violently.

"Nothing," began the inspector, when the door suddenly opened and the
figure of a woman white as a wraith and wonderful with a sort of holy
passion darted from the grasp of a man who sought to detain her, and
stood before them, palpitating with a protest which for a moment she
seemed powerless to utter.

It was Adams's young, invalid wife, whom he had left three hours before
at Belleville. She was so frail of form, so exquisite of feature, that
she would have seemed some unearthly visitant but for the human anguish
which pervaded her look and soon found vent in this touching cry:

"What is he saying? Oh, I know well what he is saying. He is saying that
he killed his brother, that he held the dagger which rid the world of a
monster of whose wickedness none knew. But you must not heed him. Indeed
you must not heed him. He is innocent; I, his wife, have come twenty
miles, from a bed of weakness and suffering, to tell you so. He----"

But here a hand was laid gently, but firmly on her mouth. She looked up,
met her husband's eyes filled with almost frantic appeal, and giving him
a look in return that sank into the heart of every man who beheld it,
laid her own hand on his and drew it softly away.

"It is too late, Tom, I must speak. My father, my own weakness, or your
own peremptory commands could not keep me at Belleville when I knew you
had been brought here. And shall I stop now, in the presence of these
men who have heard your words and may believe them? No, that would be a
cowardice unworthy of our love and the true lives we hope to lead
together. Sirs!" and each man there held his breath to catch the words
which came in faint and fainter intonation from her lips, "I know my
husband to be innocent, because the hand that held the dagger was mine.
I killed Felix Cadwalader!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The horror of such a moment is never fully realized till afterward. Not
a man there moved, not even her husband, yet on every cheek a slow
pallor was forming, which testified to the effect of such words from
lips made for smiles and showing in every curve the habit of gentle
thought and the loftiest instincts. Not till some one cried out from the
doorway, "Catch her! she is falling!" did any one stir or release the
pent-up breath which awe and astonishment had hitherto held back on
every lip. Then he in whose evident despair all could read the real
cause of the great dread which had drawn him into a false confession,
sprang forward, and with renewed life showing itself in every feature,
caught her in his arms. As he staggered with her to a sofa and laid her
softly down, he seemed another man in look and bearing; and Mr. Gryce,
who had been watching the whole wonderful event with the strongest
interest, understood at once the meaning of the change which had come
over his prisoner at that point in his memorable arrest when he first
realized that it was for himself they had come, and not for the really
guilty person, the idolized object of his affections.

Meanwhile, he was facing them all, with one hand laid tenderly on that
unconscious head.

"Do not think," he cried, "that because this young girl has steeped her
hand in blood, she is a wicked woman. There is no purer heart on earth
than hers, and none more worthy of the worship of a true man. See! she
killed my brother, son of my father, beloved by my mother, yet I can
kiss her hand, kiss her forehead, her eyes, her feet, not because I hate
him, but because I worship her, the purest--the best----" He left her,
and came and stood before those astonished men. "Sirs!" he cried, "I
must ask you to listen to a strange, a terrible tale."
