More than three centuries and a half ago, in the mid-spring of 1492, the angel of dawn, sweeping with broad, slow wings from the Levant to the Pillars of Hercules, and from the snow-capped summits of the Caucasus across the Alpine ridges to the dark, naked shores of the Western Isles, beheld nearly the same outline of firm land and unstable sea. He saw the same great mountain shadows stretching over the same valleys; the same olive mounts and pine forests; the same broad plains verdant with young corn or rain-freshened grass. He saw the domes and spires of cities rising by riverbanks or mingled with the sedge-like masts along the curved coast, in the very spots where they rise today. As the faint light of his course pierced into the dwellings of men, it fell, as now, upon the rosy warmth of nestling children; upon the haggard waking of sorrow and sickness; upon the hasty uprising of the hard-handed laborer; and upon the late sleep of the night-student, who had been questioning the stars or the sages, or his own soul, for that hidden knowledge which would break through the barrier of man's brief life and reveal its dark path, seemingly an arc in an immeasurable circle of light and glory. The great river-courses that have shaped the lives of men have hardly changed; nor have those other streams, the life-currents that ebb and flow in human hearts, ceased to pulsate with the same great needs, the same profound loves and terrors. As our thought follows close in the slow wake of the dawn, we are struck by the broad sameness of the human lot, which never alters in the main headings of its history—hunger and labor, seed-time and harvest, love and death.

Even if, instead of following the dim daybreak, our imagination pauses on a certain historical spot to await the fuller morning, we may see a world-famous city that has hardly changed its outline since the days of Columbus. It stands as an almost unviolated symbol amidst the flux of human things, reminding us that we still resemble the men of the past more than we differ from them, for the great mechanical principles on which those domes and towers were raised must create a likeness in human building that transcends all possible change. Doubtless, if the spirit of a Florentine citizen, whose eyes were closed for the last time while Columbus was still waiting and arguing for his three poor vessels at the port of Palos, could return from the shades and pause where our thought pauses, he would believe that there must still be fellowship and understanding among the inheritors of his birthplace.

Let us suppose that such a Shade has been permitted to revisit the glimpses of the golden morning, standing once more on the famous hill of San Miniato, overlooking Florence from the south.

The Spirit is clothed in his habit as he lived: the folds of his well-lined black silk garment, or *lucco*, hang in grave, unbroken lines from neck to ankle. His plain cloth cap, with its *becchetto*, or long hanging strip of drapery to serve as a scarf in case of need, surmounts a penetrating face—not, perhaps, very handsome, but with a firm, well-cut mouth kept distinctly human by a close-shaven lip and chin. It is a face charged with memories of a keen and varied life passed below on the banks of the gleaming river. As he looks at the scene before him, the sense of familiarity is so much stronger than the perception of change that he thinks it might be possible to descend once more among the streets and take up that busy life where he left it. For it is not only the mountains and the westward-bending river that he recognizes; not only the dark sides of Mount Morello opposite to him, and the long valley of the Arno that seems to stretch its grey, low-tufted luxuriance to the far-off ridges of Carrara; and the steep height of Fiesole, with its crown of monastic walls and cypresses; and all the green and grey slopes sprinkled with villas which he can name as he looks at them. He sees other familiar objects much closer to his daily walks. Though he misses the seventy or more towers that once surmounted the walls, encircling the city as with a regal diadem, his eyes will not dwell on that blank. They are drawn irresistibly to the unique tower springing, like a tall flower-stem drawn towards the sun, from the square, turreted mass of the Old Palace in the very heart of the city—the tower that looks none the worse for the four centuries that have passed since he used to walk under it. The great dome, too, greatest in the world, which in his early boyhood had been only a daring thought in the mind of a small, quick-eyed man—there it raises its large curves still, eclipsing the hills. And the well-known bell-towers—Giotto's, with its distant hint of rich color, and the graceful-spired Badia, and the rest—he looked at them all from the shoulder of his nurse.

"Surely," he thinks, "Florence can still ring her bells with the solemn hammer-sound that used to beat on the hearts of her citizens and strike out the fire there. And here, on the right, stands the long dark mass of Santa Croce, where we buried our famous dead, laying the laurel on their cold brows and fanning them with the breath of praise and of banners. But Santa Croce had no spire then; we Florentines were too full of great building projects to carry them all out in stone and marble. We had our frescoes and our shrines to pay for, not to speak of rapacious condottieri, bribed royalty, and purchased territories; our façades and spires must needs wait. But what architect can the Frati Minori, the Franciscans, have employed to build that spire for them? If it had been built in my day, Filippo Brunelleschi or Michelozzo would have devised something of another fashion than that—something worthy to crown the church of Arnolfo."

At this, the Spirit, with a sigh, lets his eyes travel on to the city walls, and now he dwells on the change there with wonder at these modern times. Why have five out of the eleven convenient gates been closed? And why, above all, should the towers have been levelled that were once a glory and defense? Is the world become so peaceful, then, and do Florentines dwell in such harmony, that there are no longer conspiracies to bring ambitious exiles home again with armed bands at their back? These are difficult questions: it is easier and pleasanter to recognize the old than to account for the new. And there flows the Arno, with its bridges just where they used to be—the Ponte Vecchio, least like other bridges in the world, laden with the same quaint shops where our Spirit remembers lingering a little on his way, perhaps to look at the progress of that great palace which Messer Luca Pitti had set a-building with huge stones got from the Hill of Bogoli (now Boboli) close behind, or perhaps to transact a little business with the cloth-dressers in Oltrarno. The exorbitant line of the Pitti roof is hidden from San Miniato; but the yearning of the old Florentine is not to see Messer Luca's too ambitious palace which he built unto himself; it is to be down among those narrow streets and busy, humming piazzas where he inherited the eager life of his fathers. Is not the anxious voting with black and white beans still going on down there? Who are the Priori in these months, eating soberly-regulated official dinners in the Palazzo Vecchio, with removes of tripe and boiled partridges, seasoned by practical jokes against the ill-fated butt among those potent signors? Are not the significant banners still hung from the windows—still distributed with decent pomp under Orcagna's Loggia every two months?

Life had its zest for the old Florentine when he, too, trod the marble steps and shared in those dignities. His politics had an area as wide as his trade, which stretched from Syria to Britain, but they also possessed the passionate intensity and the detailed practical interest which could belong only to a narrow scene of corporate action; only to the members of a community shut in close by the hills and by walls of six miles' circuit, where men knew each other as they passed in the street, set their eyes every day on the memorials of their commonwealth, and were conscious of having not simply the right to vote, but the chance of being voted for. He loved his honors and his gains, the business of his counting-house, of his guild, of the public council-chamber; he loved his enmities too, and fingered the white bean which was to keep a hated name out of the *borsa* with more complacency than if it had been a golden florin. He loved to strengthen his family by a good alliance, and went home with a triumphant light in his eyes after concluding a satisfactory marriage for his son or daughter under his favorite loggia in the evening cool; he loved his game at chess under that same loggia, and his biting jest, and even his coarse joke, as not beneath the dignity of a man eligible for the highest magistracy. He had gained an insight into all sorts of affairs at home and abroad: he had been of the "Ten" who managed the war department, of the "Eight" who attended to home discipline, of the Priori or Signori who were the heads of the executive government; he had even risen to the supreme office of Gonfaloniere; he had made one in embassies to the Pope and to the Venetians; and he had been commissary to the hired army of the Republic, directing the inglorious, bloodless battles in which no man died of brave breast wounds—*virtuosi colpi*—but only of casual falls and tramplings. And in this way he had learned to distrust men without bitterness; looking on life mainly as a game of skill, but not dead to traditions of heroism and clean-handed honor. For the human soul is hospitable, and will entertain conflicting sentiments and contradictory opinions with much impartiality. It was his pride besides that he was duly tinctured with the learning of his age, and judged not altogether with the vulgar, but in harmony with the ancients: he, too, in his prime, had been eager for the most correct manuscripts, and had paid many florins for antique vases and for disinterred busts of the ancient immortals—some, perhaps, *truncis naribus*, wanting as to the nose, but not the less authentic; and in his old age he had made haste to look at the first sheets of that fine Homer which was among the early glories of the Florentine press. But he had not, for all that, neglected to hang up a waxen image or double of himself under the protection of the Madonna Annunziata, or to do penance for his sins in large gifts to the shrines of saints whose lives had not been modelled on the study of the classics; he had not even neglected making liberal bequests towards buildings for the Frati, against whom he had levelled many a jest.

For the Unseen Powers were mighty. Who knew—who was sure—that there was *any* name given to them behind which there was no angry force to be appeased, no intercessory pity to be won? Were not gems medicinal, though they only pressed the finger? Were not all things charged with occult virtues? Lucretius might be right—he was an ancient, and a great poet; Luigi Pulci, too, who was suspected of not believing anything from the roof upward (*dal tetto in su*), had very much the air of being right over the supper-table, when the wine and jests were circulating fast, though he was only a poet in the vulgar tongue. There were even learned personages who maintained that Aristotle, wisest of men (unless, indeed, Plato were wiser?), was a thoroughly irreligious philosopher; and a liberal scholar must entertain all speculations. But the negatives might, after all, prove false; nay, seemed manifestly false, as the circling hours swept past him and turned round with graver faces. For had not the world become Christian? Had he not been baptised in San Giovanni, where the dome is awful with symbols of coming judgment, and where the altar bears a crucified Image disturbing to perfect complacency in one's self and the world? Our resuscitated Spirit was not a pagan philosopher, nor a philosophising pagan poet, but a man of the fifteenth century, inheriting its strange web of belief and unbelief; of Epicurean levity and fetishistic dread; of pedantic, impossible ethics uttered by rote, and crude passions acted out with childish impulsiveness; of inclination towards a self-indulgent paganism, and inevitable subjection to that human conscience which, in the unrest of a new growth, was filling the air with strange prophecies and presentiments.

He had smiled, perhaps, and shaken his head dubiously, as he heard simple folk talk of a Pope Angelico, who was to come by-and-by and bring in a new order of things, to purify the Church from simony, and the lives of the clergy from scandal—a state of affairs too different from what existed under Innocent the Eighth for a shrewd merchant and politician to regard the prospect as worthy of entering into his calculations. But he felt the evils of the time, nevertheless; for he was a man of public spirit, and public spirit can never be wholly immoral, since its essence is care for a common good. That very Quaresima or Lent of 1492 in which he died, still in his erect old age, he had listened in San Lorenzo, not without a mixture of satisfaction, to the preaching of a Dominican Friar named Girolamo Savonarola, who denounced with a rare boldness the worldliness and vicious habits of the clergy, and insisted on the duty of Christian men not to live for their own ease when wrong was triumphing in high places, and not to spend their wealth in outward pomp even in the churches, when their fellow-citizens were suffering from want and sickness. The Frate carried his doctrine rather too far for elderly ears; yet it was a memorable thing to see a preacher move his audience to such a pitch that

The Shipwrecked Stranger.

The Loggia de' Cerchi stood in the very heart of old Florence, nestled within a labyrinth of narrow streets behind the Badia. In the fifteenth century, these thoroughfares were rarely traversed by strangers unless they sought a specific, austere door marked with the inscription: *Qui Nacque Il Divino Poeta*. To Dante's ear, these lanes had once echoed with the clamor of civil war between rival families; now, however, they resounded only with the boisterous, unhistorical squabbles and broad jests of wool-carders in the districts of San Martino and Garbo.

Under this loggia, on the early morning of April 9, 1492, two men locked gazes. One stood slightly stooped, peering down with the scrutiny of curiosity; the other lay upon the pavement, gazing upward with the startled eyes of a dreamer abruptly awakened.

The standing figure spoke first. He was a grey-haired man of broad shoulders, a type Tuscan phraseology described as "moulded with the fist and polished with the pickaxe." Yet, the self-important gravity etched into the deep lines of his brow and mouth seemed designed to counteract any contemptuous judgments one might pass on his rugged exterior. Beside him lay a large, well-filled sack of skins, and before him hung a peddler's basket, garnished with small wares like thread and pins, alongside shards of glass likely acquired in trade.

"Young man," he said, pointing to a ring on the finger of the reclining figure, "once your chin grows a stiffer crop, you'll learn better than to nap in street corners with such a jewel on your forefinger. By the holy Gospels! If it had been anyone else standing over you two minutes ago... but Bratti Ferravecchi is not a thief. The cat cannot eat her mouse unless she catches it alive, and Bratti cannot relish gain without tasting a bargain. Why, young man, one San Giovanni, three years ago, the Saint sent a dead body my way—a blind beggar with a cap well-lined with coins. But my stomach turned against the money I'd never bargained for, until I realized San Giovanni owed me the pieces for what I spend yearly at the Festa. Besides, I buried the body and paid for a mass—and so I saw it was a fair deal. But how does a young man like you, with the face of Messer San Michele, sleep on a stone bed with the wind for a curtain?"

The deep guttural sounds of the speaker were barely intelligible to the newly awakened listener, yet he understood the gesture regarding the ring. With a half-automatic obedience, he removed it and thrust it within his doublet, rising simultaneously to stretch his limbs.

"Your tunic and hose match ill with that jewel, young man," said Bratti, deliberately. "One might say the saints sent *you* a dead body; but if you took the jewels, I hope you buried him—and you can afford a mass or two for him into the bargain."

A painful thrill seemed to dart through the listener's frame, arresting his careless stretching. For an instant, he turned on Bratti with a sharp frown, but immediately recovered an air of indifference. He removed the red Levantine cap, which hung like a great purse over his left ear, pushed back his long dark-brown curls, glanced at his attire, and smiled.

"You speak truth, friend: my garments are as weather-stained as an old sail, and they are not old either, only, like an old sail, they have had a sprinkling of the sea as well as the rain. The fact is, I'm a stranger in Florence, and when I came in footsore last night, I preferred flinging myself in a corner of this hospitable porch to hunting any longer for a chance hostelry, which might turn out to be a nest of blood-suckers of more sorts than one."

"A stranger, in good sooth," said Bratti. "For the words melt out of your throat so that a Christian and a Florentine cannot tell a hook from a hanger. But you're not from Genoa? More likely from Venice, by the cut of your clothes?"

"At this present moment," said the stranger, smiling, "it is of less importance where I come from than where I can go to for a mouthful of breakfast. This city of yours turns a grim look on me just here: can you show me the way to a more lively quarter, where I can get a meal and a lodging?"

"That I can," said Bratti. "And it is your good fortune, young man, that I have happened to be walking in from Rovezzano this morning, and turned out of my way to Mercato Vecchio to say an Ave at the Badia. That, I say, is your good fortune. But it remains to be seen what is my profit in the matter. Nothing for nothing, young man. If I show you the way to Mercato Vecchio, you'll swear by your patron saint to let me have the bidding for that stained suit of yours, when you set up a better—as doubtless you will."

"Agreed, by San Niccolò," said the other, laughing. "But now let us set off to this said Mercato, for I feel the want of a better lining to this doublet of mine which you are coveting."

"Coveting? Nay," said Bratti, heaving his bag onto his back and setting out. But he broke off in his reply, bursting into loud, harsh tones, not unlike the creaking of a cart-wheel: "*Chi abbaratta—baratta—b'ratta—chi abbaratta cenci e vetri—b'ratta ferri vecchi?*" ("Who wants to exchange rags, broken glass, or old iron?")

"It's worth but little," he said presently, returning to his conversational tone. "Hose and altogether, your clothes are worth but little. Still, if you've a mind to set yourself up with a lute worth more than any new one, or with a sword that's been worn by a Ridolfi, or with a paternoster of the best mode, I could let you have a great bargain, by making an allowance for the clothes; for, simple as I stand here, I've got the best-furnished shop in the Ferravecchi, and it's close by the Mercato. The Virgin be praised! it's not a pumpkin I carry on my shoulders. But I don't stay caged in my shop all day: I've got a wife and a raven to stay at home and mind the stock. *Chi abbaratta—baratta—b'ratta?* ... And now, young man, where do you come from, and what's your business in Florence?"

"I thought you liked nothing that came to you without a bargain," said the stranger, rather scornfully. "You've offered me nothing yet in exchange for that information."

"Well, well; a Florentine doesn't mind bidding a fair price for news: it stays the stomach a little though he may win no hose by it. If I take you to the prettiest damsel in the Mercato to get a cup of milk—that will be a fair bargain."

"Nay; I can find her myself, if she be really in the Mercato; for pretty heads are apt to look forth of doors and windows. No, no. Besides, a sharp trader, like you, ought to know that he who bids for nuts and news, may chance to find them hollow."

"Ah! young man," said Bratti, with a sideways glance of some admiration, "you were not born of a Sunday—the salt-shops were open when you came into the world. You're not a Hebrew, eh?—come from Spain or Naples, eh? Let me tell you the Frati Minori are trying to make Florence as hot as Spain for those dogs of hell that want to get all the profit of usury to themselves and leave none for Christians; and when you walk the Calimara with a piece of yellow cloth in your cap, it will spoil your beauty more than a sword-cut across that smooth olive cheek of yours.—*Abbaratta, baratta—chi abbaratta?*—I tell you, young man, grey cloth is against yellow cloth; and there's as much grey cloth in Florence as would make a gown and cowl for the Duomo, and there's not so much yellow cloth as would make hose for Saint Christopher—blessed be his name, and send me a sight of him this day!—*Abbaratta, baratta, b'ratta—chi abbaratta?*"

"All that is very amusing information you are parting with for nothing," said the stranger, "but it happens not to concern me. I am no Hebrew."

"See, now!" said Bratti, triumphantly; "I've made a good bargain with mere words. I've made you tell me something, young man, though you're as hard to hold as a lamprey. San Giovanni be praised! a blind Florentine is a match for two one-eyed men. But here we are in the Mercato."

They had now emerged from the narrow streets into a broad piazza, known to the elder Florentine writers as the Mercato Vecchio, or the Old Market. Though this piazza had been the scene of a provision-market from time immemorial, and may, perhaps, says fond imagination, be the very spot to which the Fesulean ancestors of the Florentines descended from their high fastness to traffic with the rustic population of the valley, it had not been shunned as a place of residence by Florentine wealth. In the early decades of the fifteenth century, which was now near its end, the Medici and other powerful families of the *popolani grassi*, or commercial nobility, had their houses there, not perhaps finding their ears much offended by the loud roar of mingled dialects, or their eyes much shocked by the butchers' stalls, which the old poet Antonio Pucci accounts a chief glory, or *dignita*, of a market that, in his esteem, eclipsed the markets of all the earth beside. But the glory of mutton and veal (well attested to be the flesh of the right animals; for were not the skins, with the heads attached, duly displayed, according to the decree of the Signoria?) was just now wanting to the Mercato, the time of Lent not being yet over. The proud corporation, or "Art," of butchers was in abeyance, and it was the great harvest-time of the market-gardeners, the cheesemongers, the vendors of macaroni, corn, eggs, milk, and dried fruits: a change which was apt to make the women's voices predominant in the chorus. But in all seasons there was the experimental ringing of pots and pans, the chinking of the money-changers, the tempting offers of cheapness at the old-clothes stalls, the challenges of the dicers, the vaunting of new linens and woollens, of excellent wooden-ware, kettles, and frying-pans; there was the choking of the narrow inlets with mules and carts, together with much uncomplimentary remonstrance in terms remarkably identical with the insults in use by the gentler sex of the present day, under the same imbrowning and heating circumstances. Ladies and gentlemen, who came to market, looked on at a larger amount of amateur fighting than could easily be seen in these later times, and beheld more revolting rags, beggary, and rascaldom, than modern householders could well picture to themselves. As the day wore on, the hideous drama of the gaming-house might be seen here by any chance open-air spectator—the quivering eagerness, the blank despair, the sobs, the blasphemy, and the blows:—

"E vedesi chi perde con gran soffi,
E bestemmiar colla mano alia mascella,
E ricever e dar di molti ingoffi."

But still there was the relief of prettier sights: there were brood-rabbits, not less innocent and astonished than those of our own period; there were doves and singing-birds to be bought as presents for the children; there were even kittens for sale, and here and there a handsome *gattuccio*, or "Tom," with the highest character for mousing; and, better than all, there were young, softly-rounded cheeks and bright eyes, freshened by the start from the far-off castello (walled village) at daybreak, not to speak of older faces with the unfading charm of honest goodwill in them, such as are never quite wanting in scenes of human industry. And high on a pillar in the centre of the place—a venerable pillar, fetched from the church of San Giovanni—stood Donatello's stone statue of Plenty, with a fountain near it, where, says old Pucci, the good wives of the market freshened their utensils, and their throats also; not because they were unable to buy wine, but because they wished to save the money for their husbands.

But on this particular morning a sudden change seemed to have come over the face of the market. The *deschi*, or stalls, were indeed partly dressed with their various commodities, and already there were purchasers assembled, on the alert to secure the finest, freshest vegetables and the most unexceptionable butter. But when Bratti and his companion entered the piazza, it appeared that some common preoccupation had for the moment distracted the attention both of buyers and sellers from their proper business. Most of the traders had turned their backs on their goods, and had joined the knots of talkers who were concentrating themselves at different points in the piazza. A vendor of old-clothes, in the act of hanging out a pair of long hose, had distractedly hung them round his neck in his eagerness to join the nearest group; an oratorical cheesemonger, with a piece of cheese in one hand and a knife in the other, was incautiously making notes of his emphatic pauses on that excellent specimen of *marzolino*; and elderly market-women, with their egg-baskets in a dangerously oblique position, contributed a wailing fugue of invocation.

In this general distraction, the Florentine boys, who were never wanting in any street scene, and were of an especially mischievous sort—as who should say, very sour crabs indeed

Once Bratti had merged into the throng of gossipers, the young stranger, resigned to his inability to discern the source of the city's feverish excitement and indifferent to the particulars that mattered only to native Florentines, grew weary of waiting for his escort. He decided instead to wander the piazza, scanning the stalls for a vendor of provisions who might possess less than the usual fervor for public news. Suddenly, as if prompted by a sudden realization, he thrust his hand into the pouch hanging at his waist, rummaging through it with a look of mounting frustration.

"Not a single coin, by Jupiter!" he muttered, in a tongue that was neither Tuscan nor Italian. "I believed I had one poor piece left. I shall have to seek my breakfast for love, then!"

He had not taken many steps before it appeared he had stumbled upon a quarter of the market where such currency would not be spurned. In a secluded corner, far from the clusters of talkers, two mules stood adorned with red tassels and collars. One bore wooden milk vessels; the other, panniers overflowing with herbs and salads. Leaning her elbow against the neck of the milk-laden beast was a young girl, seemingly no older than sixteen, her face framed by a red hood that concealed her hair entirely. Her prettiness was all the more striking in its innocence, hidden as it was. Perhaps exhausted by her morning labor in the twilight, preparing for the trek from a castle several miles away, she had fallen asleep in that half-standing, half-leaning posture. Yet, the stranger felt no hesitation in waking her; his approach was so gentle that to the sleeping damsel, it seemed merely as though a sprig of thyme had brushed her lips as she bent to gather herbs.

The dream shattered, however, as she opened wide, baby-blue eyes and sprang up in astonishment and confusion to find the stranger standing close before her. She heard his voice, strange yet soft, and though she might have dismissed it as unintelligible had she been more composed, her first instinct was to turn her head slightly and lift a corner of her green serge mantle as a shield. He repeated his words.

"Forgive me, fair one, for disturbing your rest. I am dying of hunger, and the scent of milk makes breakfast seem infinitely more desirable."

He had chosen the phrase *muoio di fame* because he knew it would be familiar to her ears; he spoke it playfully, with the intonation of a mendicant. This time, he was understood. The corner of the mantle dropped, and moments later, a large cup of fragrant milk was offered to him. He accepted it without further compliment, raising it to his lips. As he drank, the little maiden gathered the courage to look up at the long, dark curls of this stranger with the singular voice. He had asked for food in the tones of a beggar, yet, though his clothes were tattered, he bore no resemblance to any beggar she had ever known.

While this scrutiny took place, another current of feeling moved her hand into a bag hanging beside the mule. When the stranger set down his cup, he saw a large piece of bread held out toward him, catching a glimpse of those blue eyes that seemed to encourage him to accept this additional gift.

"But perhaps that is your own breakfast," he said. "No, I have had enough without payment. A thousand thanks, my gentle one."

There was no verbal response, yet the bread was pushed a fraction closer, as if impatient at his refusal. As the stranger's long dark eyes rested on the infantine face, it seemed the girl was gathering more courage to look up and meet his gaze.

"Ah, then, if I must take the bread," he said, laying his hand upon it, "I shall grow bolder still, and beg for another kiss to make the bread sweeter."

His speech was becoming wonderfully intelligible despite the strange timbre of his voice, which had initially seemed a barrier. She blushed deeply and lifted the corner of her mantle to her mouth again. Just as the presumptuous stranger leaned forward, his fingers brushing the arm that held up the screening mantle, he was startled by a harsh voice close to his ear.

"Who are _you_—with a murrain to you? No honest buyer, I'll warrant, but a hanger-on of the dicers—or something worse. Go! Dance off and find fitter company, or I'll give you a tune to a quicker time than you'll like."

The young stranger drew back, meeting the speaker's glare with a look provocatively free of alarm or deprecation. His slight expression of saucy amusement broke into a broad, beaming smile as he surveyed the figure of his threatener. She was a stout, brawny woman, wearing a man's jerkin over her green serge gown, with the peaked hood of some departed mantle fastened around her sunburnt face. Beneath all its coarseness and premature wrinkles, her face showed a half-sad, half-ludicrous maternal resemblance to the tender baby-face of her daughter—a resemblance that often serves as a more croaking, shudder-inducing prophecy than that of the death's-head.

There was something irresistibly propitiating in that bright young smile, but Monna Ghita was no woman to betray weakness. She continued speaking with heightened exasperation.

"Yes, yes, you can grin as well as other monkeys in cap and jerkin. You're a minstrel or a mountebank, I'll be sworn; you look for all the world as silly as a tumbler when he has been upside down and has scrambled back onto his heels. And what fool's tricks hast thou been after, Tessa?" she added, turning to her daughter, whose frightened face was more inviting to abuse. "Giving away milk and victuals, it seems? Ay, ay, thou'dst carry water in thy ears for any idle vagabond that didn't like to stoop for it, thou silly staring rabbit! Turn thy back and lift the herbs from the panniers, else I'll make thee say a few Aves without counting."

"Nay, Madonna," said the stranger with a pleading smile, "do not be angry with your pretty Tessa for taking pity on a hungry traveler who found himself unexpectedly without a quattrino. Your handsome face looks so well when it frowns that I long to see it illuminated by a smile."

"_Va via_! I know what paste you are made of. You may tickle me with that straw a good long while before I shall laugh, I can tell you. Get along with a bad Easter, else I'll make a beauty-spot or two on that face of yours that shall spoil your kissing before Advent."

As Monna Ghita lifted her formidable talons to enforce her commands, Bratti, who had arrived a moment prior, was saying to his companion, "What think you of this pretty parrot, Nello? Doesn't his tongue smack of Venice?"

"Nay, Bratti," said the barber in an undertone, "thy wisdom has much of the ass in it, as I told thee just now; especially regarding the ears. This stranger is a Greek, else I am not the barber who has had the sole and exclusive shaving of the excellent Demetrio, and drawn more than one sorry tooth from his learned jaw. And this youth might be taken to have come straight from Olympus—at least once he has had a touch of my razor."

"_Orsù_! Monna Ghita!" continued Nello, not sorry to see some sport. "What has happened to cause such a thunderstorm? Has this young stranger been misbehaving himself?"

"By San Giovanni!" said the cautious Bratti, who had not shaken off his original suspicions concerning the shabbily-clad possessor of jewels, "he did right to run away from _me_, if he meant to get into mischief. I can swear that I found him under the Loggia de' Cerchi, with a ring on his finger such as I've seen worn by Bernardo Rucellai himself. Not another rusty nail's worth do I know about him."

"The fact is," said Nello, eyeing the stranger good-humoredly, "this _bello giovane_ has been a little too presumptuous in admiring the charms of Monna Ghita, and has attempted to kiss her while her daughter's back is turned; for I observe that the pretty Tessa is too busy to look this way at present. Was it not so, Messer?" Nello concluded in a tone of courtesy.

"You have divined the offense like a soothsayer," said the stranger, laughing. "Only that I had not the good fortune to find Monna Ghita here at first. I begged a cup of milk from her daughter and had accepted this gift of bread, for which I was making a humble offering of gratitude, before I had the higher pleasure of being face to face with these riper charms which I was perhaps too bold in admiring."

"_Va, va_! Be off, every one of you, and stay in purgatory till I pay to get you out, will you?" said Monna Ghita, fiercely, elbowing Nello and leading her mule forward to compel the stranger to step aside. "Tessa, thou simpleton, bring forward thy mule a bit: the cart will be upon us."

As Tessa turned to take the mule's bridle, she cast one timid glance at the stranger, who was now moving with Nello out of the way of an approaching market-cart. The glance lasted just long enough to catch the beckoning movement of his hand, indicating that he had been watching for this opportunity of an adieu.

"_Ebbene_," said Bratti, raising his voice to speak across the cart, "I leave you with Nello, young man, for there's no pushing my bag and basket any farther, and I have business at home. But you'll remember our bargain, because if you found Tessa without me, it was not my fault. Nello will show you my shop in the Ferravecchi, and I'll not turn my back on you."

"A thousand thanks, friend!" said the stranger, laughing, and then turned away with Nello up the narrow street that led most directly to the Piazza del Duomo.

The Barber's Shop.

"To tell you the truth," said the young stranger to Nello, as they moved clear of the tangled carts and mules, "I am relieved to be handed over by that patron of mine to one who speaks with less barbarism and conducts a less enigmatic trade. Is it common among you Florentines for a wandering merchant of broken glass and rags to speak of a shop where he sells lutes and swords?"

"Common? No: our Bratti is no common man. He possesses a theory and lives by it, a feat I cannot claim for any philosopher I have the honor of shaving," answered Nello, whose loquacity, like an overfull bottle, could never dispense a small measure. "Bratti intends to extract the maximum possible pleasure—that is, the hardest bargaining—from this life, winding it up with a bargain for the easiest passage through purgatory by giving the Holy Church his winnings when the game ends. He has had his will drawn up to that effect on the cheapest terms a notary could be found. Yet I have often told him, 'Bratti, your bargain is a limping one, and you stand on the lame side of it. Does it not sadden you to gaze upon the pictures of the Paradiso? You will never be able there to haggle over rags and rusty nails; the saints and angels require neither pins nor tinder. Save perhaps with San Bartolommeo, who carries his skin about in an inconvenient manner, I see no chance of your striking a deal for second-hand clothing.' But God forgive me," Nello added, shifting his tone and crossing himself, "this light chatter ill becomes a morning when Lorenzo lies dead and the Muses tear their hair—a painful thought for a barber; and you yourself, Messere, are likely under a cloud, for when a man of your speech and presence takes up with such sorry lodging, it argues some misfortune has befallen him."

"What Lorenzo is that whose death you speak of?" the stranger asked, appearing to dwell with too anxious an interest on this point to have noticed the indirect inquiry that followed.

"What Lorenzo? There is but one Lorenzo, I imagine, whose death could throw the Mercato into an uproar, set the lantern of the Duomo leaping in desperation, and cause the lions of the Republic to feel an immediate necessity to devour one another. I mean Lorenzo de' Medici, the Pericles of our Athens—if I may make such a comparison in the ear of a Greek."

"Why not?" said the other, laughing; "for I doubt whether Athens, even in the days of Pericles, could have produced so learned a barber."

"Yes, yes; I thought I could not be mistaken," said the rapid Nello, "else I have shaved the venerable Demetrio Calcondila to little purpose; but pardon me, I am lost in wonder: your Italian is better than his, though he has been in Italy forty years—better even than that of the accomplished Marullo, who may be said to have married the Italic Muse in more senses than one, since he wedded our learned and lovely Alessandra Scala."

"It will lighten your wonder to know that I come of a Greek stock planted in Italian soil much longer than the mulberry-trees which have taken so kindly to it. I was born at Bari, and my—I mean, I was brought up by an Italian—and, in fact, I am a Greek, very much as your peaches are Persian. The Greek dye was subdued in me, I suppose, till I had been dipped over again by long abode and much travel in the land of gods and heroes. And, to confess something of my private affairs to you, this same Greek dye, with a few ancient gems I have about me, is the only fortune shipwreck has left me. But—when the towers fall, you know it is an ill business for the small nest-builders—the death of your Pericles makes me wish I had rather turned my steps towards Rome, as I should have done but for a fallacious Minerva in the shape of an Augustinian monk. 'At Rome,' he said, 'you will be lost in a crowd of hungry scholars; but at Florence, every corner is penetrated by the sunshine of Lorenzo's patronage: Florence is the best market in Italy for such commodities as yours.'"

"_Gnaffè_, and so it will remain, I hope," said Nello. "Lorenzo was not the only patron and judge of learning in our city—heaven forbid! Because he was a large melon, every other Florentine is not a pumpkin, I suppose. Have we not Bernardo Rucellai, and Alamanno Rinuccini, and plenty more? And if you want to be informed on such matters, I, Nello, am your man. It seems to me a thousand years till I can be of service to a _bel erudito_ like yourself. And, first of all, in the matter of your hair. That beard, my fine young man, must be parted with, were it as dear to you as the nymph of your dreams. Here at Florence, we love not to see a man with his nose projecting over a cascade of hair. But, remember, you will have passed the Rubicon, once you have been shaven: if you repent, and let your beard grow after it has acquired stoutness by a struggle with the razor, your mouth will by-and-by show no longer what Messer Angelo calls the divine prerogative of lips, but will appear like a dark cavern fringed with horrent brambles."

"That is a terrible prophecy," said the Greek, "especially if your Florentine maidens are many of them as pretty as the little Tessa I stole a kiss from this morning."

"Tessa? She is a rough-handed contadina: you will rise into the favor of dames who bring no scent of the mule-stables with them. But to that end, you must not have the air of a _sgherro_, or a man of evil repute: you must look like a courtier, and a scholar of the more polished sort, such as our Pietro Crinito—like one who sins among well-bred, well-fed people, and not one who sucks down vile _vino di sotto_ in a chance tavern."

"With all my heart," said the stranger. "If the Florentine Graces demand it, I am willing to give up this small matter of my beard, but—"

"Yes, yes," interrupted Nello. "I know what you would say. It is the _bella zazzera_—the hyacinthine locks, you do not choose to part with; and there is no need. Just a little pruning—ecco!—and you will look not unlike the illustrious prince Pico di Mirandola in his prime. And here we are in good time in the Piazza San Giovanni, and at the door of my shop. But you are pausing, I see: naturally, you want to look at our wonder of the world, our Duomo, our Santa Maria del Fiore. Well, well, a mere glance; but I beseech you to leave a closer survey till you have been shaved: I am quivering with the inspiration of my art even to the very edge of my razor. Ah, then, come round this way."

The mercurial barber seized the arm of the stranger and led him to a point on the south side of the piazza, from which he could see at once the huge dark shell of the cupola, the slender soaring grace of Giotto's campanile, and the quaint octagon of San Giovanni in front of them, showing its unique gates of storied bronze, which still bore the somewhat dimmed glory of their original gilding. The inlaid marbles were then fresher in their pink, white, and purple, than they are now, when the winters of four centuries have turned their white to the rich ochre of well-mellowed meerschaum; the façade of the cathedral did not stand ignominious in faded stucco, but had upon it the magnificent promise of the half-completed marble inlaying and statued niches, which Giotto had devised a hundred and fifty years before; and as the campanile in all its harmonious variety of color and form led the eyes upward, high into the clear air of this April morning, it seemed a prophetic symbol, telling that human life must somehow and some time shape itself into accord with that pure aspiring beauty.

But this was not the impression it appeared to produce on the Greek. His eyes were irresistibly led upward, but as he stood with his arms folded and his curls falling backward, there was a slight touch of scorn on his lip, and when his eyes fell again they glanced round with a scanning coolness which was rather piquing to Nello's Florentine spirit.

"Well, my fine young man," he said, with some impatience, "you seem to make as little of our Cathedral as if you were the Angel Gabriel come straight from Paradise. I should like to know if you have ever seen finer work than our Giotto's tower, or any cupola that would not look a mere mushroom by the side of Brunelleschi's there, or any marbles finer or more cunningly wrought than these that our Signoria got from far-off quarries, at a price that would buy a dukedom. Come, now, have you ever seen anything to equal them?"

"If you asked me that question with a scimitar at my throat, after the Turkish fashion, or even your own razor," said the young Greek, smiling gaily, and moving on towards the gates of the Baptistery, "I daresay you might get a confession of the true faith from me. But with my throat free from peril, I venture to tell you that your buildings smack too much of Christian barbarism for my taste. I have a shuddering sense of what there is inside—hideous smoked Madonnas; fleshless saints in mosaic, staring down idiotic astonishment and rebuke from the apse; skin-clad skeletons hanging on crosses, or stuck all over with arrows, or stretched on gridirons; women and monks with heads aside in perpetual lamentation. I have seen enough of those wry-necked favorites of heaven at Constantinople. But what is this bronze door rough with imagery? These women's figures seem moulded in a different spirit from those starved and staring saints I spoke of: these heads in high relief speak of a human mind within them, instead of looking like an index to perpetual spasms and colic."

"Yes, yes," said Nello, with some triumph. "I think we shall show you by-and-by that our Florentine art is not in a state of barbarism. These gates, my fine young man, were moulded half a century ago, by our Lorenzo Ghiberti, when he counted hardly so many years as you do."

"Ah, I remember," said the stranger, turning away, like one whose appetite for contemplation was soon satisfied. "I have heard that your Tuscan sculptors and painters have been studying the antique a little. But with monks for models, and the legends of mad hermits and martyrs for subjects, the vision of Olympus itself would be of small use to them."

"I understand," said Nello, with a significant shrug, as they walked along. "You are of the same mind as Michele Marullo, ay, and as Angelo Poliziano himself, in spite of his canonicate, when he relaxes himself a little in my shop after his lectures, and talks of the gods awaking from their long sleep and making the woods and streams vital once more. But he rails against the Roman scholars who want to make us all talk Latin again: 'My ears,' he says, 'are sufficiently flayed by the barbarisms of the learned, and if the vulgar are to talk Latin I would as soon have been in Florence the day they took to beating all the kettles in the city because the bells were not enough to stay the wrath of the saints.' Ah, Messer Greco, if you want to know the flavor of our scholarship, you must frequent my shop: it is the focus of Florentine intellect, and in that sense the navel of the earth—as my great predecessor, Burchiello, said of _his_ shop, on the more frivolous pretension that his street of the Calimara was the center of our city. And here we are at the sign of 'Apollo and the Razor.' Apollo, you see, is bestowing the razor on the Triptolemus of our craft, the first reaper of beards, the sublime _Anonimo_, whose mysterious identity is indicated by a shadowy hand."

"I see thou hast had custom already, Sandro," continued Nello, addressing a solemn-looking dark-eyed youth who made way for them on the threshold. "And now make all clear for this signor to sit down. And prepare the finest-scented lather, for he has a learned and a handsome chin."

"You have a pleasant little adytum there, I see," said the stranger, looking through a latticed screen which divided the shop from a room of about equal size, opening into a still smaller walled enclosure, where a few bay and laurel trees surrounded a stone Hermes. "I suppose your conclave of _eruditi_ meets there?"

"There, and not less in my shop," said Nello, leading the way into the inner room, in which were some benches, a table, with one book in manuscript and one printed in capitals lying open upon it, a lute, a few oil-sketches, and a model or two of hands and ancient masks. "For my shop is a no less fitting haunt of the Muses, as you will acknowledge when you feel the sudden illumination of understanding and the serene vigor of inspiration that will come to you with a clear chin. Ah! you can make that lute discourse, I perceive. I, too, have some skill that way, though the serenata is useless when daylight discloses a visage like mine, looking no fresher than an apple that has stood the winter. But look at that sketch: it is a fancy of Piero di Cosimo's, a strange freakish painter, who says he saw it by long looking at a mouldy wall."

The sketch Nello pointed to represented three masks—one a drunken laughing Satyr, another a sorrowing Magdalen, and the third, which lay between them, the rigid, cold face of a Stoic:

"Good day, Messer Domenico," Nello greeted the first of the two men entering the shop, offering a silent nod to his companion. "You arrive at the perfect moment, like cheese grated just for macaroni. Ah, you are in a rush—eager to be shaved without delay. *Ecco!* And what a morning it is for heavy thoughts. Florence orphaned, the very pivot of Italy torn away, heaven itself bewildered as to its next move. *Oimè!* Yet, well enough; the sun marches steadily toward dinner. As I was saying, you come like cheese ready for the pot. This young stranger seeks an honorable merchant to advance funds against a ring of value. If I had counted every goldsmith and money-lender in Florence upon my fingers, I could not have found a finer name than Menico Cennini. Besides, he deals in other wares you require—Greek learning and youthful eyes, a double instrument printers are perpetually in need of."

The grave elderly man, son of Bernardo Cennini, who two decades prior had heard of the German printing process and cast his own types in Florence, remained in lathered silence and passivity while Nello showered this discourse upon him, yet he turned a slow, sidelong gaze upon the stranger.

"This fine youth possesses unlimited Greek, Latin, or Italian at your service," Nello continued, favoring ample paraphrase. "He is a wonder of juvenile learning comparable to Francesco Filelfo or our incomparable Poliziano. A second Guarino, too, though he suffered the misfortune of shipwreck, doubtless losing a store of precious manuscripts that might have corrected even your most accurate editions, Domenico. Fortunately, he has rescued a few gems of rare value. His name is—you stated your name, Messer, was—?"

"Tito Melema," the stranger replied, slipping the ring from his finger and presenting it to Cennini, whom Nello, no less rapid with his razor than with his tongue, had now released from the shaving cloth.

Meanwhile, the man who had entered with the goldsmith—a tall figure of about fifty, sporting a short trimmed beard, an old felt hat, and a threadbare mantle—had kept his eye fixed on the Greek. Now, he spoke abruptly.

"Young man, I am painting a picture of Sinon deceiving old Priam, and I should be glad of your face for my Sinon, if you would grant me a sitting."

Tito Melema started, looking around with a pale astonishment that seemed like a sudden accusation. But Nello left him no time to flounder for an answer. "Piero," the barber declared, "you are the most extraordinary compound of humors and fancies ever packed into human skin. What trick will you play with the fine visage of this young scholar to make it suit your traitor? Ask him rather to turn his eyes upward, and you may make a Saint Sebastian of him that will draw troops of devout women; or, if you are in a classical vein, place myrtle about his curls and make him a young Bacchus, or rather a Phoebus Apollo, for his face is as warm and bright as a summer morning. It made me his friend in the space of a single 'credo.'"

"Ay, Nello," the painter replied, speaking with abrupt pauses, "and if your tongue could cease its everlasting chirping long enough for your understanding to consider the matter, you would see that you have just revealed why this face suits my traitor. A perfect traitor must possess a face upon which vice writes no marks—lips capable of lying with a dimpled smile, eyes of such agate-like brightness and depth that no infamy can dull them, cheeks that rise from murder without looking haggard. I say not this young man is a traitor; I mean, he has a face that would make him the more perfect traitor if he possessed the heart of one. Which is to say neither more nor less than that he has a beautiful face, informed with rich young blood, that will be nourished sufficiently by food and keep its color without much help from virtue. He may harbor the heart of a hero alongside it; I aver nothing to the contrary. Ask Domenico there if lapidaries can always tell a gem by sight alone. And now, I shall stuff tow in my ears, for your chatter and the bells together are more than I can endure. Say no more to me, but trim my beard."

With these final words, Piero (known as "di Cosimo" from his master, Cosimo Rosselli) drew out two bits of tow, stuffed them into his ears, and seated himself before Nello. The barber shrugged his shoulders and cast a grimacing look of intelligence at the Greek, as if to signal, "A whimsical fellow, you perceive! Everyone takes his speeches as mere jests."

Tito, who had stood transfixed with his long dark eyes resting on the unknown man who had addressed him so equivocally, seemed recalled to his self-command by Piero's change of position. Satisfied with the explanation, he once again gave his attention to Cennini, who presently remarked,

"This is a curious and valuable ring, young man. This intaglio of the fish with the crested serpent above it, set in the black stratum of the onyx—or rather nicolo—is well shown by the surrounding blue of the upper stratum. The ring undoubtedly has a history?" Cennini added, looking up keenly at the young stranger.

"Yes, indeed," Tito replied, meeting the scrutiny frankly. "The ring was found in Sicily, and I have learned from those who busy themselves with gems and sigils that both the stone and intaglio possess virtue to make the wearer fortunate, especially at sea, and also to restore to him whatever he may have lost. But," he continued, smiling, "though I have worn it constantly since I left Greece, it has not made me altogether fortunate at sea, you perceive, unless I am to count escape from drowning as sufficient proof of its virtue. It remains to be seen whether my lost chests will come to light; but to lose no chance of such a result, Messer, I pray you only to hold the ring for a short space as pledge for a small sum far beneath its value. I will redeem it as soon as I can dispose of certain other gems secured within my doublet, or indeed as soon as I can earn something by any scholarly employment, if I may be so fortunate as to meet with such."

"That may be seen, young man, if you will come with me," Cennini said. "My brother Pietro, who is a better judge of scholarship than I, will perhaps be able to supply you with a task that may test your capabilities. Meanwhile, take back your ring until I can hand you the necessary florins, and, if it pleases you, come along with me."

"Yes, yes," Nello interjected. "Go with Messer Domenico; you cannot go in better company. He was born under the constellation that grants a man skill, riches, and integrity, whatever that constellation may be—which is of less consequence because babies cannot choose their own horoscopes, and indeed, if they could, there might be an inconvenient rush of infants at particular epochs. Besides, our Phoenix, the incomparable Pico, has shown that your horoscopes are all a nonsensical dream—which is the less troublesome opinion. *Addio! bel giovane!* Do not forget to return to me."

"No fear of that," Tito said, beckoning a farewell as he turned his bright face toward the door. "You are to do me a great service; that is the most positive security for your seeing me again."

"Say what thou wilt, Piero," Nello murmured as the young stranger disappeared. "I shall never look at such an exterior as that without taking it as a sign of a lovable nature. Why, thou wilt say next that Leonardo, whom thou art always raving about, ought to have made his Judas as beautiful as Saint John! But thou art as deaf as the top of Mount Morello with that accursed tow in thy ears. Well, well: I shall get a little more of this young man's history from him before I take him to Bardo Bardi."

The Blind Scholar and his Daughter.

The Via de' Bardi, a thoroughfare etched into the annals of Florence, winds through Oltrarno, the district draped along the southern bank of the Arno. Stretching from the Ponte Vecchio to the Piazza de' Mozzi, it is flanked on the right by a steep ascent known in the fifteenth century as the Hill of Bogoli—a former stone quarry that supplied the city's pavement, now treacherous when soaked by rain. To the left, the river laps against a row of buildings with irregular, pierced façades, their reflections softened in the water as the sun dips toward the western horizon. Though quaint, these structures feel to the historical eye like a modern substitute for the legendary palaces of the Bardi family, razed by popular fury in the mid-fourteenth century.

Those Bardi were a proud, vigorous lineage, prominent among the early Florentine factions that clashed in the shadow of high noble towers. They possessed hands capable of gripping a sword with lethal force, yet also fingers attuned to the delicate pleasure of handling minted gold. By the mid-1300s, they had evolved from commoners into feudal Counts of Vernio, acquiring lands and strongholds that stirred the jealousy of their republican peers. Their ambition was matched by their prowess in commerce; akin to the Rothschilds of their era, they financed the wars of Edward III, only to be undone by a sudden demand from Sicilian creditors. Their bankruptcy sent shockwaves through the Mediterranean, yet unlike modern bankrupts, they did not hide in shame. Instead, they stood taller, becoming arrogant grandees who, in 1343, drew the wrath of the armed populace. They held their narrow street inlets like panthers at bay until an assault from the hill forced them to retreat. Their twenty-two houses were sacked and burned, and many of their chiefs fled the city. Yet, like a multi-rooted tree, the family survived, rising again and again through the vicissitudes of Florentine history, oscillating between dignity and disgrace, wealth and poverty. However, they never reclaimed their old street on the riverbank, which by 1492 belonged to others, notably the Neri.

Within one of these Neri houses, however, resided a descendant of the Bardi, specifically the branch that had once been Counts of Vernio. This descendant inherited the family's pride, energy, and desire to leave a lasting mark upon the swirling earth, yet his passions had shifted under new conditions. He was no longer a warrior or a daring merchant-general. He was a blind, elderly scholar, Bardo de' Bardi, whose hands were cramped from decades of copying manuscripts, who ate sparing meals, and wore threadbare clothes out of choice and necessity. He sat among his books and marble fragments, illuminated only by the distant glow of his memories, a moneyless man to whom Nello, the barber, had promised to introduce the young Greek, Tito Melema.

Bardo's home was situated near the hillside, a large, sombre mass of stone pierced by small windows and topped by a roofed terrace. Grim doors with scrolled hinges opened onto a groined entrance court, empty save for a massive lamp-iron hanging from the center. A smaller door led to a stone staircase and the ground-floor rooms, which served as a warehouse. Both floors were filled with precious stores destined for the Scheldt, the shores of Africa, the Aegean, or the Euxine. Maso, the old servant, had to climb slowly to the second storey to reach his master's door, where we enter shortly after Nello's conversation with the Greek.

We follow Maso into the ante-chamber and through the left-hand door. He nods briefly as a clear, young voice greets him: "Ah, you are come back, Maso. It is well. We have wanted nothing."

The voice emanates from the far end of a long, spacious room lined with shelves holding books and antiquities in scrupulous order. Scattered on separate stands are a beautiful feminine torso, a headless statue wielding a bladeless sword, severed infantine limbs inviting a kiss, well-preserved Roman busts, and vases from Magna Grecia. A large central table holds antique bronze lamps and dark pottery vessels. The room's palette is pale and sombre; the vellum bindings offer little relief to the marble, which is livid with age, and the once-splendid carpet is worn to dimness. The dark bronzes lack sunlight to reveal their green tinge, for the sun has not yet climbed high enough to send gleams through the narrow windows facing the Via de' Bardi.

The only splash of bright color comes from the hair of a tall maiden, seventeen or eighteen years old, standing before a carved reading-desk. Her hair is a reddish gold, enriched by an unbroken ripple reminiscent of sunset clouds on a grand autumn evening. Confined by a black fillet above her small ears, it ripples forward to veil her neck above a square-cut gown of black serge. Her eyes are fixed on a large volume before her; one white hand rests on the desk, the other clasping the back of her father's chair.

Her blind father sits with his head uplifted, turned slightly toward her as if gazing at her. His delicate paleness, framed by a black velvet cap atop his drooping white hair, highlights the striking resemblance between his aged features and those of the young maiden. Both lack the tinge of rose on their cheeks, sharing a refinement of brow and nostril, balanced by a full, firm mouth and a powerful chin that conveys proud tenacity and latent impetuosity. This expression is mirrored in the backward poise of the girl's head and the grand line of her neck and shoulders. One cannot tell if such a face inspires love or only an unwilling admiration mixed with dread; the answer lies in the eyes, which often seem charged with a direct message from the soul. But the father's eyes have long been silent, while the daughter's are bent on the Latin pages of Politian's 'Miscellanea,' reading aloud from the eightieth chapter:

"There was a certain nymph of Thebes named Chariclo, especially dear to Pallas; and this nymph was the mother of Teiresias. But once when in the heat of summer, Pallas, in company with Chariclo, was bathing her disrobed limbs in the Heliconian Hippocrene, it happened that Teiresias coming as a hunter to quench his thirst at the same fountain, inadvertently beheld Minerva unveiled, and immediately became blind. For it is declared in the Saturnian laws, that he who beholds the gods against their will, shall atone for it by a heavy penalty... When Teiresias had fallen into this calamity, Pallas, moved by the tears of Chariclo, endowed him with prophecy and length of days, and even caused his prudence and wisdom to continue after he had entered among the shades, so that an oracle spake from his tomb: and she gave him a staff, wherewith, as by a guide, he might walk without stumbling... And hence, Nonnus, in the fifth book of the 'Dionysiaca,' introduces Actreon exclaiming that he calls Teiresias happy, since, without dying, and with the loss of his eyesight merely, he had beheld Minerva unveiled, and thus, though blind, could for evermore carry her image in his soul."

At this point, the daughter's hand slips from the chair back to meet her father's, which he has just uplifted. She does not look around, continuing with a voice slightly altered by suppressed feeling to read the Greek quotation from Nonnus, when the old man interrupts.

"Stay, Romola; reach me my own copy of Nonnus. It is a more correct copy than any in Poliziano's hands, for I made emendations in it which have not yet been communicated to any man. I finished it in 1477, when my sight was fast failing me."

Romola walks to the far end of the room with a queenly step, natural to her tall, finely-wrought frame, requiring no conscious adjustment.

"Is it in the right place, Romola?" asks Bardo, perpetually seeking assurance that the outward fact corresponds with the image stored in his mind.

"Yes, father; at the west end of the room, on the third shelf from the bottom, behind the bust of Hadrian, above Apollonius Rhodius and Callimachus, and below Lucan and Silius Italicus."

As she speaks, a fine ear would detect a faint suggestion of weariness struggling with habitual patience in her clear voice. But as she approaches her father and sees his arms stretch out with nervous excitement to seize the volume, her hazel eyes fill with pity. She hastens to lay the book on his lap and kneels beside him, looking up as if believing her love must penetrate the darkness that shuts out everything else. At that moment, the doubtful attractiveness of Romola's face, where pride and passion quiver against native refinement and intelligence, is transfigured into lovable womanliness by mingled pity and affection. It is evident that the deepest fount of feeling within her has not yet reached her less changeful features, finding outlet only through her eyes.

The father, unaware of this soft radiance, looks flushed and agitated as his hand explores the edges and back of the large book.

"The vellum is yellowed in these thirteen years, Romola."

"Yes, father," she says gently; "but your letters at the back are dark and plain still—fine Roman letters; and the Greek character," she continues, opening the book on his knee, "is more beautiful than that of any of your bought manuscripts."

"Assuredly, child," says Bardo, passing his finger across the page as if hoping to distinguish line and margin. "What hired amanuensis can be equal to the scribe who loves the words that grow under his hand, and to whom an error or indistinctness in the text is more painful than a sudden darkness or obstacle across his path? And even these mechanical printers who threaten to make learning a base and vulgar thing—even they must depend on the manuscript over which we scholars have bent with that insight into the poet's meaning which is closely akin to the *mens divinior* of the poet himself; unless they would flood the world with grammatical falsities and inexplicable anomalies that would turn the very fountain of Parnassus into a deluge of poisonous mud. But find the passage in the fifth book, to which Poliziano refers—I know it very well."

Seating herself on a low stool close to her father's knee, Romola takes the book on her lap and reads the four verses containing Actreon's exclamation.

"It is true, Romola," says Bardo when she finishes; "it is a true conception of the poet; for what is that grosser, narrower light by which men behold merely the petty scene around them, compared with that far-stretching, lasting light which spreads over centuries of thought, and over the life of nations, and makes clear to us the minds of the immortals who have reaped the great harvest and left us to glean in their furrows? For me, Romola, even when I could see, it was with the great dead that I lived; while the living often seemed to me mere spectres—shadows dispossessed of true feeling and intelligence; and unlike those Lamiae, to whom Poliziano, with that superficial ingenuity which I do not deny to him, compares our inquisitive Florentines, because they put on their eyes when they went abroad, and took them off when they got home again, I have returned from the converse of the streets as from a forgotten dream, and have sat down among my books, saying with Petrarca, the modern who is least unworthy to be named after the ancients, 'Libri medullitus delectant, colloquuntur, consulunt, et viva quadam nobis atque arguta familiaritate junguntur.'"

"And in one thing you are happier than your favourite Petrarca, father," says Romola, affectionately humouring the old man's disposition to dilate; "for he used to look at his copy of Homer and think sadly that the Greek was a dead letter to him: so far, he had the inward blindness that you feel is worse than your outward blindness."

"True, child; for I carry within me the fruits of that fervid study which I gave to the Greek tongue under the teaching of the younger Crisolora, and Filelfo, and Argiropulo; though that great work in which I had desired to gather, as into a firm web, all the threads that my research had laboriously disentangled, and which would have been the vintage of my life, was cut off by the failure of my sight and my want of a fitting coadjutor. For the sustained zeal and unconquerable patience demanded from those who would tread the unbeaten paths of knowledge are still less reconcilable with the wandering, vagrant propensity of the feminine mind than with the feeble powers of the feminine body."

"Father," says Romola, with a sudden flush and an injured tone, "I read anything you wish me to read; and I will look out any passages for you, and make whatever notes you want."

Bardo shakes his head, smiling with a bitter sort of pity. "As well try to be a pentathlos and perform all the five feats of the palaestra with the limbs of a nymph. Have I forgotten thy fainting in the mere search for the references I needed to explain a single passage of Callimachus?"

"But, father, it was the weight of the books, and Maso can help me; it was not want of attention and patience."

Bardo shakes his head again. "It is not mere bodily organs that I want: it is the sharp edge of a young mind to pierce the way for my somewhat blunted faculties. For blindness acts like a dam, sending the streams of thought backward along the already-travelled channels and hindering the course onward. If my son had not forsaken me, deluded by debasing fanatical dreams, worthy only of an energumen whose dwelling is among tombs, I might have gone on and seen my path broadening to the end of my life; for he was a youth of great promise. But it has closed in now," the old man continues

Dawning Hopes.

When Maso opened the door again to admit the two visitors, Nello, performing a deep reverence to Romola, gently pushed Tito forward and stepped ahead to greet her father.

"Messer Bardo," he announced in a tone of measured respect, "I have the honor of presenting to you a Greek scholar. He has long sought an audience with you, driven not only by the report I made regarding your learning and priceless collections, but by the urgent need for your patronage following a shipwreck that has reduced him to destitution. His name is Tito Melema, at your service."

Romola's astonishment was profound. The barber had omitted any mention of the stranger's age or appearance; among her father's scholarly guests, she had rarely seen anyone but middle-aged or grey-haired men. Yet, one image remained vividly etched in her mind: the face of her brother, who had once taken her on his knee and never returned—a fair visage with sunny hair like her own. But her mind's habitual defense, a proud self-reliance hardened by her father's complaints against the world's injustice, stood like a snowy embankment against the rushing tide of admiration. Tito's bright face displayed a rich, untarnished beauty, unmarred by the shadows of age, his black *sajo* and knee-length tunic framing a countenance like a wreath of spring dropped suddenly into her young but wintry life. This life had inherited only memories: of a dead mother, a lost brother, and a blind father's happier times—memories of distant light and love buried in dark mines of books, waiting to be kindled by the torch of known joy.

Nevertheless, she returned Tito's bow with the same pale, proud expression she always wore. Yet, as he approached, the snow seemed to melt. When he glanced toward her while Nello spoke, a pink flush overspread her face, vanishing almost instantly as if her imperious will had recalled it. Tito's gaze, however, held a gentle, beseeching admiration, the most propitiating appeal to a shy, proud woman, perhaps the only atonement a man can offer for being too handsome. His entire demeanor radiated a finished fascination born of an absence of demand or assumption. It was the grace of a fleet, soft-coated animal that delights not by bounding away in indifference, but by unexpectedly resting its chin on your palm and looking up, desiring to be stroken—as if it loved you.

"Mesere, I give you welcome," said Bardo, with a note of condescension. "Misfortune wedded to learning, especially Greek learning, is a letter of credit that should win the ear of every instructed Florentine. As you are doubtless aware, since the time when your countryman, Manuelo Crisolora, diffused the light of his teaching nearly a century ago, no man is deemed worthy of the title of scholar who possesses merely the transplanted literature of the Latins. Such inert students are stigmatized as *opici* or barbarians, as the Romans themselves phrased it, who frankly replenished their urns at the fountain-head. I am, as you perceive, and as Nello has forewarned you, totally blind. A calamity to which we Florentines are especially liable, whether due to the cold winds from the Apennines, the sudden transition from our house's gloom to the summer sun's brilliance—which the *Lippi* attribute to their own lineage—or some occult cause eluding our surmises. But pray, be seated. Nello, my friend, be seated."

Bardo waited until his fine ear confirmed that the visitors were settling, noting that Romola took her usual chair at his right hand. Then he asked, "From what part of Greece do you come, Messere? I had thought your unhappy country had been almost exhausted of sons capable of cherishing images of her original glory, though the barbarous Sultans have lately shown themselves disposed to graft their precious vine onto their wild stock."

"I sailed last from Nauplia," Tito replied. "But I have resided in Constantinople and Thessalonica, and traveled in regions little visited by Western Christians since the triumph of Turkish arms. However, Messere, I was not born in Greece, but at Bari. I spent my first sixteen years in Southern Italy and Sicily."

As Tito spoke, a subtle emotion passed across Bardo's delicate features. He leaned forward, extending his right hand toward Romola and turning his head as if to address her, but then corrected himself, turning away instead to speak in a subdued voice. "Excuse me; is it not true—you are young?"

"I am three-and-twenty," Tito answered.

"Ah," Bardo murmured, his tone charged with subdued excitement, "and you had, doubtless, a father who cared for your early instruction—who, perhaps, was himself a scholar?"

A slight pause preceded Tito's reply. For Romola and Nello, it began with a shock that seemed to ripple through him, causing a momentary quiver of the lip, doubtless reviving a supremely painful memory.

"Yes," he replied, "at least a father by adoption. He was a Neapolitan, accomplished in both Latin and Greek. But," he added after another brief pause, "he is lost to me—lost on a voyage he too rashly undertook to Delos."

Bardo sank back, too delicate to probe a sorrow he divined to be recent. Romola, knowing the fibers Tito's voice had stirred in her father, felt that this new acquaintance had with wonderful suddenness breached the barrier separating them from the alien world. Nello, sensing the check placed on the conversation offered a graceful opportunity to relieve the silence, remarked, "In truth, it is as clear as Venetian glass that this fine young man has received the best training. The two Cennini have already set him to work on their Greek sheets; they are not men to begin cutting before feeling the edge of their tools. They tested him well beforehand. If there are two things not to be hidden—love and a cough—I say there is a third, and that is ignorance, once a man is obliged to do something besides wagging his head. The *tonsor inequalis* is inevitably betrayed when he takes the shears in his hand. Is it not true, Messer Bardo? I speak as a barber, but as Luigi Pulci says—"

"Nay, my good Nello," Bardo interrupted with friendly severity, "you are not altogether illiterate and might have made more respectable progress if you had abstained somewhat from the *cicalata* and gossip of the street-corner, to which our Florentines are excessively addicted; and even more if you had not clogged your memory with those frivolous productions of which Luigi Pulci has furnished the most peccant exemplar—a compendium of extravagances and incongruities far removed from the models of a pure age, resembling rather the *grylli* or conceits of a period when mystic meaning was held a warrant for monstrosity of form. With this difference, that while the monstrosity is retained, the mystic meaning is absent, in contemptible contrast with the great poem of Virgil, who, as I long held with Filelfo before Landino took upon himself to expound the same opinion, embodied the deepest lessons of philosophy in a graceful and well-knit fable. I cannot but regard the multiplication of these babbling, lawless productions, albeit countenanced by the patronage and example of Lorenzo himself, otherwise a friend to true learning, as a sign that the glorious hopes of this century are to be quenched in gloom. Nay, that they have been the delusive prologue to an age worse than that of iron—the age of tinsel and gossamer, in which no thought has substance enough to be molded into consistent and lasting form."

"Once more, pardon," Nello said, opening his palms and shrugging his shoulders. "I find myself knowing so many things in good Tuscan before I have time to think of the Latin for them; and Messer Luigi's rhymes are always slipping off the lips of my customers—that is what corrupts me. And indeed, talking of customers, I have left my shop and my reputation too long in the custody of my slow Sandro, who does not deserve even to be called a *tonsor inequalis*, but rather to be pronounced simply a bungler in the vulgar tongue. So, with your permission, Messer Bardo, I will take my leave—well understood that I am at your service whenever Maso calls upon me. It seems a thousand years till I dress and perfume the damigella's hair, which deserves to shine in the heavens as a constellation, though indeed it were a pity for it ever to go so far out of reach."

Three voices formed a fugue of friendly farewells as Nello retreated with a bow to Romola and a beck to Tito. The acute barber saw that the pretty youngster, who had crept into his liking by some strong magic, was well launched in Bardo's favorable regard. Satisfied that his introduction had not miscarried, he felt the propriety of retiring.

The little burst of wrath provoked by Nello's unlucky quotation had diverted Bardo's mind from the feelings that had previously hemmed in further speech. He now addressed Tito again with his ordinary calmness. "Ah! young man, you are happy in having united the advantages of travel with those of study, and you will be welcome among us as a bringer of fresh tidings from a land which has become sadly strange to us, except through the agents of a now restricted commerce and the reports of hasty pilgrims. For those days are in the far distance which I myself witnessed, when men like Aurispa and Guarino went out to Greece as to a storehouse, and came back laden with manuscripts which every scholar was eager to borrow—and, be it owned with shame, not always willing to restore. Nay, even the days when erudite Greeks flocked to our shores for refuge seem far-off now—farther off than the on-coming of my blindness. But doubtless, young man, research after the treasures of antiquity was not alien to the purpose of your travels?"

"Assuredly not," said Tito. "On the contrary, my companion—my father—was willing to risk his life in his zeal for the discovery of inscriptions and other traces of ancient civilization."

"And I trust there is a record of his researches and their results," Bardo said eagerly, "since they must be even more precious than those of Ciriaco, which I have diligently availed myself of, though they are not always illuminated by adequate learning."

"There *was* such a record," Tito replied, "but it was lost, like everything else, in the shipwreck I suffered below Ancona. The only record left is such as remains in our—in my memory."

"You must lose no time in committing it to paper, young man," Bardo said, his interest growing. "Doubtless you remember much, if you aided in transcription; for when I was your age, words wrought themselves into my mind as if fixed by the tool of the graver; wherefore I constantly marvel at the capriciousness of my daughter's memory, which grasps certain objects with tenacity and lets fall all those minutiae whereon depends accuracy, the very soul of scholarship. But I apprehend no such danger with you, young man, if your will has seconded the advantages of your training."

When Bardo made this reference to his daughter, Tito ventured to turn his eyes toward her. At the accusation against her memory, his face broke into its brightest smile, which was reflected as inevitably as sudden sunbeams in Romola's. Conceive the soothing delight of that smile to her! Romola had never dreamed that there was a scholar in the world who would smile at a deficiency for which she was constantly made to feel herself a culprit. It was like the dawn of a new sense to her—the sense of comradeship. They did not look away from each other immediately, as if the smile had been stolen; they looked and smiled with frank enjoyment.

"She is not really so cold and proud," Tito thought.

"Does *he* forget too, I wonder?" Romola thought, "Yet I hope not, else he will vex my father."

But Tito was obliged to turn away to answer Bardo's question. "I have had much practice in transcription," he said. "But in the case of inscriptions copied in memorable scenes, rendered doubly impressive by the sense of risk and adventure, it may have happened that my retention of written characters has been weakened. On the plain of the Eurotas, or among the gigantic stones of Mycenae and Tyrins—especially when the fear of the Turk hovers over one like a vulture—the mind wanders, even though the hand writes faithfully what the eye dictates. But something doubtless I have retained," he added with a modesty that was not false, though he was conscious it was politic, "something that might be of service if illustrated and corrected by a wider learning than my own."

"That is well spoken, young man," Bardo said, delighted. "And I will not withhold from you such aid as I can give, if you like to communicate with me concerning your recollections. I foresee a work which will be a useful supplement to the 'Isolario' of Christoforo Buondelmonte, and which may take rank with the 'Itineraria' of Ciriaco and the admirable Ambrogio Traversari. But we must prepare ourselves for calumny, young man," Bardo went on with energy, as if the work were already growing so fast that the time of trial was near; "if your book contains novelties you will be charged with forgery; if my elucidations should clash with any principles of interpretation adopted by another scholar, our personal characters will be attacked, we shall be impeached with foul actions; you must prepare yourself to be told that your mother was a fish-woman, and that your father was a renegade priest or a hanged malefactor. I myself, for having shown error in a single preposition, had an invective written against me wherein I was taxed with treachery, fraud, indecency, and even hideous crimes. Such, my young friend—such are the flowers with which the glorious path of scholarship is st

Bartolommeo Scala, the secretary of the Florentine Republic, resided in a stately palace near the Porta Pinti, now known as the Casa Gherardesca. His coat of arms, an azure ladder crossing a golden field with the motto *Gradatim* above the gate, declared to all who passed that the miller's son had climbed to his high station solely through his own exertions—a truth he wore with unashamed pride. The secretary was a man of vanity and pomp, yet fundamentally honest; he believed so deeply in his own worth that he saw no need for pretense. By this time, he had ascended to the very top rung of his ladder. For twenty years he had served as secretary, delivering his orations from the *ringhiera*, the balcony of the Old Palace, before princely guests while the Marzocco, the lion of the republic, wore a golden crown and the populace shouted, "Viva Messer Bartolommeo!" He had served as an ambassador to Rome, earning titles such as Titular Senator, Apostolical Secretary, and Knight of the Golden Spur. Eight years prior, he had become Gonfaloniere, the ultimate ambition of any Florentine citizen. Along with his honors, his wealth had grown, and so had his gout, a common affliction of successful mortals. Often, the Knight of the Golden Spur was forced to sit with his cushioned heel helpless beneath the magnificent loggia he had constructed, overlooking the vast gardens behind his home.

It was on such a day that he granted the requested audience to Tito Melema. The May sun warmed the flowers and grass beyond the pleasant shade of the loggia. Scala had discarded his heavy silk *lucco* for a light, loose mantle over his tunic. Seated beside him were his beautiful daughter, Alessandra, and her husband, the Greek soldier-poet Marullo. On the opposite side sat two friends, distinguished enough to be respectable but not so illustrious as to dominate the conversation, making them ideal listeners. Yet, despite the gout and the sunny afternoon, Messer Bartolommeo's felicity was far from complete. It was embittered by a pile of papers before him, mostly a correspondence between himself and the scholar Poliziano.

It was a peculiar foible of that era—incredible as it may seem today—to recite quarrels and offer scholarly visitors the full text of lengthy disputes. This was not the first time Scala had sought the candid opinions of his friends regarding the balance of right and wrong in a dozen Latin letters exchanged with Poliziano, all stemming from playful epigrams. It was the tale of a typical, petty quarrel, one that served precisely as the thorn necessary to prick the sluggish horse of friendship, as Nello had once noted.

Poliziano, having been a rejected suitor for the hand of Scala's daughter, kept a sharp, learned tooth ready against the prosperous secretary who had refused to marry the greatest scholar of the age to his daughter. Scala was a meritorious public servant and a lucky man—qualities naturally exasperating to an offended academic. However, Scala also possessed an itch for authorship, albeit a poor one. He was one of those delightful individuals who, sitting in gout-ridden slippers, penned poetic trifles purely for amusement, sending them to friends who acted as the literary periodicals of the fifteenth century. Scala had many friends eager to praise his work, such as Ficino and Landino, who found his Latin prose elegant and masculine. The terrifying Joseph Scaliger, who would later declare him totally ignorant of Latinity, was still a century away. But when does the coquetry of superfluous authorship ever find contentment with the ready praise of friends? That critical, haughty Poliziano—a fellow-browser who was far from amiable—had to be shown that the solid secretary possessed a fertile mind for verse, hinting at the potential greatness he might achieve if he were not so consumed by affairs.

What an ineffable moment it is when the man you secretly hate sends you a Latin epigram with a false gender, hendecasyllables with a questionable elision, or poetic figures that are manifest solecisms. That moment had arrived for Poliziano. The secretary had poked his soft head out of the official shell, and the terrible lurking crab descended upon him. Poliziano had used the freedom of a friend to correct Scala's mistake in gendering the *culex* (the mosquito, ubiquitous on the banks of the Arno) as feminine. Scala replied with a bad joke in suitable Latin verses, referencing Poliziano's unsuccessful suit. Poliziano found the verses charming and facetious, though he pitied the fact that they were seriously incorrect. Since Scala claimed to have written them imitating a Greek epigram, Poliziano, on such friendly terms, enclosed a Greek epigram of his own on the same insect. It contained a lively conceit about Venus, Cupid, and the mosquito, based on the zoological fact that the gnat, like Venus, was born from the waters.

In reply, Scala begged to state that his verses were never intended for a scholar with such delicate olfactory senses as Poliziano, the nearest living man to the perfection of the ancients, whose taste was so fastidious that even sturgeon would seem insipid to him. He defended his verses, noting they were written hastily without correction, intended merely as a distraction during the summer heat for himself and friends satisfied with mediocrity. Unlike others who courted publicity through booksellers, Scala was content to keep his work private. Furthermore, he admitted he barely had enough Greek to understand the sense of the epigram Poliziano had sent, let alone taste its elegance. Yet, the epigram was Poliziano's; what more needed to be said? Still, as a postscript, he feared Poliziano's comparison of the gnat to Venus, due to its watery origin, was problematic. Venus might be offended; on the other hand, unless the poet alluded to the doctrine of Thales, the cold, damp origin seemed doubtful for a creature so fond of warmth. Perhaps a fish was a better comparison, or, regarding flight, an eagle; considering the darkness, a bat or an owl would be a less obscure parallel.

Here was a golden opportunity for Poliziano. He wrote that he was unaware Scala had any question of sturgeon, but rather of frogs and gudgeons. He made short work of Scala's defense of his Latin and mangled him terribly over the stupid criticisms he had ventured on the Greek epigram kindly forwarded as a model. These were wretched cavils! Regarding the damp origin of the gnat, there was the authority of Virgil himself, who called it the "alumnus of the waters." As for Scala's comments on the fish, the eagle, and the rest, it was *nihil ad rem*; just because an eagle could fly higher did not mean the gnat could not fly at all. Poliziano was ashamed to dwell on such trivialities and swell a gnat into an elephant, but he added that he had nothing deceitful or double about him, nor was he to be caught by the false blandishments of those who slandered him in his absence. He agreed with a Homeric sentiment on this head, furnishing a Greek quotation to serve as powder for his bullet.

The quarrel could not end there. The logic grew harder to follow, but the secretary became more pompously self-asserting, while the scholarly poet's temper turned more venomous. Poliziano had been generously willing to hold up a mirror, hoping the too-inflated secretary, beholding his own likeness, might cease defending his ignorant Latin against ancient authorities confirmed by centuries of consent. Unless, indeed, he designed to sink in literature as he rose in honors, so that men of letters might feel themselves his equals. In return, Poliziano was begged to examine Scala's writings; nowhere would he find a more devout admiration of antiquity. The secretary was ashamed of the age in which he lived and blushed for it. Some wanted their works exalted to the level of divine monuments, but Scala could not oblige them. As for the honors offensive to the envious, they had been well earned, witnessed by his life since coming to Florence in penury. The elegant scholar replied that he was not surprised Scala found the Age distasteful, since he himself was so distasteful to the Age. Indeed, he had accurately called Scala a "branny monster," formed from the off-scourings of monsters, born amidst the refuse of a mill, and eminently worthy of the long-eared office of turning paternal millstones (*in pistrinis sordibus natus et quidem pistrino dignissimus*).

It was not without reference to Tito's appointed visit that these papers were brought out that day. Here was a new Greek scholar whose accomplishments were to be tested, and on nothing did Scala more desire a dispassionate opinion from persons of superior knowledge than on that Greek epigram of Poliziano's. After sufficient introductory talk concerning Tito's travels, a survey of the gems, and an easy transition from the lamented Lorenzo's eagerness for ancient art to classical tastes in general, it was inevitable to mention Poliziano. He was a man of eminent ability, indeed, but a little too arrogant—assuming to be a Hercules whose office was to destroy all literary monstrosities of the age, writing letters to his elders without signing them as if they were miraculous revelations. Were not his own criticisms often questionable and his tastes perverse? He was fond of saying pungent things about men who thought they wrote like Cicero because they ended every sentence with "esse videtur," yet while boasting of freedom from servile imitation, did he not fall into the other extreme, chasing strange words and affected phrases? Even in his much-lauded *Miscellanea*, was every point tenable? Tito, who had just looked into the *Miscellanea*, found so much agreeable to the secretary that he showed himself quite worthy to be made a judge in the notable correspondence concerning the *culex*. Here was the Greek epigram which Poliziano undoubtedly thought the finest in the world, though he had pretended to believe the "transmarini," the Greeks themselves, would make light of it. Had he not been unintentionally speaking the truth in his false modesty?

Tito was ready and scarified the epigram to Scala's content. Oh, wise young judge! He could doubtless appreciate satire even in the vulgar tongue. Scala, an excellent man who never sought publicity through booksellers, was never unprovided with "hasty uncorrected trifles" as a sort of sherbet for a visitor on a hot day, or a cordial if the weather were cold. He had a few little matters in the shape of Sonnets turning on well-known foibles of Poliziano's, which he would not like to pursue further but which might amuse the company.

Enough: Tito took his leave under an urgent invitation to return. His gems were interesting, especially the agate with the *lusus naturae* inside—a wonderful semblance of Cupid riding a lion—and the "Jew's stone," with a lion-headed serpent encased within. Scala agreed to buy both; the latter as a reinforcement of his preventives against the gout, which gave him such severe twinges that it was plain he needed rings of rare virtue and an amulet worn close under the right breast. But Tito was assured that he himself was more interesting than his gems. He had won his way to the Scala Palace by the recommendation of Bardo de' Bardi, who was indeed Scala's old acquaintance and a worthy scholar, despite his tendency to overvalue himself—a frequent foible in the secretary's friends. Yet, he must come again on the ground of his own manifest accomplishments.

The interview could hardly have ended more auspiciously for Tito. As he walked out at the Porta Pinti, laughing lightly at the affair of the *culex*, he felt that fortune could hardly mean to turn her back on him again at present, since she had taken him by the hand in this decided way.

A Face in the Crowd.

To the northern soul, the dawn of Midsummer is merely a season of dew upon the grass, fresh shoots among the oaks, and a view of the shorn meadow. They rise to greet the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist with the casual indifference of men who measure time by the turning of the wheel rather than the turning of the page. Not so the Florentine, and not so the Florentine of the fifteenth century. To him, the eastern sun breaking over the Arno possessed a specific, electric quality; the bells did not merely ring—they articulated a declaration, announcing the great summer festival of Florence, the day of San Giovanni.

San Giovanni had been the patron of Florence for eight centuries, a lineage stretching back to the Lombard Queen Theodolinda, and according to the chronicler Villani, perhaps even to the days of Constantine and Sylvester. In those ancient times, the Florentines had been so prudent that they did not discard their old idol, Mars, with contempt. Instead, they had consecrated their temple to God and the "Beato Messere Santo Giovanni" while placing Mars respectfully upon a high tower near the river, fearing that if the god of the spear and shield were broken, the city itself would suffer mutation and ruin. But by the fifteenth century, such superstitious caution had vanished. The defences of the Republic were no longer found in the spear and shield, but in craft and coffers. For spear and shield could be hired with gold florins, and on every gold florin, the image of San Giovanni shone.

Much good had come to Florence since that struggle between the old patron and the new. There had been the inevitable quarrels and bloodshed between Guelf and Ghibelline, Black and White, orthodox and heretic; there had been floods, famine, and pestilence. Yet, amidst the chaos, there had been immense wealth and glory. Florence had conquered walled cities mightier than itself, notably Pisa, whose marble buildings and honored masts were now overshadowed by the Florentine name. That name had grown prouder in the courts of Europe and Africa, built upon purest gold coinage, finest dyes, pre-eminent scholarship, and wits of the most serviceable sort for statesmanship and banking. A Pope with a turn for epigram had once called Florentines "the fifth element." And for this high destiny, though it might partly depend on the stars and the Madonna dell'Impruneta, the praise was largely due to San Giovanni, whose image crowned the fair gold florins.

Therefore, it was fitting that the day of San Giovanni should be a day of peculiar rejoicing, ushered in by a vigil kept in strict old Florentine fashion. This vigil involved dancing, street jesting, perhaps some stone-throwing and window-breaking, but above all, sights provided by a city that employed a clever engineer named Cecca. By Cecca's hand, the saints, surrounded by almond-shaped glory and floating clouds with winged cherubs, seemed to bring a piece of heaven down into the narrow streets. More wonderfully, saints of gigantic size, with attendant angels, moved in a slow, mysterious manner along the thoroughfares, like a procession of colossal figures descended from the high domes. The clouds were woven of fine stuff; the saints were mortals supported by firm bars; and those mysterious giants were men of steady brains balancing themselves on stilts, enlarged by huge masks and stuffed shoulders. To the unimaginative Florentine, this was impiety, for in the images of sacred things lay some of the virtue of the sacred things themselves. Yet, the Tuscan mind slipped from the devout to the burlesque as readily as water round an angle. After the saints had done their turn before the gates of San Giovanni, a company of merry black demons, armed with claws and thongs, would perform impromptu farces of bastinadoing and clothes-tearing. That was their way of keeping vigil, and they, too, had descended from the domes.

On the morrow, the great day, the tributary symbols paid by all dependent cities and villages were offered at the shrine of San Giovanni in the octagonal baptistery. Every Florentine, from the white-haired man to the lisping child, would be clothed in their best to honor the great sight. When the sun sloped and the streets cooled, there would be the glorious race or *Corso*, where unsaddled horses, clothed in rich trappings, would run from the Porta al Prato to the Porta Santa Croce. There, the richest *Palii*—velvet and brocade banners with silk linings and gold fringe—would await the winner on a triumphal car. And thereafter, more dancing, weddings, and grand gatherings, with piping, music, and song, so much gladness and ornament that the earth might be mistaken for Paradise.

In this year of 1492, however, it was perhaps a little less easy to make that mistake. Lorenzo the Magnificent was dead, replaced by an arrogant and incautious Piero, an evil change for Florence unless, indeed, the wise horse prefers the bad rider, as he is more easily thrown. Regrets for Lorenzo were giving way to murmured desires for a broader government, one where corruption might be arrested and free play given to everyone's jealousy and ambition. Lorenzo was dead; Pope Innocent was dying; a troublesome Neapolitan succession and an intriguing Milan threatened to set Italy by the ears. The times were likely to be difficult. Still, there was all the more reason for the Republic to keep its religious festivals.

Midsummer morning in 1492 was not less bright than usual. Betimes, the symbolic offerings were assembled at the Piazza della Signoria, where stood the massive Palazzo Vecchio and the spacious Loggia built by Orcagna. The sky made a fairest blue tent, and the bells swung so vigorously that every evil spirit with sense enough to be formidable must have taken flight. Windows and terraced roofs were alive with human faces; sombre stone houses were bright with hanging draperies. The boldly soaring palace tower, the older square tower of the Bargello, and the spire of the neighboring Badia seemed to keep watch above. Below, on the broad polygonal flags of the piazza, was the glorious show of banners, horses with rich trappings, and gigantic *ceri*, or tapers, fitly called towers—strangely aggrandized descendants of the torches by whose faint light the Church worshipped in the Catacombs.

But where the procession was to pause, the magnificent city had provided another tent than the sky. The whole of the Piazza del Duomo, from the octagonal baptistery to the façade of the cathedral, was covered at a height of forty feet or more with blue drapery adorned with yellow lilies and coats of arms. Sheaves of many-colored banners drooped beneath this superincumbent blue, creating a gorgeous, rainbow-lit shelter for the waiting spectators.

One of these spectators was Tito Melema. Bright, in the midst of brightness, he sat at the window of the room above Nello's shop. His right elbow rested on the red drapery hanging from the window-sill, his head supported in a backward position by the right hand, which pressed the curls against his ear. His face wore that bland liveliness, far removed from excitability or gloom, which marks the companion popular alike amongst men and women—the companion who is never obtrusive or noisy from uneasy vanity, and whose brow is never contracted by resentment. He showed no other change from the two months since his first appearance in the weather-stained tunic and hose than an added radiance of good fortune, like the just-perceptible perfecting of a flower after it has drunk a morning's sunbeams.

Close behind him stood the slim figure of Nello in holiday suit, and at his left the younger Cennini—Pietro, the erudite corrector of proof-sheets, not Domenico the practical. Tito looked alternately down on the scene below and upward at the knot of gazers around him. Piero di Cosimo was raising a laugh among them by his grimaces and anathemas at the noise of the bells, declaring that he would bury himself in the most solitary spot of the Valdarno if he were not condemned, as a painter, to lie in wait for the secrets of color caught from the floating of banners.

Tito had just turned his laughing face away from the whimsical painter to look down at the small drama among the checkered border of spectators when, at the angle of the marble steps in front of the Duomo, nearly opposite Nello's shop, he saw a man's face upturned towards him. It fixed on him a gaze that seemed to have more meaning than the ordinary passing observation of a stranger. It was a face with a tonsured head, rising above the black mantle and white tunic of a Dominican friar—a common sight in Florence. But the glance had something peculiar in it for Tito. There was a faint suggestion, certainly not of an unpleasant kind. Yet, what pleasant association had he ever had with monks? None. The glance and the suggestion hardly took longer than a flash of lightning.

"Nello!" said Tito, hastily, but immediately added, in a tone of disappointment, "Ah, he has turned round. It was that tall, thin friar who is going up the steps. I wanted you to tell me if you knew aught of him?"

"One of the Frati Predicatori," said Nello, carelessly; "you don't expect me to know the private history of the crows."

"I seem to remember something about his face," said Tito. "It is an uncommon face."

"What? You thought it might be our Fra Girolamo? Too tall; and he never shows himself in that chance way."

"Besides, that loud-barking 'hound of the Lord' is not in Florence just now," said Francesco Cei, the popular poet; "he has taken Piero de' Medici's hint to carry his railing prophecies on a journey for a while."

"The Frate neither rails nor prophesies against any man," said a middle-aged personage seated at the other corner of the window; "he only prophesies against vice. If you think that an attack on your poems, Francesco, it is not the Frate's fault."

"Ah, he's gone into the Duomo now," said Tito, who had watched the figure eagerly. "No, I was not under that mistake, Nello. Your Fra Girolamo has a high nose and a large under-lip. I saw him once—he is not handsome; but this man..."

"Truce to your descriptions!" said Cennini. "Hark! See! Here come the horsemen and the banners. That standard, carried on the horse with white trappings—that with the red eagle holding the green dragon between his talons, and the red lily over the eagle—is the Gonfalon of the Guelf party, and those cavaliers close round it are the chief officers of the Guelf party. That is one of our proudest banners, grumble as we may; it means the triumph of the Guelfs, which means the triumph of Florentine will, which means triumph of the popolani."

"Nay, go on, Cennini," said the middle-aged man, "which means triumph of the fat popolani over the lean, which again means triumph of the fattest popolano over those who are less fat."

"Cronaca, you are becoming sententious," said the printer. "Fra Girolamo's preaching will spoil you, and make you take life by the wrong handle. Trust me, your cornices will lose half their beauty if you begin to mingle bitterness with them; that is the *maniera Tedesca* which you used to declaim against when you came from Rome."

"That is a goodly show of cavaliers," said Tito, who had learned by this time the best way to please Florentines; "but are there not strangers among them? I see foreign costumes."

"Assuredly," said Cennini; "you see there the Orators from France, Milan, and Venice, and behind them are English and German nobles; for it is customary that all foreign visitors of distinction pay their tribute to San Giovanni in the train of that gonfalon. For my part, I think our Florentine cavaliers sit their horses as well as any of those cut-and-thrust northerners, whose wits lie in their heels and saddles; and for yon Venetian, I fancy he would feel himself more at ease on the back of a dolphin. We ought to know something of horsemanship, for we excel all Italy in the sports of the Giostra, and the money we spend on them. But you will see a finer show of our chief men by-and-by, Melema; my brother himself will be among the officers of the Zecca."

"The banners are the better sight," said Piero di Cosimo, forgetting the noise in his delight at the winding stream of color as the tributary standards advanced. "The Florentine men are so-so; they make but a sorry show at this distance with their patch of sallow flesh-tint above the black garments; but those banners with their velvet, and satin, and minever, and brocade, and their endless play of delicate light and shadow!—*Va*! your human talk and doings are a tame jest; the only passionate life is in form and colour."

"Ay, Piero, if Satanasso could paint, thou wouldst sell thy soul to learn his secrets," said Nello. "But there is little likelihood of it, seeing the blessed angels themselves are such poor hands at chiaroscuro, if one may judge from their *capo-d'opera*, the Madonna Nunziata."

"There go the banners of Pisa and Arezzo," said Cennini. "Ay, Messer Pisano, it is no use for you to look sullen; you may as well carry your banner to our San Giovanni with a good grace. 'Pisans false, Florentines blind'—the second half of that proverb will hold no longer. There come the ensigns of our subject towns and signories, Melema; they will all be suspended in San Giovanni until this day next year, when they will give place to new ones."

"They are a fair sight," said Tito; "

A Man's Ransom.

The Piazza was alive with the heat of the midday sun, and Tito moved swiftly through the throng, his steps carrying him from the square toward the Corso degli Adimari. Though he offered only a casual answer to Nello's inquiry regarding his recent encounter, a quiet longing stirred within him. As he navigated the crowd, his mind drifted briefly to the pair of blue eyes he had seen gazing up from beneath the white linen hood of a country woman at the festival. He knew well that face belonged to Tessa, yet he chose silence. Why should Nello concern himself with such trivialities? Tito possessed a natural aptitude for reticence, a talent that operated without conscious intent. Like many who find concealment effortless, he sometimes hid things that required no hiding at all, such as the mere sight of a flock of crows.

However, this fleeting thought of Tessa was quickly overshadowed by a more persistent memory: the face of the friar, pale and fanatical, who had stared at him with an intensity that felt irrecoverably linked to his own past. Why had that sickly figure singled him out? Where, in all his travels, had he seen such a visage before? It was folly to dwell on such vague, cobweb-like impressions; they demanded to be swept away. By the time he turned from the Corso into a narrow side street, his thoughts had shifted entirely. He cared only that the sun burned high and that the procession had delayed him from his intended visit to the room in the Via de' Bardi. He knew his arrival was anxiously awaited there.

In his imagination, he rehearsed the scene of his entrance: the blind man's face, usually obscured, glowing with a diffuse joy like light filtering through a translucent lamp; the faint, transient flush on Romola's cheeks and neck, which added a delicate, feminine charm to her inherent majesty, enhanced by a boyish frankness in her gaze and smile. Together, they were the finest companions, circling the blind man's chair. She appealed to him constantly, and he informed her, yet he felt a strange subjugation to Romola, bowing before the simplicity of her nature. For the first time, he experienced a loving awe in the presence of noble womanhood—a reverence akin to the ancient worship of a great goddess, whose power was deeper and more primordial than mere knowledge. They had never been alone, and he could conjure no probable image of love between them. He could only imagine wildly, though he knew it impossible, that one day Romola would speak her love.

He recalled a day in Greece, leaning against a sun-drenched wall, when a small peasant girl with dark eyes had crept closer until she shyly asked for a kiss, offering her round olive cheek with innocent trust. Tito was accustomed to love arriving in such unsought ways. But Romola's love would never come thus; would it ever come at all? Yet, it remained the highest apple upon which his mind had fixed itself. In his fresh youth, though not yet passionate, he was deeply impressionable. It was as inevitable that he should feel love for Romola as it was for white irises to reflect in a sunlit stream. He possessed no vanity, yet he held an intimate sense that she stood far above him. Many men have felt this same distance before a large-eyed, simple child.

Nevertheless, Tito had achieved rapid success. Some men might have grown presuming, or at least entertained the hope of becoming Romola's husband, or even convinced her father, Bartolommeo Scala, of such a future. His first meeting with the secretary had indeed marked the beginning of growing favor. Politian, professor of both Greek and Latin in Florence, found himself without a rival since the departure of Demetrio Calcondila to Milan. Friends wished to teach the renowned scholar humility, and it was agreed that Tito should be supported in a Greek chair, following the precedent set by Lorenzo the Magnificent for Calcondila. There was nothing invidious in this arrangement, only a zeal for true learning and the education of Florentine youth.

Tito sailed under the fairest breeze. He convinced fair judges that his talents matched his fortune, wearing his good luck with such ease and lack of pretense that no offense was taken. He was destined for the best Florentine society, a circle where fine plate abounded and the Signory permitted the wearing of rich brocade. Where else would a handsome young scholar be welcomed, one who could play the lute and sing a gay song? His bright face, easy smile, and liquid voice seemed to bring a holiday to the city, making the work-worn and the sad ashamed of their own gloom. He was a professor likely to render the Greek classics amiable to the sons of great houses.

This was not all his fortune; he had sold his jewels, keeping only one ring, and now held five hundred gold florins. Yet, the moment he first possessed this sum marked the crisis of the first serious struggle his facile, good-humored nature had ever known. An importunate thought, previously seen only as a shadow, suddenly grasped him. He was forced to pause and decide: would he surrender to duty, or offer a refusal with irrevocable consequences?

It was in the room above Nello's shop, which Tito now rented, that the elder Cennini handed him the final portion of the funds on behalf of Bernardo Rucellai, the buyer of the two precious gems.

"Ecco, giovane mio!" the respectable printer and goldsmith declared. "You now possess a pretty little fortune. If you will take my advice, let me place your florins in a safe quarter where they may increase, rather than slipping through your fingers for banquets and follies common among our Florentine youth. It has become the fashion of scholars, especially when, like our Pietro Crinito, they believe their scholarship needs scenting and embroidery, to squander with one hand until they must beg with the other. I have brought you the money, and you are free to make a wise or unwise choice; I shall see which way the balance tips. We Florentines hold no man a member of an Art until he has shown his skill and been matriculated; and no man is matriculated to the art of life until he has been well tempted. If you decide to put your florins out to usury, let me know tomorrow. A scholar may marry, and should have something in readiness for the *morgen-cap*. Addio."

As Cennini closed the door, Tito turned, the smile fading from his face, and fixed his eyes on the table where the florins lay. He made no other movement, standing with his thumbs in his belt, looking down in a transfixed state, his consciousness concentrated on some inward image.

"A man's ransom!" Who had said that five hundred florins was more than a man's ransom? If, under this midday sun on some hot coast far away, a man somewhat aged, yet possessing high thoughts and a passionate heart—a man who had once rescued a boy from beggary and cruelty, raising him tenderly as a father—were now toiling as a slave, hewing wood and drawing water, perhaps struck down because he lacked agility? If that man were thinking, "Tito will find me; he need only carry our manuscripts and gems to Venice; he will raise money and never rest until he finds me"? If that were certain, could Tito, seeing the price of the gems before him, say, "I will stay in Florence, fanned by soft airs of promised love and prosperity; I will not risk myself for his sake"? No, surely not, *if it were certain*.

But nothing was certain. The galley had been captured by a Turkish vessel on its way to Delos, known only by the report of the companion galley that had escaped. There had been resistance, probable bloodshed, and a man seen falling overboard. Who were the survivors, and what had befallen them amidst the multitude of possibilities? Had not Tito himself suffered shipwreck and narrowly escaped drowning? He had good cause to feel the omnipresence of casualties threatening all projects with futility. Rumors of pirate settlements in Delos were unreliable. What would likely happen if he left Florence for Venice, obtained authoritative letters, and set out for the Archipelago? Why, that he himself would be seized, spend all his florins on preliminaries, and become again a destitute wanderer with no gems to sell.

Tito had a clearer vision of this disastrous result than of the moment he might find his father and carry him deliverance. It would surely be an unfairness for him, in his full ripe youth, to whom life had hitherto held some of the restraint of a school, to turn his back on promised love and distinction, perhaps never to be visited by that promise again. "And yet," he told himself, "if I were certain that Baldassarre Calvo was alive, and that I could free him by whatever exertions or perils, I would go now—now that I have the money. I would go now to Bardo and Bartolommeo Scala and tell them the whole truth."

He did not explicitly tell himself that if those two men knew the truth, he would have no alternative but to search for his benefactor, the rightful owner of the gems, whom he had always equivocally spoken of as "lost." He did not acknowledge that Greeks of distinction had made sacrifices, undertaken repeated voyages, and sought aid from crowned and mitred heads to free relatives from Turkish slavery. Public opinion did not regard this as exceptional virtue.

This was his first real colloquy with himself. He had followed the impulses of the moment, one of which had been to conceal half the truth. He had never considered this part of his conduct long enough to face the consciousness of his motives for concealment. What was the use of telling the whole? It was true, the thought had crossed his mind several times since leaving Nauplia that it was a great relief to be quit of Baldassarre, and he would have liked to know *who* had fallen overboard. But such thoughts spring inevitably from a relationship that has become irksome. Baldassarre was exacting and had grown stranger as he aged; he constantly scrutinized Tito's mind to see if it met his own exaggerated expectations. Age—the age of a thickset, heavy-browed, bald man beyond sixty, whose intensity and eagerness in the grasp of ideas had long taken the character of monotony and repetition—could be viewed from many angles without being found attractive. Such a man, stranded among new acquaintances, unless he possessed the philosopher's stone, would hardly find rank, youth, and beauty at his feet. The feelings that gather fervor from novelty would be of little help in making the world a home for dimmed and faded human beings. Unless they retained a love rooted in memories, distilling perpetually the sweet balms of fidelity and forbearing tenderness, they were widowed of all affection.

But surely such memories were not absent from Tito's mind? Far in the backward vista of his remembered life, when he was only seven years old, Baldassarre had rescued him from blows, taking him to a home that seemed like opened paradise, filled with sweet food and soothing caresses, all centered on Baldassarre's knee. From that time until the hour they parted, Tito had been the sole center of Baldassarre's fatherly cares.

He had been docile, pliable, quick of apprehension, and ready to acquire: a very bright, lovely boy, a youth of splendid grace, who seemed quite without vices, as if that beautiful form represented a vitality so exquisitely poised and balanced that it could know no uneasy desires, no unrest—a radiant presence for a lonely man to have won for himself. If he was silent when his father expected a response, he did not look moody; if he declined some labor, he flung himself down with such a charming, half-smiling, half-pleading air that the pleasure of looking at him made amends to one who had watched his growth with a sense of claim and possession. The curves of Tito's mouth held ineffable good humor. And then, the quick talent to which everything came readily, from philosophical systems to the rhymes of a street ballad caught up at a hearing! Would anyone have said that Tito had not made a rich return to his benefactor, or that his gratitude and affection would fail on any great demand?

He did not admit that his gratitude had failed; but *it was not certain* that Baldassarre was in slavery, nor certain that he was living.

"Do I not owe something to myself?" Tito said inwardly, with a slight movement of his shoulders, the first he had made since turning to look down at the florins. "Before I quit everything and incur again all the risks of which I am even now weary, I must at least have a reasonable hope. Am I to spend my life in a wandering search? *I believe he is dead.* Cennini was right about my florins: I will place them in his hands tomorrow."

When, the next morning, Tito put this determination into action, he had chosen his color in the game and given an inevitable bent to his wishes. He had made it impossible that he should not from henceforth desire it to be the truth that his father was dead; impossible that he should not be tempted to baseness rather than that the precise facts of his conduct should not remain forever concealed.

Under every guilty secret is hidden a brood of guilty wishes, whose unwholesome, infecting life is cherished by the darkness. The contaminating effect of deeds often lies less in the commission than in the consequent adjustment of our desires—the enlistment of self-interest on the side of falsity. On the other hand, the purifying influence of public confession springs from the fact that by it the hope in lies is forever swept away, and the soul recovers the noble attitude of simplicity.

Besides, in this first distinct colloquy with himself, the ideas which had previously been scattered and interrupted had now concentrated. The little rills of selfishness had united to make a channel, so that they could never again meet with the same resistance. Hitherto, Tito had left in vague indecision the question whether, with the means in his power, he would not return to ascertain his father's fate. He had now made a definite excuse to himself for not taking that course; he had avowed to himself a choice which he would have been ashamed to av

Under the Plane-Tree.

Three weeks had passed since Tito handed his florins to Cennini, and as he set out toward the Via de' Bardi, he wore the outward marks of a mind entirely at ease. How could it be otherwise? His nature was too buoyant, too unburdened by foresight, for the hidden dangers or distant terrors of the world to seize him. Turning from the hot sun into the cool shadow of a narrow street, he removed his black cloth cap, pushing back his brown curls to court the breeze. There was no deceit upon his brow, nor any trace of naive simplicity; it was merely a finely formed, smooth young forehead. His slow, absent glance at the upper windows of the houses possessed neither cunning nor innocence, but simply the wide, unwearying breadth of a youthful gaze, framed by dark lashes and a cerulean-white angle of the eye. Did his face attract or repel depending on the observer's mood? Was he a cipher with many keys? The strong, unmistakable expression of his entire person was a negative one, perfectly truthful, declaring an absence of restless vanity or uneasy claims. It commanded a willing tribute of admiration from the holiday-makers crowding the streets.

By now, the stir of the Festa was felt even in the smallest alleys. The throng, once concentrated for the procession, now streamed in all directions, chasing new distractions. These intervals of a festival are precisely when the vague animal spirits of a crowd become petulant, ready to sacrifice a stray individual for the greater happiness of the many. As Tito entered the neighborhood of San Martino, he found the crowd denser. Near the hostelry of the *Bertucce*, or Baboons, a knot of people had gathered around some arresting object. Tito prepared to turn aside when, amidst loud laughter, his ear caught a distressed childish voice crying, "Loose me! Holy Virgin, help me!" This sound determined him to push his way into the knot of gazers.

He perceived the voice came from a young peasant girl, her white hood fallen off in her struggle to free her hands from the grasp of a man in the parti-colored dress of a *cerretano*, or conjuror. The conjuror made laughing attempts to soothe and cajole her, carrying with him the amused sympathy of the spectators, who argued with the girl against her obstinacy using various terms for "simpleton" rich in the Florentine dialect. At first, the girl's face was turned away, revealing only her light-brown hair plaited with a long silver pin. But the struggle brought her face opposite Tito's, and he saw the baby features of Tessa, her blue eyes filled with tears and her lower lip quivering. Tessa saw *him*, and through the mist of her swelling tears, a sudden hope beamed in her face, like that of a child held by a stranger who spots a familiar hand reaching out.

In an instant, Tito pushed through the barrier of bystanders, whose curiosity made them step aside at his sudden interference. He grasped Tessa's waist and said, "Loose this child! What right have you to hold her against her will?"

The conjuror—a man with a face where the angles of the eyes, eyebrows, nostrils, and jaw all tended upward—showed his small, regular teeth in an impish but not ill-natured grin. He released Tessa's hands, stretching his own backward, shrugging his shoulders in a half-apologetic, half-protesting manner.

"I mean the ragazza no evil in the world, Messere: ask this respectable company," the conjuror said. "I was only going to show them a few samples of my skill, in which this little damsel might have helped me the better because of her kitten face, which would have assured them of open dealing; and I had promised her a lapful of confetti as a reward. But what then? Messer has doubtless better confetti at hand, and she knows it."

A general laugh among the bystanders accompanied these words, raised probably by the look of relief and confidence with which Tessa clung to Tito's arm as he drew her close. She cared only for the laugh as she might have cared for the roar of wild beasts from which she was escaping, attaching no meaning to it. But Tito, having no sooner got her on his arm than he foresaw some embarrassment in the situation, hastened to clear himself from observers who, having been despoiled of an expected amusement, were sure to re-establish the balance by jests.

"See, see, little one! here is your hood," said the conjuror, throwing the bit of white drapery over Tessa's head. "*Orsù*, bear me no malice; come back to me when Messere can spare you."

"Ah! Maestro Vaiano, she'll come back presently, as the toad said to the harrow," called out one of the spectators, seeing how Tessa started and shrank at the action.

Tito pushed vigorously toward the corner of a side-street, a little vexed at this delay in his progress to the Via de' Bardi, intending to get rid of the poor little contadina as soon as possible. But the next street had its own passengers inclined to make holiday remarks on so unusual a pair. They had no sooner entered it than he said, in a kind but hurried manner, "Now, little one, where were you going? Are you come by yourself to the Festa?"

"Ah, no!" said Tessa, looking frightened and distressed again; "I have lost my mother in the crowd—her and my father-in-law. They will be angry—he will beat me. It was in the crowd in San Pulinari—somebody pushed me along and I couldn't stop myself, so I got away from them. Oh, I don't know where they're gone! Please, don't leave me!"

Her eyes swelled with tears again, and she ended with a sob.

Tito hurried along; the Church of the Badia was not far off. They could enter it by the cloister that opened at the back, and in the church he could talk to Tessa—perhaps leave her. No! it was an hour when the church was not open. They paused under the shelter of the cloister, and he said, "Have you no cousin or friend in Florence, my little Tessa, whose house you could find; or are you afraid of walking by yourself since you have been frightened by the conjuror? I am in a hurry to get to Oltrarno, but if I could take you anywhere near—"

"Oh, I *am* frightened: he was the devil—I know he was. And I don't know where to go. I have nobody: and my mother meant to have her dinner somewhere, and I don't know where. Holy Madonna! I shall be beaten."

The corners of her pouting mouth went down piteously, and the poor little bosom with the beads on it above the green serge gown heaved so that a loud sob *would* come, and the big tears fell as if making up for lost time. Here was a situation! It would have been brutal to leave her, and Tito's nature was all gentleness. He wished at that moment that he had not been expected in the Via de' Bardi. As he saw her lifting up her holiday apron to catch the hurrying tears, he laid his hand on the apron, rubbed one of her cheeks, and kissed the baby-like roundness.

"My poor little Tessa! leave off crying. Let us see what can be done. Where is your home—where do you live?"

There was no answer, but the sobs began to subside a little and the drops to fall less quickly.

"Come! I'll take you a little way, if you'll tell me where you want to go."

The apron fell, and Tessa's face began to look as contented as a cherub's budding from a cloud. The diabolical conjuror, the anger, and the beating seemed a long way off.

"I think I'll go home, if you'll take me," she said, in a half whisper, looking up at Tito with wide blue eyes and something sweeter than a smile—with a childlike calm.

"Come, then, little one," said Tito, in a caressing tone, putting her arm within his again. "Which way is it?"

"Beyond Peretola—where the large pear-tree is."

"Peretola? Out at which gate, pazzarella? I am a stranger, you must remember."

"Out at the Por del Prato," said Tessa, moving along with a very fast hold on Tito's arm.

He did not know all the turnings well enough to venture on an attempt at choosing the quietest streets; and besides, it occurred to him that where the passengers were most numerous there was, perhaps, the most chance of meeting with Monna Ghita and finding an end to his knight-errant-ship. So he made straight for Porta Rossa and on to Ognissanti, showing his usual bright propitiatory face to the mixed observers who threw their jests at him and his little heavy-shod maiden with much liberality. Mingled with the more decent holiday-makers were frolicsome apprentices, rather envious of his good fortune; bold-eyed women with the badge of the yellow veil; beggars who thrust forward their caps for alms in derision at Tito's evident haste; dicers, sharpers, and loungers of the worst sort; boys whose tongues were used to wag in concert at the most brutal street games. For the streets of Florence were not always a moral spectacle in those times, and Tessa's terror at being lost in the crowd was not wholly unreasonable.

When they reached the Piazza d'Ognissanti, Tito slackened his pace. They were both heated with their hurried walk, and here was a wider space where they could take breath. They sat down on one of the stone benches frequent against the walls of old Florentine houses.

"Holy Virgin!" said Tessa; "I am glad we have got away from those women and boys; but I was not frightened, because you could take care of me."

"Pretty little Tessa!" said Tito, smiling at her. "What makes you feel so safe with me?"

"Because you are so beautiful—like the people going into Paradise: they are all good."

"It is a long while since you had your breakfast, Tessa," said Tito, seeing some stalls near with fruit and sweetmeats upon them. "Are you hungry?"

"Yes, I think I am—if you will have some too."

Tito bought some apricots, cakes, and comfits, and put them into her apron.

"Come," he said, "let us walk on to the Prato, and then perhaps you will not be afraid to go the rest of the way alone."

"But you will have some of the apricots and things," said Tessa, rising obediently and gathering up her apron as a bag for her store.

"We will see," said Tito aloud; and to himself he said, "Here is a little contadina who might inspire a better idyl than Lorenzo de' Medici's 'Nencia da Barberino,' that Nello's friends rave about; if I were only a Theocritus, or had time to cultivate the necessary experience by unseasonable walks of this sort! However, the mischief is done now: I am so late already that another half-hour will make no difference. Pretty little pigeon!"

"We have a garden and plenty of pears," said Tessa, "and two cows, besides the mules; and I'm very fond of them. But my father-in-law is a cross man: I wish my mother had not married him. I think he is wicked; he is very ugly."

"And does your mother let him beat you, poverina? You said you were afraid of being beaten."

"Ah, my mother herself scolds me: she loves my young sister better, and thinks I don't do work enough. Nobody speaks kindly to me, only the Pievano (parish priest) when I go to confession. And the men in the Mercato laugh at me and make fun of me. Nobody ever kissed me and spoke to me as you do; just as I talk to my little black-faced kid, because I'm very fond of it."

It seemed not to have entered Tessa's mind that there was any change in Tito's appearance since the morning he begged the milk from her, and that he looked now like a personage for whom she must summon her little stock of reverent words and signs. He had impressed her too differently from any human being who had ever come near her before, for her to make any comparison of details; she took no note of his dress. He was simply a voice and a face to her, something come from Paradise into a world where most things seemed hard and angry; and she prattled with as little restraint as if he had been an imaginary companion born of her own lovingness and the sunshine.

They had now reached the Prato, which at that time was a large open space within the walls, where the Florentine youth played at their favorite *Calcio*—a peculiar kind of football—and otherwise exercised themselves. At this mid-day time it was forsaken and quiet to the very gates, where a tent had been erected in preparation for the race. On the border of this wide meadow, Tito paused and said—

"Now, Tessa, you will not be frightened if I leave you to walk the rest of the way by yourself. Addio! Shall I come and buy a cup of milk from you in the Mercato to-morrow morning, to see that you are quite safe?"

He added this question in a soothing tone, as he saw her eyes widening sorrowfully and the corners of her mouth falling. She said nothing at first; she only opened her apron and looked down at her apricots and sweetmeats. Then she looked up at him again and said complainingly—

"I thought you would have some, and we could sit down under a tree outside the gate, and eat them together."

"Tessa, Tessa, you little siren, you would ruin me," said Tito, laughing, and kissing both her cheeks. "I ought to have been in the Via de' Bardi long ago. No!

When Fra Luca fell silent, Tito remained standing beside him, paralyzed by indecision. It was only after the crowd of pilgrims had thinned and the friar rose to walk slowly toward the church of Santa Felicita that Tito followed, turning his steps down the Via de' Bardi.

"If this monk is truly Florentine," he murmured to himself, "and if he intends to stay in Florence, then everything must be revealed." He sensed a new crisis had arrived, yet he was not so visibly shaken that he could not proceed with his scheduled visit to Bardo to apologize for his recent absence. Tito's gift for concealment was rapidly evolving from a passive trait into an active weapon. It was conceivable—perhaps inevitable—that he could now accept the changed circumstances openly and confess Baldassarre's existence. However, doing so would cast a harsh retroactive light on his initial silence, framing it as a calculated equivocation designed to evade a recognized claim. Furthermore, it would expose his quiet settlement of funds and investments, actions taken while his benefactor's fate remained unverified. For the moment, prudence dictated acting as if nothing had occurred. He would suspend decisive thought; the night offered ample time for meditation, and no one would know the exact hour he received the letter.

He ascended to the second-floor room where Romola and her father sat amidst parchment and marble, isolated from the street's holiday bustle just as they were on ordinary days. Tito entered with a countenance only slightly brighter than usual, masking a regret at his lateness—a regret requiring no proof, since he had sacrificed the spectacle of the Corso to express it. He then endeavored to inject extra animation into the evening conversation, though his consciousness operated like a complex machine, depositing thoughts entirely distinct from the flow of speech. By the time he descended the stone stairs and emerged from the grim door into the starlight, his mind had genuinely reached a new stage in forming a purpose.

The following day, once freed from his professorial duties, he turned up the Via del Cocomero toward the convent of San Marco, his purpose now fully crystallized. He intended to ascertain from Fra Luca precisely what he suspected of the truth and on what grounds; furthermore, he needed to know how long the friar planned to remain at San Marco. With this fuller knowledge, he hoped to craft a statement that would spare him the necessity of leaving Florence. Tito had never before had occasion to fabricate an ingenious lie, yet the opportunity had arrived—the specific circumstance that always breeds tacit falsehood. His ingenuity was ready. He had convinced himself that he was not bound to search for Baldassarre. He had once declared that upon receiving a fair assurance of his father's existence and whereabouts, he would unhesitatingly pursue him. But why, after all, was he bound to go? What, upon close inspection, was the ultimate end of life but to extract the maximum sum of pleasure? Was not his own blooming existence a promise of incomparably greater joy—not merely for himself, but for others—than the withered, wintry life of a man past the age of keen enjoyment, whose ideas had stiffened into barren rigidity? Those ideas had been sown in the fresh soil of Tito's mind; they were lively germs there. That was the proper order of things—the order of nature, which treats maturity as merely a nesting ground for youth. Baldassarre had done his work, had drawn his fill of life; Tito declared it was his turn now.

The prospect loomed vague yet enticing: "I think they are taking me to Antioch." Here was a vista! After a long voyage, to spend months, perhaps years, in a search for which there was no guarantee it would not prove vain, and to leave behind at the starting point a life of distinction and love. And if he found anything, he would encounter the old, exacting companionship known by rote. Certainly, the gems—and therefore the florins—were, in a narrow legal sense, Baldassarre's. But in that larger, more radically natural view where the world belongs to youth and strength, they belonged to whoever could extract the most pleasure from them. He was conscious that this was not the sentiment engendered by the complicated play of human feelings in society. The men around him would expect him to immediately apply those florins to his benefactor's rescue. But what was the sentiment of society? A mere tangle of anomalous traditions and opinions, which no wise man would take as a guide, except so far as his own comfort was concerned. Did he care for the florins save perhaps for Romola's sake? He would give them up readily enough. It was the joy due to him, hovering close to his lips, which he felt he was not bound to thrust away and thus travel on, thirsting. Any maxims requiring a man to fling away the good needed to make existence sweet were merely the lining of human selfishness turned outward; they were crafted by men who desired others to sacrifice themselves for their sake. He would rather that Baldassarre should not suffer; he liked no one to suffer. But could any philosophy prove to him that he was bound to care for another's suffering more than his own? To do so, he must have loved Baldassarre devotedly, and he did not. Was that his fault? Gratitude, seen closely, made no valid claim. His father's life would have been dreary without him; were we convicted of a debt to men for the pleasures they give themselves?

Once he began to explain away Baldassarre's claim, Tito's thought showed itself as active as a virulent acid, eating its rapid way through all the tissues of sentiment. His mind was destitute of that dread erroneously decried as nothing higher than a man's animal care for his own skin: the awe of Divine Nemesis felt by religious pagans, and, though taking a more positive form under Christianity, still felt by the mass of mankind simply as a vague fear of anything called wrongdoing. Such terror of the unseen was so far above mere sensual cowardice that it would annihilate it; it was the initial recognition of a moral law restraining desire, checking the hard, bold scrutiny of imperfect thought into obligations that could never be proved to possess sanctity in the absence of feeling. "It is good," sang the old Eumenides in Aeschylus, "that fear should sit as the guardian of the soul, forcing it into wisdom—it is good that men should carry a threatening shadow in their hearts under the full sunshine; else, how should they learn to revere the right?" That guardianship might become needless, but only when all outward law has become needless—only when duty and love have united in one stream to make a common force.

As Tito entered the outer cloister of San Marco and inquired for Fra Luca, there was no shadowy presentiment in his mind; he felt himself too cultured and skeptical for such fears. He had been nurtured in contempt for the tales of priests whose impudent lives were proverbial, and in erudite familiarity with disputes concerning the Chief Good, which he considered ultimately a matter of taste. Yet fear was a strong element in Tito's nature—the fear of what he believed or saw was likely to rob him of pleasure. He harbored a definite fear that Fra Luca might be the means of driving him from Florence.

"Fra Luca? Ah, he has gone to Fiesole—to the Dominican monastery there. He was taken on a litter in the cool of the morning. The poor Brother is very ill. Could you leave a message for him?"

This answer came from a *fra converso*, or lay brother, whose accent plainly marked him as a raw countryman, and whose dull glance implied no curiosity.

"Thanks; my business can wait."

Tito turned away with a sense of relief. "This friar is not likely to live," he said to himself. "I saw he was worn to a shadow. And at Fiesole there will be nothing to recall me to his mind. Besides, if he should return, my explanation will serve as well then as now. But I wish I knew what it was about his face that recalled to me."

The Prize is Nearly Grasped.

Tito moved with a light, buoyant step, the shadow of fear having vanished from his mind. The usual joyousness of his nature returned to dominate his spirit, and he hurried to see Romola. Yet, as he approached, he felt a pang of hesitation. Romola's life appeared to him a mirror of that loving, pitying devotion and patient endurance of tedious duties from which he had previously shrank. He was not, however, out of love with goodness, nor prepared to plunge into vice; he was still in his fresh youth, with soft pulses responsive to all charm and loveliness. He retained a healthy appetite for ordinary human joys, and the poison could only work upon him by degrees. Though he had sold himself to evil, life seemed so nearly unchanged to him that he was unconscious of the bond he had forged. He intended for all things to proceed as they had before, both within and without him; he meant to win golden opinions through meritorious exertion, ingenious learning, and amiable compliance. He was not going to do anything that would throw him out of harmony with the beings he cared for. And he cared supremely for Romola; he wished to have her for his beautiful and loving wife. While there might be wealthier alliances within the reach of his successful accomplishments, there was no woman in all Florence like Romola. When she was near him, looking at him with her sincere hazel eyes, he was subdued by a delicious influence as strong and inevitable as those musical vibrations which take possession of us with a rhythmic empire that no sooner ceases than we desire it to begin again.

As he trod the stone stairs, still outside the door with no one but Maso near him, the influence seemed to have begun its work merely through the nearness of anticipation.

"Welcome, Tito mio," said the old man's voice before Tito had spoken. There was a new vigor in the voice, a new cheerfulness in the blind face, since that first interview more than two months ago. "You have brought fresh manuscript, doubtless; but since we were talking last night I have had new ideas: we must take a wider scope—we must go back upon our footsteps."

Tito, paying his homage to Romola as he advanced, went, as his custom was, straight to Bardo's chair. He placed his hand in the palm held out to receive it, positioning himself on the cross-legged leather seat with scrolled ends, close to Bardo's elbow.

"Yes," he said in his gentle way. "I have brought the new manuscript, but that can wait your pleasure. I have young limbs, you know, and can walk back up the hill without any difficulty."

He did not look at Romola as he said this, but he knew quite well that her eyes were fixed on him with delight.

"That is well said, my son." Bardo had already addressed Tito in this way once or twice of late. "And I perceive with gladness that you do not shrink from labour, without which, the poet has wisely said, life has given nothing to mortals. It is too often the 'palma sine pulvere,' the prize of glory without the dust of the race, that attracts young ambition. But what says the Greek? 'In the morning of life, work; in the mid-day, give counsel; in the evening, pray.' It is true, I might be thought to have reached that helpless evening; but not so, while I have counsel within me which is yet unspoken. For my mind, as I have often said, was shut up as by a dam; the plenteous waters lay dark and motionless; but you, my Tito, have opened a duct for them, and they rush forward with a force that surprises myself. And now, what I want is, that we should go over our preliminary ground again, with a wider scheme of comment and illustration: otherwise I may lose opportunities which I now see retrospectively, and which may never occur again. You mark what I am saying, Tito?"

He had just stooped to reach his manuscript, which had rolled down, and Bardo's jealous ear was alive to the slight movement.

Tito might have been excused for shrugging his shoulders at the prospect before him, but he was not naturally impatient; moreover, he had been bred up in that laborious erudition, at once minute and copious, which was the chief intellectual task of the age; and with Romola near, he was floated along by waves of agreeable sensation that made everything seem easy.

"Assuredly," he said. "You wish to enlarge your comments on certain passages we have cited."

"Not only so; I wish to introduce an occasional *excursus*, where we have noticed an author to whom I have given special study; for I may die too soon to achieve any separate work. And this is not a time for scholarly integrity and well-sifted learning to lie idle, when it is not only rash ignorance that we have to fear, but when there are men like Calderino, who, as Poliziano has well shown, have recourse to impudent falsities of citation to serve the ends of their vanity and secure a triumph to their own mistakes. Wherefore, my Tito, I think it not well that we should let slip the occasion that lies under our hands. And now we will turn back to the point where we have cited the passage from Thucydides, and I wish you, by way of preliminary, to go with me through all my notes on the Latin translation made by Lorenzo Valla, for which the incomparable Pope Nicholas the Fifth—with whose personal notice I was honoured while I was yet young, and when he was still Thomas of Sarzana—paid him (I say not unduly) the sum of five hundred gold scudi. But inasmuch as Valla, though otherwise of dubious fame, is held in high honour for his severe scholarship, whence the epigrammatist has jocosely said of him that since he went among the shades, Pluto himself has not dared to speak in the ancient languages, it is the more needful that his name should not be as a stamp warranting false wares; and therefore I would introduce an *excursus* on Thucydides, wherein my castigations of Valla's text may find a fitting place. My Romola, thou wilt reach the needful volumes—thou knowest them—on the fifth shelf of the cabinet."

Tito rose at the same moment with Romola, saying, "I will reach them, if you will point them out," and followed her hastily into the adjoining small room, where the walls were also covered with ranges of books in perfect order.

"There they are," said Romola, pointing upward. "Every book is just where it was when my father ceased to see them."

Tito stood by her without hastening to reach the books. They had never been in this room together before.

"I hope," she continued, turning her eyes full on Tito, with a look of grave confidence—"I hope he will not weary you; this work makes him so happy."

"And me too, Romola—if you will only let me say, I love you—if you will only think me worth loving a little."

His speech was the softest murmur, and the dark beautiful face, nearer to hers than it had ever been before, was looking at her with beseeching tenderness.

"I do love you," murmured Romola. She looked at him with the same simple majesty as ever, but her voice had never in her life before sunk to that murmur. It seemed to them both that they were looking at each other a long while before her lips moved again; yet it was but a moment till she said, "I know *now* what it is to be happy."

The faces just met, and the dark curls mingled for an instant with the rippling gold. Quick as lightning after that, Tito set his foot on a projecting ledge of the book-shelves and reached down the needful volumes. They were both contented to be silent and separate, for that first blissful experience of mutual consciousness was all the more exquisite for being unperturbed by immediate sensation.

It had all been as rapid as the irreversible mingling of waters, for even the eager and jealous Bardo had not become impatient.

"You have the volumes, my Romola?" the old man said, as they came near him again. "And now you will get your pen ready; for, as Tito marks off the scholia we determine on extracting, it will be well for you to copy them without delay—numbering them carefully, mind, to correspond with the numbers in the text which he will write."

Romola always had some task which gave her a share in this joint work. Tito took his stand at the *leggio*, where he both wrote and read, and she placed herself at a table just in front of him, where she was ready to give into her father's hands anything that he might happen to want, or relieve him of a volume that he had done with. They had always been in that position since the work began, yet on this day it seemed new; it was so different now for them to be opposite each other; so different for Tito to take a book from her, as she lifted it from her father's knee. Yet there was no finesse to secure an additional look or touch. Each woman creates in her own likeness the love-tokens that are offered to her; and Romola's deep calm happiness encompassed Tito like the rich but quiet evening light which dissipates all unrest.

They had been two hours at their work, and were just desisting because of the fading light, when the door opened and there entered a figure strangely incongruous with the current of their thoughts and with the suggestions of every object around them. It was the figure of a short, stout, black-eyed woman, about fifty, wearing a black velvet *berretta*, or close cap, embroidered with pearls, under which surprisingly massive black braids surmounted the little bulging forehead, and fell in rich plaited curves over the ears, while an equally surprising carmine tint on the upper region of the fat cheeks contrasted with the surrounding sallowness. Three rows of pearls and a lower necklace of gold reposed on the horizontal cushion of her neck; the embroidered border of her trailing black velvet gown and her embroidered long-drooping sleeves of rose-coloured damask were slightly faded, but they conveyed to the initiated eye the satisfactory assurance that they were the splendid result of six months' labour by a skilled workman; and the rose-coloured petticoat, with its dimmed white fringe and seed-pearl arabesques, was duly exhibited in order to suggest a similar pleasing reflection. A handsome coral rosary hung from one side of an inferential belt, which emerged into certainty with a large clasp of silver wrought in niello; and, on the other side, where the belt again became inferential, hung a *scarsella*, or large purse, of crimson velvet, stitched with pearls. Her little fat right-hand, which looked as if it had been made of paste, and had risen out of shape under partial baking, held a small book of devotions, also splendid with velvet, pearls, and silver.

The figure was already too familiar to Tito to be startling, for Monna Brigida was a frequent visitor at Bardo's, being excepted from the sentence of banishment passed on feminine triviality, on the ground of her cousinship to his dead wife and her early care for Romola, who now looked round at her with an affectionate smile, and rose to draw the leather seat to a due distance from her father's chair, that the coming gush of talk might not be too near his ear.

"_La cugina_?" said Bardo, interrogatively, detecting the short steps and the sweeping drapery.

"Yes, it is your cousin," said Monna Brigida, in an alert voice, raising her fingers smilingly at Tito, and then lifting up her face to be kissed by Romola. "Always the troublesome cousin breaking in on your wisdom," she went on, seating herself and beginning to fan herself with the white veil hanging over her arm. "Well, well; if I didn't bring you some news of the world now and then, I do believe you'd forget there was anything in life but these mouldy ancients, who want sprinkling with holy water if all I hear about them is true. Not but what the world is bad enough nowadays, for the scandals that turn up under one's nose at every corner—I don't want to hear and see such things, but one can't go about with one's head in a bag; and it was only yesterday—well, well, you needn't burst out at me, Bardo, I'm not going to tell anything; if I'm not as wise as the three kings, I know how many legs go into one boot. But, nevertheless, Florence is a wicked city—is it not true, Messer Tito? for you go into the world. Not but what one must sin a little—Messer Domeneddio expects that of us, else what are the blessed sacraments for? And what I say is, we've got to reverence the saints, and not to set ourselves up as if we could be like them, else life would be unbearable; as it will be if things go on after this new fashion. For what do you think? I've been at the wedding to-day—Dianora Acciajoli's with the young Albizzi that there has been so much talk of—and everybody wondered at its being to-day instead of yesterday; but, *cieli*! such a wedding as it was might have been put off till the next Quaresima for a penance. For there was the bride looking like a white nun—not so much as a pearl about her—and the bridegroom as solemn as San Giuseppe. It's true! And half the people invited were *Piagnoni*—they call them *Piagnoni* (funeral mourners: properly, paid mourners) now, these new saints of Fra Girolamo's making. And to think of two families like the Albizzi and the Acciajoli taking up such notions, when they could afford to wear the best! Well, well, they invited me—but they could do no other, seeing my husband was Luca Antonio's uncle by the mother's side—and a pretty time I had of it while we waited under the canopy in front of the house, before they let us in. I couldn't stand in my

The afternoon of the seventh of September hung heavy and lazy over Florence, a silence broken only by the distant hum of the city, two months since Romola and Tito had dared to speak their love aloud.

Tito stepped into Nello's shop, finding the barber in a state of profound repose. Stretched upon the bench, a cap served as a blindfold over his eyes, one leg drawn up while the other had slipped toward the floor, dragging a manuscript volume of verse beneath it until the leaves were crushed. In the corner, Sandro sat alone, his fingers moving with solemn, rhythmic precision as he played *mora*, his left hand responding to the arithmetical demands of his right with the gravity of a priest.

Tito moved with a whisper of a step, snatching up the lute. He bent over the sleeping barber, plucking the strings softly as he sang Lorenzo de' Medici's *Carnival Song*:

*"Beauteous is life in blossom!
And it fleeteth—fleeteth ever;
Whoso would be joyful—let him!
There's no surety for the morrow."*

Nello woke as easily as a startled bird. The cap flew from his eyes, and he sprang upright, stretching his arms to their full length before curling them around Tito's curls in a playful grip.

"Ah, my Apollino! I am somewhat late with my siesta on this scorching day," Nello chuckled, rubbing his eyes. "That comes of not sleeping naturally, but taking a potion of potent poetry. Listen to me matching my words by their initial letters, like a *Trovatore*. A bad symptom, I fear; my wine of understanding is running off at the spigot of authorship, leaving me an empty cask smelling of dregs, like many a genius I know. What is it, my Orpheus?"

"It is but a tailor's image of your poet's," Tito replied, letting his fingers drift lightly across the strings. "Yet you have divined my impatience. I seek an extra touch of your art—not on my chin, but on the *zazzera*, which is as tangled as Florentine politics. Your comb works wonders there, stirring the animal spirits, and a hint of your orange-scent would be fitting. I am bound for the Scala palace; the young Cardinal Giovanni de' Medici attends, bringing with him Bernardo Dovizi of Bibbiena, whose wit is so rapid I can only hope to outshine it with the fragrance of orange blossoms."

Nello seized his comb, flourishing it before pushing Tito gently back into the chair and wrapping him in a cloth.

"Never speak of rivalry, *bel giovane mio*," Nello said, working the comb with practiced ease. "Bernardo Dovizi is a keen youth, but he will never cast a net to catch the wind. He bears the sharp-muzzled look of his brother, Ser Piero, the weasel Piero de' Medici keeps to slip through small holes. No! You distance all rivals; you may soon touch the sky with your forefinger. They say you have carried enough honey to sweeten the sour Messer Angelo, who has pronounced you less of an ass than expected, given your understanding with the Secretary."

"And between ourselves, Nello," Tito murmured, "Messer Angelo possesses more genius and erudition than all other Florentine scholars combined. It suits them to praise me now that Poliziano is bowed by grief or illness. I might challenge a sparrow-hawk like Pietro Crinito, but Poliziano is a large-beaked eagle who would swallow me, feathers and all, without noticing the difference."

"I will not contradict your modesty," Nello teased. "But we clever Florentines do not repeat the same truths daily; we cry down Dante and cry up Francesco Cei merely for variety. If we hail you as a new Poliziano, heaven ensures the lie is not quite so great. Are you not a pattern of virtue in this wicked city? With your ears double-waxed against siren invitations that would lure you from the Via de' Bardi and your great work destined to astonish posterity?"

"Posterity," Tito smiled wryly, "whom it will probably astonish as the universe does, by the impossibility of seeing what the plan ever was."

"Yes, something like that was prophesied recently. Cristoforo Landino said the excellent Bardo lies overthrown in his learning like a cavalier in heavy armor, angry because he is over-ridden. A pithy remark, though it seems Messer Cristoforo feeds one with an empty spoon and gags one with vain expectation. *Ecco!* You are perfect now." Nello drew away the cloth. "Impossible to add more grace! But love is not always fed on learning, is it? I shall have to dress the *zazzera* for the betrothal soon, shall I?"

"Perhaps," Tito said, smiling faintly, "unless Messer Bernardo recommends that Bardo require me to yoke a lion and a wild boar to the car of the Zecca before I can win my Alcestis. But I confess he is right: I am unworthy of Romola. She is a Pleiad who may grow dim by marrying any mortal."

"*Gnaffè*," Nello laughed. "Your modesty is in the right place. Yet fate seems to have measured and chiselled you for the niche left empty by the old man's son. By the way, *Cronaca* told me he is now at San Marco. Did you know?"

A slight electric shock passed through Tito as he rose, though he hid it by stooping to flatten the crushed leaves of the fallen book.

"No; I thought he was at Fiesole. Are you sure he has returned to San Marco?"

"Cronaca is my authority," Nello shrugged. "I do not frequent that sanctuary, but he does. Ah," he added, taking the book from Tito's hands, "my poor Nencia da Barberino! It jars your scholarly feelings to see the pages dog-eared. I was lulled by her rustic charms—'prettier than the turnip-flower,' 'with a cheek more savoury than cheese.' But to get such a notion of a *contadina*, one must lie on velvet cushions in the Via Larga, not watch the *Fierucoloni* stumping into the Piazza della Nunziata this evening."

"And pray, who are the *Fierucoloni*?" Tito asked, settling his cap.

"The country women from Pistoia and the Casentino, come to keep vigil in the church of the Nunziata and sell their yarn and dried mushrooms at the *Fierucola*, the little Fair. They make a queer show with paper lanterns, howling hymns to the Virgin on her nativity. If you had the leisure..." Nello paused, his expression darkening slightly. "No? Well, I have had enough. There is wild work in the Piazza tonight. One may get stones about the ears or shins without asking for them. I was never fond of that pressing attention. *Addio*."

Tito left the shop carrying a quiet uneasiness. His visit had ended sooner than anticipated. The boy-cardinal Giovanni de' Medici, the youngest of red-hatted fathers who would later present his broad dark cheek to posterity as Pope Leo the Tenth, had been detained by his favorite pastime, the chase, and failed to appear at the Scala palace.

It was nearly sunset when Tito left the palace, intending to proceed to the Via de' Bardi. He had not gone far when, to his astonishment, he saw Romola advancing toward him along the Borgo Pinti.

She wore a thick black veil and a black mantle, yet her figure and her walk were unmistakable. Beside her walked a short, stout form, recognized instantly as Monna Brigida, despite the unusual plainness of her attire. Romola had not been bred for devotional observances, and her appearances outside the loggia on the roof of her house were so rare, and so heavily discussed beforehand due to Bardo's dislike of being left alone, that Tito felt certain there must be some sudden, urgent cause for her absence.

She saw him through her veil and hastened her steps.

"Romola, has anything happened?" Tito asked, turning to walk beside her.

She did not answer immediately. Monna Brigida broke the silence.

"Ah, Messer Tito, you do well to turn round, for we are in haste. And is it not a misfortune? We are obliged to go round by the walls and turn up the Via del Maglio because of the Fair; the *contadine* block the way by the Nunziata, which would have taken us to San Marco in half the time."

Tito's heart gave a violent bound.

"Romola," he said in a lower tone, "are you going to San Marco?"

They had emerged from the Borgo Pinti and were now under the city walls, where wide gardens lay to their left and all was quiet. Romola lifted her veil to breathe the air, and Tito saw the subdued agitation in her face.

"Yes, Tito mio," she said, looking directly at him with sad eyes. "For the first time I am doing something unknown to my father. It comforts me that I have met you, for at least I can tell *you*. But if you are going to him, it will be well for you not to say that you met me. He thinks I am only gone to my cousin, because she sent for me. I left my godfather with him; *he* knows where I am going and why. You remember that evening when my brother's name was mentioned and my father spoke of him to you?"

"Yes," Tito whispered. A strange complication seized his mental state. His heart sank at the probability of a great change in his prospects, yet his thoughts darted over a hundred details of the course he would take when that change arrived. Still, he returned her gaze with a hungry sense that it might be the last time she would bend it upon him with full, unquestioning confidence.

"The *cugina* heard he had returned. The evening before—the evening of San Giovanni—I afterwards found he had been seen by our good Maso near our door. But when Maso went to inquire at San Marco, Dino, that is, my brother—christened Bernardino after our godfather, but now calling himself Fra Luca—had been taken to the monastery at Fiesole because he was ill. This morning, however, a message came to Maso saying he had returned to San Marco. Maso went to him there. He is very ill, and he has adjured me to go and see him. I cannot refuse, though I hold him guilty. I still remember how I loved him when I was a little girl, before I knew he would forsake my father. Perhaps he has some word of penitence to send by me. It cost me a struggle to act against my father's feeling, which I have always held to be just. I am almost sure you will think I have chosen rightly, Tito, because I have noticed your nature is less rigid than mine, and nothing makes you angry. It would cost you less to be forgiving. Though, if you had seen your father forsaken by one to whom he gave his chief love—by one in whom he planted his labor and his hopes—forsaken when his need was becoming greatest—even you, Tito, would find it hard to forgive."

What could he say? He was not equal to the hypocrisy of telling Romola that such offenses ought not to be pardoned, nor did he have the courage to utter words of dissuasion.

"You are right, my Romola; you are always right, except in thinking too well of me."

There was genuine truth in those words. Tito looked beautiful as he spoke them, his face unusually pale, his lip quivering slightly. Romola, interpreting all things largely, like a mind prepossessed with high beliefs, had a tearful brightness in her eyes as she looked at him, touched with keen joy that he felt so strongly whatever she felt.

"And now, Tito, I wish you to leave me," she said, continuing her walk. "The *cugina* and I shall be less noticed if we enter the piazza alone."

"Yes, it were better you should leave us," Monna Brigida interjected. "To say the truth, Messer Tito, all eyes follow you. Let Romola muffle herself as she will, everyone wants to see what is under her veil, for she has that way of walking like a procession. Not that I find fault with her for it, only it doesn't suit my steps. And indeed, I would rather not have us seen going to San Marco. That is why I am dressed as if I were one of the *Piagnoni* themselves, and as old as Sant' Anna. For if it had been anybody but poor Dino, who ought to be forgiven if he's dying, for what's the use of having a grudge against dead people? Make them feel while they live, say I—"

No one made a scruple of interrupting Monna Brigida. Tito, having just raised Romola's hand to his lips and said, "I understand, I obey you," turned away, lifting his cap. It was a sign of reverence rarely made by native Florentines at that time, exciting Bernardo del Nero's contempt for Tito as a fawning Greek, while to Romola, who loved homage, it gave him an exceptional grace.

He was half glad of the dismissal, half disposed to cling to Romola to the last moment in which she would love him without suspicion. It seemed certain that this brother would before all things want to know, and that Romola would before all things confide to him her father's position and her own after the years that must have brought so much change. She would tell him she was soon to be publicly betrothed to a young scholar, filling the place left vacant long ago by a wandering son. Tito foresaw the impulse that would prompt Romola to dwell on that prospect, and what would follow on the mention of the future husband's name. Fra Luca would tell all he knew and conjectured, and Tito saw no possible falsity by which he could now ward off the worst consequences of his former dissimulation.

The roar of the crowd and the chaotic symphony of sounds that greeted Tito at the Piazza's entrance reminded him of Nello's warnings regarding the Fierucoloni. With a strange sense of relief, he thrust himself into the throng, enjoying the jostling and the raucous noise that filled the void. It dulled the bleak calculations of his future—the terrifying prospect of wandering alone in search of fortune—and momentarily extinguished the thought of seeking out Baldassarre.

Through the opposing archways, people surged into the square, illuminated by paper lanterns waved on sticks. A monotonous chant formed a steady thread beneath a cacophony of screams, whistles, mocking songs from boys, drumbeats, and tinkling bells. Occasionally, a lantern shattered with a crash as a stone flew blindly through the air, followed by shrieks and renewed shouting. Yet, on the periphery of this whirlwind, groups observed the Nativity of the Virgin with a more orderly devotion. Ragged men darted sharp glances around while their tongues ran on, inviting country folk to games; two figures on stilts, having snatched lanterns from the crowd, swung the lights like meteors as they paraded; a shrewd merchant sold hot *berlingozzi* from a small stall; another man, leaning against a pillar of the Foundling Hospital, hawked miracle pills guaranteed to cure toothache and drowning; a tumbler performed on a platform nearby; and a handful of apprentices, bored by the casual stone-throwing, engaged in a fierce, concentrated match of their favorite Florentine sport at the narrow entrance of the Via de' Febbrai.

Tito, forced to weave through random gaps in the crowd, found himself beside a procession of barefoot peasant women. Their sun-baked, bronzed faces and fragmentary, dirt-stained garments of obsolete fashion made them appear to the city dwellers as a weary ancestry returning from a pilgrimage begun a century prior. These were the hardy women from the Pistoia mountains, carrying a year's labor in a modest bundle of yarn on their backs. In their hearts lay a meager hope and a vast, dim fear, both entrusted to the Blessed Virgin, whose miraculous image was to be unveiled on this Eve of her Nativity, allowing her power to flow unobstructed.

At another moment, Tito was pushed toward the edge of the square, where peddlers stationed themselves safely behind pillars. There he recognized Bratti, who stood with his back to the stone, lips pursed in disdainful silence. He eyed every approacher with a cold superiority, clutching a serge cloth that hid the contents of his basket. Surprised by such unusual composure in an anxious trader, Tito stepped closer. Two women approached the basket with curiosity, prompting Bratti to pull the cloth tighter and look away. Provoked, one woman asked what was inside.

"Before I answer, Monna, I must know if you intend to buy," Bratti replied sharply. "I cannot display such wares to every fly that settles and pays nothing. My goods are too choice. Besides, I have only two left, and I have no mind to soil them. With the rumors of pestilence, they might be worth their weight in gold. No, no: *andate con Dio*."

The women exchanged glances. "And what is the price?" asked the second.

"Not within what you likely carry, buona donna," Bratti said in a tone of compassionate condescension. "Trust in Messer Domeneddio and the saints; poor people can do no better."

"Not so poor!" the second woman retorted indignantly, producing her money-bag. "Come, what do you say to a *grosso*?"

"I say you may get twenty-one *quattrini* for it," Bratti replied coolly, "but not from me, for I lack such small change."

"Two, then?" the woman demanded, growing exasperated, while her companion looked on with envy. "It won't be more than two, I think."

After further haggling and mercantile coquetry, Bratti feigned concession. "Since you are set on it," he said slowly, lifting the cover, "I would be loath to cause you harm. Maestro Gabbadeo used to say that when a woman desires something and fails to obtain it, she falls into greater danger of the pestilence. *Ecco!* I have but two left. Let me tell you, the companion to these is on the finger of Maestro Gabbadeo, who has gone to Bologna—a wise doctor indeed."

The objects were two clumsy iron rings, beaten into the shape of ancient Roman rings sometimes unearthed. Their rust and the hidden nature of their supposed potency were so convincing that the *grossi* were paid without complaint. The first woman, lacking such coins, succeeded after much feigned reluctance in trading some of her yarn for the remaining ring, carrying it off in triumph. Bratti covered his basket, now filled with miscellaneous items likely acquired under similar circumstances, and moved from his pillar, suddenly confronting Tito, who would have preferred to avoid recognition.

"By the head of San Giovanni," Bratti said, pulling Tito back to the pillar, "what luck! I was speaking of you this morning, Messer Greco. I said he has risen among the gentlemen—and I am glad, for I was at the bottom of his fortune—but I rarely catch him lying on the stones now. But it is your luck, not mine, Messer Greco, save for a small trifle to satisfy me for my trouble."

"You speak in riddles, Bratti," Tito said. "Remember, I do not sharpen my wits by haggling over iron rings; you must be plain."

"By the Holy Gospels! It was an easy bargain I gave them. If a Hebrew gets thirty-two percent, I hope a Christian may get a little more. Without a conscience, I would have doubled the money and the yarn. But speaking of rings, it is your ring—that very ring on your finger—that I could find a buyer for. Yes, a buyer with a deep purse."

"Truly?" Tito asked, examining his ring.

"A Genoese heading straight to Hungary. He came to my shop searching for old things I didn't know the price of; I wager he thought I had a pumpkin on my shoulders. He had rummaged every shop in Florence. He wore a ring—not quite like yours, but of the same fashion. As we spoke of rings, I mentioned a fine young man, a particular friend of mine, who owned such a ring. He asked, 'Who is he? Tell him I'll give him his price.' I thought of coming to Nello's tomorrow. In my opinion, Messer Greco, you are not the type to watch the Arno turn to broth and stand idle."

Tito had listened intently, though his mind raced. Why keep the ring? It had been a mere sentiment preventing him from selling it with the other gems. Had he sold it, perhaps he would have avoided Fra Luca's identification. True, it had been taken from Baldassarre's finger and placed on his own as his hand grew, but there was no valid good in such superstitious scruples regarding inanimate objects. The ring had facilitated his recognition, and Tito had begun to dislike recognition—a claim from the past. This foreigner's offer, if genuine, was an opportunity to dispose of the ring without the trouble of finding a buyer.

"You speak with your usual wisdom, Bratti," Tito said. "I have no objection to hearing what your Genoese offers. But when and where shall I meet him?"

"Tomorrow, three hours after sunrise, at my shop. If your wits are as sharp as I believe, Messer Greco, you will ask for a heavy price; he cares little for money. I believe he buys for someone else, perhaps a great *signor*."

"It is well," Tito agreed. "I will be at your shop, if nothing hinders."

"And you will doubtless deal nobly by me for old acquaintance's sake," Bratti added, refusing to fix the small fee for his service. "It seems a thousand years since I left the piazza; a fair is dull, not to say wicked, when one has no goods to sell."

Tito made a hasty sign of assent and moved away, once again swept toward the center of the square and back again, unable to determine his own course. In this zigzag motion, he was carried to the end of the piazza opposite the church, where an entertainment drew a deep crowd. Loud bursts of laughter interrupted a monologue that shifted from slow oratory to rattling buffoonery. A girl was pushed into an inner circle with apparent reluctance, while a laughing minx found her way with her elbows. A strange light bathed the square: pale stars above, dim waving lanterns below, rendering objects indistinct except when caught by the fitful glow. But in a recess, a stronger light cast the heads of spectators in dark relief as Tito was pushed toward them. Above them rose the head of a man wearing a white mitre with yellow cabalistic figures.

"Behold, my children!" the speaker cried. "Behold your opportunity! Neglect not the holy sacrament of matrimony when available for the small sum of a white *quattrino*—the cheapest marriage ever offered, dissolved by special bull at every man's will. Behold the bull!" He held up a parchment with huge seals. "Behold the indulgence granted by His Holiness Alexander the Sixth, newly elected for his piety, intending to reform the Church by abolishing the priestly abuse that hoards matrimony for the clergy. Spit once, my sons, and pay a white *quattrino*! This is the whole price. The *quattrino* is the only difference the Holy Father allows between us and the clergy—who spit and pay nothing."

Tito recognized the sharp ring of the voice, though the face remained shadowed. Stepping closer, he saw within the circle an altar-like table draped in red fabric stitched with yellow cabalistic figures. Half a dozen thin tapers burned behind it, alongside a conjuring apparatus, a large open book, and a monkey fastened by a cord to a small ring, holding a taper that flickered in its restless movements. An impish boy in a white surplice cuffed the monkey and adjusted the taper. The man in the mitre wore a surplice and a chasuble with rudely marked zodiac signs. Tito was certain now; it was Maestro Vaiano, the mountebank from whom he had rescued Tessa. *Pretty little Tessa!* Perhaps she was among the peasant women.

"Come, my maidens!" the conjuror continued. "This is the time for the pretty who have many chances, and the ill-favored who have few. Matrimony to be had—hot, eaten, and done with as easily as *berlingozzi*! And see!" He held up a cluster of tiny bags. "To every bride I give a *Breve* with a secret inside—the secret alone worth the money you pay. The secret how to... no, no, I will not tell you, making it a double secret. Hang it round your neck if you like; I don't say that won't be best, for then you will see unexpected things: though if you open it you may break your leg, *è vero*, but you will know a secret! Something nobody knows but me! Mark—I give you the *Breve*, I do not sell it. The *quattrino* is for the matrimony, and the *Breve* is free. *Orsù, giovanetti*, come like dutiful sons of the Church and buy the Indulgence of His Holiness Alexander the Sixth."

This buffoonery suited the audience perfectly. The *fierucola* was a minor occasion, so the townsfolk were content with jokes less indecent than those at carnival, rhymed by the Magnifico and his satellites. The women, however, truly began to crave the *Brevi*. Several couples had already undergone the ceremony, where the conjuror's solemn gibberish, grimaces over the open book, the monkey's antics, and the preliminary spitting had elicited peals of laughter. Now, a merry-eyed youth of seventeen in a loose tunic and red cap pushed forward, holding the hand of a plump brunette whose ragged dress revealed her round arms and legs.

"Fetter us without delay, Maestro!" the youth said. "I must take my bride home and paint her under a lantern's light."

"Ha! Mariotto, my son, I commend your pious observance..." The conjuror began, when a loud chattering warned him of a crisis with his monkey.

The temper of the imperfect acolyte was tested by his colleague's over-active discipline. A sudden cuff, delivered as the taper fell horizontally, caused the boy to leap back with violence, snapping the slackened knot of his cord. His first leap threw him to the other end of the table, his remonstrances so threatening that the imp in the surplice brandished a wand. The monkey leaped onto the head of a tall woman in the foreground, dropping his taper and chattering emphatically from that height. Screaming and confusion ensued; many spectators feared the Maestro's monkey, suspecting it of hidden mischief beyond mere teeth and claws. The conjuror himself was alarmed lest harm befall his familiar. In the scuffle to seize the monkey's string, Tito slipped out of the circle and, unwilling to contend for his place, allowed himself to be pushed toward the church of the Nunziata, joining the worshippers.

The brilliant illumination within pressed upon his eyes with palpable force after the pale, scattered lights of the piazza. For the first minute or two, he saw nothing distinct. That yellow splendor was supernatural and heavenly to many peasant women, accustomed to sleeping in twilight with mountains hiding half the sky; the uninterrupted chant from the choir was repose to the ear after the hellish hubbub outside. Gradually, the scene cleared, though a thin yellow haze from incense mingled with the breath of the multitude. In a chapel on the left, wreathed with silver lamps, the miraculous fresco of the Annunciation stood unveiled, appearing dark with the excess of surrounding light. The entire nave was filled with peasant women,

When Romola reached the threshold of San Marco, a friar awaited her. Monna Brigida withdrew into the adjacent church, and Romola was ushered to the door of the chapter-house in the outer cloister, the boundary beyond which no woman was permitted to pass.

As the heavy door swung open, the dim light from outside merged with the glow of two tapers set behind a narrow bed. There lay Fra Luca, his face wasted to an emaciated skeleton, the golden tonsure framing a skull-like visage. His deep-sunken hazel eyes were fixed upon a small crucifix held before him. He was propped up in a semi-sitting position. As Romola threw aside her veil, she became aware of another monk standing beside the bed, his black cowl pulled low, who retreated toward the door as she entered. In the background, a crucified figure loomed pale and high on the frescoed wall, its lower half surrounded by ghostly, sorrowful faces.

Then, her eyes met Fra Luca's as he lifted his gaze from the cross. A sharp pang of recognition struck her, binding this haggard monastic form to the memory of her fair young brother.

"Dino!" she cried, her voice a low, pained exclamation. Yet she did not lean toward him; she remained rigid, holding her distance at two yards. An insurmountable repulsion gripped her at the sight of him in this garb. To her, it seemed the mark of a cowardly abandonment that had left her father desolate—a groveling superstition that could rebrand such betrayal as piety. Her father, a man of proud sincerity and simple living, had raised her to ignore the Church's claim to govern the minds of rational beings. In her view, the Church belonged to the chaotic masses from which they had always separated. Consequently, she felt nothing but incurious, indignant contempt for her brother's path. Still, the loving nature of her soul clung to the image of the past, and despite her rigid stance, a yearning search flickered in her eyes for something too faint to grasp.

But the monk's face offered no such warmth. He regarded the little sister, returned to him in her full womanly beauty, with the distant gaze of a spirit revisiting a lost world.

"My sister!" he managed, his voice feeble and broken yet distinct. "It is well you have not delayed further. I have a message for you, and my time is short."

Romola stepped closer. She expected a confession of affectionate penitence directed at her father. Her heart began to soften; nothing could erase the long years of desertion, but a sinner looking back with the weight of irremediable wrong might evoke pity. At the end, surely, there would be understanding and forgiveness. She imagined Dino pouring out natural filial feelings, asking about his father's blindness, the rapidity of its onset, the long dark days, and the life in the home where he had been nourished. She anticipated a final message of tenderness and regret.

"Romola," Fra Luca began, "I have had a vision concerning you. Three times in the last two months, and each time it has grown clearer. I came from Fiesole believing it a divine mandate to deliver this. And I find a promise of mercy in this, that my breath is preserved to—"

His speech was cut short by the difficult, rattling breath that constantly interrupted him.

Romola felt her heart chill. It was a vision, then—a message born of those delusions her father had bitterly alluded to. Indignation surged in her throat.

"Dino, I thought you had words for my father. You abandoned him when his sight failed; you made his life a desert. Did you never care? Never repent? What is this religion of yours that places visions above natural duties?"

The deep-sunken eyes turned slowly toward her, resting upon her in silence for several moments, as if weighing the cost of an answer.

"No," he said finally, in a low, passionless tone, sounding less like a dying man and more like a spirit speaking through mortal organs. "No. I have never repented for fleeing the stifling, poisonous breath of sin that choked me, threatening to overwhelm my senses like besotting wine. My father could not hear the voice calling me night and day; he knew nothing of the demon-tempters trying to drag me back. He lived amidst human sin and misery without believing in them, like one busy picking shining stones in a mine while a world died of plague above him. I spoke, but he listened with scorn. I told him the studies he wished me to pursue were either childish trifles or must be fueled by worldly ambition and fleshly lusts—the very substances of the poetry and history he demanded I read."

"Has my father not led a pure and noble life?" Romola burst out, unable to remain silent against this implied accusation. "He sought no worldly honors; he was truthful; he denied himself all luxuries; he lived like an ancient sage. He never wished you to live for worldly ambitions or lusts. He wanted you to live as he did, according to the purest maxims of philosophy, in which he raised you."

Romola spoke partly from rote, as ardent young creatures often do, but with intense conviction. A pink flush colored her cheeks, and she quivered from head to foot. Her brother was slow to answer, regarding her passionate face with strange, unfeeling eyes.

"What were the maxims of philosophy to me? They told me to be strong when I felt weak; to roll myself among thorns and court smarting wounds as deliverance from temptation. For Divine love had sought me, penetrating me and creating a great need within me, like a seed demanding room to grow. I was raised in carelessness of the true faith; I had not studied our doctrines, yet they seemed to possess me like a rising flood. I felt there existed a life of perfect love and purity for the soul, free from uneasy hunger for pleasure, tormenting questions, or fear of suffering. Before knowing the history of the saints, I had a foreshadowing of their ecstasy. The same truth permeated even pagan philosophy: that it is a bliss within man's reach to die to mortal needs and live in the life of God as the Unseen Perfection. But to attain this, I must forsake the world. I must have no affection, no hope wedded to that which passes away. I must live with my fellow-beings only as human souls related to the eternal unseen life. This need urged me continually. It came over me in visions when my mind grew weary of the vain words recording the passions of dead men; it seized me after I had been tempted into sin and turned away with loathing from the scent of the emptied cup. In these visions, I saw the meaning of the Crucifix."

He paused, breathing hard for a minute or two. Romola did not speak. It was futile for her mind to attempt contact with this unearthly brother, as useless as trying to grasp a shadow. When he spoke again, his heaving chest was quieter.

"I felt whom I must follow. But I saw that even among the servants of the Cross who claimed to have renounced the world, my soul would be stifled by the fumes of hypocrisy, lust, and pride. God had not chosen me, as He chose Saint Dominic and Saint Francis, to wrestle with evil in the Church and the world. He called upon me to flee. I took the sacred vows and I fled—to lands where danger, scorn, and want bore me continually, like angels, to repose on the bosom of God. I lived as a hermit, ministering to pilgrims, but my task was short. The veil dividing me from my everlasting rest has worn very thin. I returned to Florence that—"

"Dino, you *did* want to know if my father was alive," Romola interrupted, the picture of that suffering life stirring in her again, sparking a desire for union and forgiveness.

"—That before I died, I might urge our brethren to study Eastern tongues, as I failed to do, and go forth to greater ends. I find them already bent on the work. And since I came, Romola, I have felt I was sent partly to you—not to renew bonds of earthly affection, but to deliver the heavenly warning conveyed in a vision. For I have had that vision thrice. Through all the years since the Divine voice first called me, while I was still in the world, I have been taught and guided by visions. For in the painful linking of our waking thoughts, we can never be sure we have not mingled our own errors with the light we prayed for; but in visions and dreams, we are passive, and our souls become instruments in the Divine hand. Therefore, listen, and speak no more—for the time is short."

Romola's mind recoiled from listening to this vision. Her indignation had subsided, only because she felt the chasm between herself and her brother widening. As Fra Luca spoke, the figure of another monk entered, standing on the opposite side of the bed with his cowl drawn low.

"Kneel, my daughter, for the Angel of Death is present and waits while the message of heaven is delivered. Bend your pride before it is bent for you by a yoke of iron," a strong, rich voice declared, startlingly contrasting with Fra Luca's frailty.

The tone was not imperious but one of quiet self-possession and assured right, blended with benignity. Romola, vibrating at the sound, turned to the figure on the other side. His face was barely discernible under the shadow of the cowl, but her eyes fell immediately on his hands, folded across his breast and resting on the edge of his black mantle. They possessed a marked physiognomy that enforced the voice's authority: very beautiful, almost of transparent delicacy. Romola's disposition to rebel against command, doubly active in the presence of monks she had been taught to despise, would have latched onto any repulsive detail as a point of support. But the face was hidden, and the hands seemed to hold an appeal against all hardness. The next moment, the right hand took the crucifix to relieve Fra Luca's fatigued grasp, while the left touched his lips with a wet sponge lying nearby. As he bent, the cowl was pushed back, revealing the features of the monk to the full light of the tapers. They were striking features, lending themselves to popular description: a high-arched nose, a prominent under-lip, a coronet of thick dark hair above the brow—all suggesting energy and passion. There were blue-grey eyes, shining mildly beneath auburn lashes, seeming, like the hands, to radiate acute sensitiveness. Romola was certain these were the features of Fra Girolamo Savonarola, the prior of San Marco, whom she had chiefly considered more offensive than other monks because he was more noisy. Her rebellion rose against the first impression, which had almost forced her to kneel.

"Kneel, my daughter," the penetrating voice repeated. "The pride of the body is a barrier against the gifts that purify the soul."

He looked at her with mild fixedness, and again she felt that subtle, mysterious influence of personality by which rare men move their fellows. Slowly, Romola fell to her knees. In the very act, a tremor seized her; in the renunciation of her proud erectness, her mental attitude seemed transformed, and she found herself in a new state of passiveness.

Her brother began to speak again.

"Romola, in the deep night, as I lay awake, I saw my father's room—the library—with all the books and the marbles and the leggio where I used to stand and read. And I saw you—you were revealed to me as I see you now, with fair long hair, sitting before my father's chair. And at the leggio stood a man whose face I could not see. I looked, and looked, and it was a blank to me, even as a painting effaced. I saw him move and take you, Romola, by the hand; and then I saw you take my father by the hand; and you all three went down the stone steps into the streets, the man whose face was a blank leading the way. You stood at the altar in Santa Croce, and the priest who married you had the face of death. The graves opened, and the dead in their shrouds rose and followed you like a bridal train. You passed on through the streets and gates into the valley, and it seemed to me that he who led you hurried you more than you could bear, and the dead were weary of following you, turning back to their graves. Finally, you came to a stony place where there was no water, no trees, no herbage. Instead of water, I saw written parchment unrolling everywhere; instead of trees and herbage, I saw men of bronze and marble springing up and crowding round you. My father was faint for want of water and fell to the ground. The man whose face was a blank loosed your hand and departed. As he went, I could see his face; it was the face of the Great Tempter. You, Romola, wrung your hands and sought for water, but there was none. The bronze and marble figures seemed to mock you and hold out cups of water. When you grasped them and put them to my father's lips, they turned to parchment. The bronze and marble figures seemed to turn into demons and snatch my father's body from you, and the parchments shriveled up, and blood ran everywhere instead of them, and fire upon the blood, till they all vanished, and the plain was bare and stony again, and you were alone in the midst of it. Then it seemed that the night fell, and I saw no more... Thrice I have had that vision, Romola. I believe it is a revelation meant for you: to warn you against marriage as a temptation of the enemy; it calls upon you to dedicate yourself—"

His pauses had grown longer and more frequent, until he was compelled to cease by a severe fit of gasping, his eyes turned on the crucifix as on a light vanishing. Presently, he found strength to speak again, but in a feebler, scarcely audible tone.

"To renounce the vain philosophy and corrupt thoughts of the heathens: for in the hour of sorrow and death their pride will

A Florentine Joke.

The morning sun rose warm and golden over the Piazza di San Giovanni, casting a spell of festive idleness upon the city. Yet, for Tito, the light offered no comfort. He had just returned from Bratti's shop in the narrow thoroughfare of the Ferravecchi, his pockets heavy with fifty florins but his spirit hollow. The Genoese stranger had departed with the onyx ring, leaving Tito with a bitter taste in his mouth. A fleeting thought crossed his mind: if Fortune had truly spared him the necessity of fleeing Florence, perhaps he should not have parted with the ring, for it was worn not merely as jewelry, but as a vessel for cherished memories and predilections. Still, the loss was a trivial matter compared to the weight of his current shame. The feverish excitement that had once driven him to look toward the future had cooled into a dull, regretful lassitude. Now, he envied the ignorance of those who had never risked ignominy by shrinking from the obligations his peers demanded.

Deeds, he realized with a sinking heart, were like children born to us; they lived and acted apart from our own will. While children might be strangled, deeds possessed an indestructible vitality, pressing hard upon the conscience whether we acknowledged them or not. This dreadful vitality was crushing Tito for the first time.

He turned away from the Mercato Vecchio, avoiding the nearest path lest he encounter Tessa. He was not in the mood to seek anything, only to await the first sign of his altered lot. The piazza itself was a tableau of life: stalls laden with fruit and flowers surrounded the octagonal Baptistery, while mules stood patiently in their nose-bags, their drivers perhaps already kneeling before the Virgin inside the sacred doors. On the broad marble steps of the Duomo, beggars and gossipers mingled. An old crone encouraged a round-capped baby to feel the warmth of the stone, while a suspicious dog sniffed nearby; shaggy-headed boys watched a pale cripple carving a face into a cherry-stone; and above them, men knotted ribbons in desultory laughter or gesticulated in earnest conversation.

Tito's destination, however, was the barber's shop of Nello. It was the busiest hour of the day, and under the pretty red and white awning, men preferred the fresh air to the narrow confines of the shop. To sit with a lathered chin thrown backward, having one's nose made a handle, was not a sublime posture, yet it was a fashion of Florentine respectability, and the men looked at each other with grave seriousness while undergoing the ritual. The barber's tongue was in its glory, the deft activity of the razor and the lather seeming set in motion by a common spring. Tito knew he could not escape the circle of conversation; he would have to smile, retort, and appear perfectly at ease. It was merely the ordeal of swallowing bread and cheese pills, he told himself. The man who let the anticipation of discovery choke him was simply weak of nerve.

Just as he prepared to enter, a hand laid heavily upon his shoulder. No amount of prior resolution could prevent the unpleasant shock of the sudden touch. Tito turned, his face betraying an inward start, only to find the owner of the hand breaking into a light laugh. It was a young man of Tito's own age, with keen features, a small, close-clipped head, and a close-shaven lip and chin that suggested a mind unburdened by non-essential matters. His eyes were bright with hope and friendliness, a brightness that would later fade into bitterness for many; at this moment, however, Niccolò Machiavelli was hailed as a man of promise destined to mend the fortunes of his ancient family.

"Why, Melema," Machiavelli said, "what evil dream did you have last night that you took my light grasp for that of an *sbirro* or something worse?"

"Ah, Messer Niccolò!" Tito recovered himself instantly. "It must have been an extra amount of dulness in my veins this morning that shuddered at the approach of your wit. But the fact is, I have had a bad night."

"That is unlucky, because you will be expected to shine without any obstructing fog today in the Rucellai Gardens. I take it for granted you are to be there."

"Messer Bernardo did me the honor to invite me," Tito replied, "but I shall be engaged elsewhere."

"Ah! I remember, you are in love," Machiavelli shrugged, "else you would never have such inconvenient engagements. Why, we are to eat a peacock and ortolans under the loggia among Bernardo Rucellai's rare trees; there are to be the choicest spirits in Florence and the choicest wines. Only, as Piero de' Medici is to be there, the choice spirits may happen to be swamped in the capping of impromptu verses. I hate that game; it is a device for the triumph of small wits, who are always inspired the most by the smallest occasions."

"What is that you are saying about Piero de' Medici and small wits, Messer Niccolò?" asked Nello, whose light figure dominated the Herculean frame of Niccolò Caparra.

The famous worker in iron, whom they had last seen with bared muscular arms and a leathern apron in the Mercato Vecchio, was now dressed in holiday attire. As he sat submissively while Nello skipped around him, lathering his chin, seizing his nose, and scraping him with magical quickness, he looked much as a lion might if it had donned linen and tunic to prepare for society.

"A private secretary will never rise in the world if he couples great and small in that way," Nello continued. "When great men are not allowed to marry their sons and daughters as they like, small men must not expect to marry their words as they like. Have you heard the news Domenico Cennini has been telling us?—that Pagolantonio Soderini has given Ser Piero da Bibbiena a box on the ear for setting on Piero de' Medici to interfere with the marriage between young Tommaso Soderini and Fiammetta Strozzi, and is to be sent ambassador to Venice as a punishment?"

"I don't know which I envy him most," Machiavelli mused, "the offense or the punishment. The offense will make him the most popular man in all Florence, and the punishment will take him among the only people in Italy who have known how to manage their own affairs."

"Yes, if Soderini stays long enough at Venice," Cennini added, "he may chance to learn the Venetian fashion, and bring it home with him. The Soderini have been fast friends of the Medici, but what has happened is likely to open Pagolantonio's eyes to the good of our old Florentine trick of choosing a new harness when the old one galls us; if we have not quite lost the trick in these last fifty years."

"Not we," said Niccolò Caparra, rejoicing in the free use of his lips again. "Eat eggs in Lent and the snow will melt. That's what I say to our people when they get noisy over their cups at San Gallo, and talk of raising a *romor* (insurrection): I say, never do you plan a *romor*; you may as well try to fill the Arno with buckets. When there's water enough, the Arno will be full, and that will not be till the torrent is ready."

"Caparra, that oracular speech of yours is due to my excellent shaving," Nello remarked. "You could never have made it with that dark rust on your chin. Ecco, Messer Domenico, I am ready for you now. By the way, my bel erudito," he continued as he saw Tito moving toward the door, "here has been old Maso seeking for you, but your nest was empty. He will come again presently. The old man looked mournful, and seemed in haste. I hope there is nothing wrong in the Via de' Bardi."

"Doubtless Messer Tito knows that Bardo's son is dead," said Cronaca, who had just come up.

Tito's heart gave a leap—had the death occurred before Romola saw him?

"No, I had not heard it," he said, with no more discomposure than the occasion warranted, turning and leaning against the doorpost as if he had abandoned his intention of leaving. "I knew that his sister had gone to see him. Did he die before she arrived?"

"No," said Cronaca. "I was in San Marco at the time, and saw her come out from the chapter-house with Fra Girolamo, who told us that the dying man's breath had been preserved as by a miracle, that he might make a disclosure to his sister."

Tito felt that his fate was decided. Again his mind rushed over all the circumstances of his departure from Florence, and he conceived a plan of retrieving his money from Cennini before the disclosure became public. If he once had his money, he need not stay long enduring scorching looks and biting words. He would wait now, go away with Cennini, and get the money from him at once. With this project in his mind, he stood motionless, hands in his belt, eyes fixed absently on the ground. Nello, glancing at him, felt sure that he was absorbed in anxiety about Romola. He thought Tito such a pretty image of self-forgetful sadness that he just perceptibly pointed his razor at him and gave a challenging look at Piero di Cosimo, whom he had never forgiven for refusing to see any prognostics of character in his favorite's handsome face. Piero, leaning against the other doorpost close to Tito, shrugged his shoulders; the frequent recurrence of such challenges from Nello had changed the painter's first declaration of neutrality into a positive inclination to believe ill of the much-praised Greek.

"So you have got your Fra Girolamo back again, Cronaca? I suppose we shall have him preaching again this next Advent," said Nello.

"And not before there is need," said Cronaca, gravely. "We have had the best testimony to his words since the last Quaresima; for even to the wicked, wickedness has become a plague; and the ripeness of vice is turning to rottenness in the nostrils even of the vicious. There has not been a change since the Quaresima, either in Rome or at Florence, but has put a new seal on the Frate's words—that the harvest of sin is ripe, and that God will reap it with a sword."

"I hope he has had a new vision, however," said Francesco Cei, sneeringly. "The old ones are somewhat stale. Can't your Frate get a poet to help out his imagination for him?"

"He has no lack of poets about him," said Cronaca, with quiet contempt, "but they are great poets and not little ones; so they are contented to be taught by him, and no more think the truth stale which God has given him to utter, than they think the light of the moon is stale. But perhaps certain high prelates and princes who dislike the Frate's denunciations might be pleased to hear that, though Giovanni Pico, and Poliziano, and Marsilio Ficino, and most other men of mark in Florence, reverence Fra Girolamo, Messer Francesco Cei despises him."

"Poliziano?" said Cei, with a scornful laugh. "Yes, doubtless he believes in your new Jonah; witness the fine orations he wrote for the envoys of Siena, to tell Alexander the Sixth that the world and the Church were never so well off as since he became Pope."

"Nay, Francesco," said Machiavelli, smiling, "a various scholar must have various opinions. And as for the Frate, whatever we may think of his saintliness, you judge his preaching too narrowly. The secret of oratory lies, not in saying new things, but in saying things with a certain power that moves the hearers—without which, as old Filelfo has said, your speaker deserves to be called, 'non oratorem, sed aratorem.' And, according to that test, Fra Girolamo is a great orator."

"That is true, Niccolò," said Cennini, speaking from the shaving-chair, "but part of the secret lies in the prophetic visions. Our people—no offense to you, Cronaca—will run after anything in the shape of a prophet, especially if he prophesies terrors and tribulations."

"Rather say, Cennini," answered Cronaca, "that the chief secret lies in the Frate's pure life and strong faith, which stamp him as a messenger of God."

"I admit it—I admit it," said Cennini, opening his palms as he rose from the chair. "His life is spotless: no man has impeached it."

"He is satisfied with the pleasant lust of arrogance," Cei burst out bitterly. "I can see it in that proud lip and satisfied eye of his. He hears the air filled with his own name—Fra Girolamo Savonarola, of Ferrara; the prophet, the saint, the mighty preacher, who frightens the very babies of Florence into laying down their wicked baubles."

"Come, come, Francesco, you are out of humor with waiting," said the conciliatory Nello. "Let me stop your mouth with a little lather. I must not have my friend Cronaca made angry: I have a regard for his chin; and his chin is in no respect altered since he became a Piagnone. And for my own part, I confess, when the Frate was preaching in the Duomo last Advent, I got into such a trick of slipping in to listen to him that I might have turned Piagnone too, if I had not been hindered by the liberal nature of my art; and also by the length of the sermons, which are sometimes a good while before they get to the moving point. But, as Messer Niccolò here says, the Frate lays hold of the people by some power over and above his prophetic visions. Monks and nuns who prophesy are not of that rareness. For what says Luigi

Under the Loggia.

The upper loggia of Bardo's house rose like a crown above the surrounding structures, forming a sheltered gallery around its quadrangular walls. On the street-facing side, columns bore the weight of the roof, while the rear opened into a series of arched windows, offering a view over the chaotic jumble of poorly built dwellings toward the hill of Bogoli. It was here, near one of these arches close to the entrance, that Tito waited. The sunlight slanted across him with a sickening intensity, mingling with the ruin of his hopes. He had never truly believed that Romola's passion could overcome the repulsion born of his secret; he lacked the vanity to imagine her love rooted in ignorance rather than truth. Yet, as he pictured her approaching in her radiant beauty, softened by those soft hazel eyes, a selfish wish took hold: he wished she were lower, merely mortal enough to allow him to clasp and kiss her before they parted. He had known only fleeting glances and brief touches from her, a hunger for solitude with her that had grown insatiable. Now, they were to be alone, yet she stood there, seemingly inexorably distant.

Then the door moved. Romola appeared. It struck Tito not as a sight but as a flash of lightning; he felt the glory haloing her head, the tearful appeal in her gaze, and heard the cry of love on her lips—"Tito!"—before she was already in his arms, sobbing against him.

How desperately Romola had longed through the sleepless nights to see that bright face! The new specter of death, the bewildering doubt stirred by tales of a life alien to her understanding, and the haunting vision she seemed to inhabit as her own dream had sharpened her awareness. It was Tito who had first brought the warm stream of hope into her life, turning away the keen edge of pain regarding her brother. She would tell him everything; there was no one else. Restrained all morning before her father, the dam of her emotions finally broke. Proud and controlled to the outside world, Romola was as simple and unreserved as a child in her love for Tito. Content with days of silent glances, she now felt the urgent need to cling to him, with no thought hindering her.

"My Romola! my goddess!" Tito murmured, clasping her gently and kissing the thick golden ripples of her hair. He was in paradise; disgrace, shame, and parting held no fear. This happiness was too potent to be marred by the knowledge that she was deceived; indeed, he rejoiced in her delusion, for concealment had been wisdom. He could only regret his needless dread, or perhaps, that the dread had been worth suffering for the sake of this sudden rapture.

The sobbing ceased, and Romola raised her head. They stood gazing at one another with the sweet wonder of young love—she with her long white hands in his dark-brown curls, he with his fingers bathed in streaming gold. Each was beautiful to the other, experiencing that undisturbed mutual consciousness for the first time. A new, cold sadness pressed on Romola's heart, making her linger in the silent soothing of their nearness, while Tito dared not press his lips to hers, for that would be a change.

"Tito," she said finally, "it has been altogether painful, but I must tell you everything. Your strength will help me to resist impressions that reason cannot shake."

"I know, Romola—I know he is dead," Tito replied. His long, lustrous eyes revealed nothing of the many wishes that would have ended that life long ago if mere desire held such potency. Romola read her own pure thoughts in their dark depths as one reads letters in a happy dream.

"So changed, Tito! It pierced me to think it was Dino. And so strangely hard: not a word to my father, nothing but a vision he wanted to tell me. Yet it was piteous—the struggling breath, the eyes that seemed to look toward the crucifix and yet not see it. I shall never forget it; it seems as if it will stand between me and everything I shall ever look at."

Her heart swelled again, forcing her to pause, but the need to disburden her mind urged her to repress the rising anguish. When she spoke again, her thoughts had traveled slightly.

"It was strange, Tito. The vision was about our marriage, and yet he knew nothing of you."

"What was it, my Romola? Sit down and tell me," Tito said, leading her to the nearby bench. A fear had crossed him that the vision might somehow relate to Baldassarre, prompting this sudden shift in position.

Romola recounted everything from her entry into San Marco, omitting not a single word of her brother's speech, which had burned itself into her memory. But at the end of the vision, she paused; the rest remained too vivid to utter, and she sat staring into the distance, almost unaware of Tito's presence. His mind was now at ease; the vague vision had passed over him like white mist, leaving no mark. He remained silent, waiting for her to continue.

"I took it," she continued, as if he had read her thoughts. "I took the crucifix; it is down below in my bedroom."

"And now, my Romola," Tito entreated, "banish these ghastly thoughts. The vision was an ordinary monkish hallucination, bred of fasting and fanatical ideas. It surely holds no weight for you."

"No, Tito; no. But poor Dino, *he* believed it was a divine message. It is strange," she mused, "this life of men possessed by fervid beliefs that seem like madness to others. Dino was not a vulgar fanatic; and that Fra Girolamo—his very voice seems to have penetrated me with a sense that there is some truth in what moves them: some truth of which I know nothing."

"It was only because your feelings were highly wrought, my Romola. Your brother's state of mind was no more than a form of that theosophy which has been the common disease of excitable dreamers in all ages; the same ideas your father's old antagonist, Marsilio Ficino, pores over in the New Platonists. Only your brother's passionate nature drove him to act out what others merely write and talk about. As for Fra Girolamo, he is simply a narrow-minded monk with a gift for preaching and instilling terror. Any words or voice would have shaken you at that moment. When your mind has rested, you will judge such things as you have always done."

"Not about poor Dino," Romola said. "I was angry with him; my heart seemed to close against him while he spoke, but since then I have thought less of my own mind and more of his. Oh, Tito! it was very piteous to see his young life ending thus. That yearning look at the crucifix when he gasped for breath—I can never forget it. Last night I stared at the crucifix for a long while, trying to see how it could help him, until by the lamplight it seemed to me as if the suffering face shed pity."

"My Romola, promise me to resist such thoughts; they are fit for sickly nuns, not for my golden-tressed Aurora, who looks made to scatter all such twilight fantasies. Try not to think of them now; we shall not long be alone together."

His final words were uttered in a tone of tender beseeching, and he turned her face toward him with a gentle touch of his right hand. Romola had been gazing absently at the arched opening, failing to see the distant hill, having remained mentally in the chapter house, contemplating the pale images of sorrow and death.

Tito's touch and voice recalled her. Now, in the warm sunlight, she perceived that rich dark beauty that seemed to gather around it all images of joy—purple vines festooned between elms, strong corn perfecting itself under the vibrating heat, bright winged creatures hurrying among flowers, round limbs beating the earth in gladness with cymbals aloft, light melodies chanted to the thrilling rhythm of strings—all signs of Nature reveling in her force. It was a strange, bewildering transition from those pale images of sorrow to this bright youthfulness, like a sun-god knowing nothing of night. What thought could reconcile the worn anguish in her brother's face, that straining after something invisible, with this satisfied strength and beauty, making it intelligible that they belonged to the same world? Or was there never any reconciliation, only a blind worship of clashing deities, first in mad joy and then in wailing? For the first time, Romola felt this questioning need like a sudden uneasy dizziness, a want of something to grasp. It was an experience hardly longer than a sigh, for the eager theorizing of ages is compressed, as in a seed, into the momentary want of a single mind. But there was no answer to meet the need, and it vanished before the returning rush of young sympathy with the glad, loving beauty beaming upon her in new radiance, like the dawn after one has looked away from it to the grey west.

"Your mind lingers apart from our love, my Romola," Tito said with a soft, reproachful murmur. "It seems a forgotten thing to you."

She looked at the beseeching eyes in silence until the sadness melted from her own.

"My joy!" she said in her full, clear voice.

"Do you really care for me enough, then, to banish those chill fancies, or shall you always be suspecting me as the Great Tempter?" Tito asked, smiling brightly.

"How should I not care for you more than for everything else? Everything I had felt before in all my life—about my father, about my loneliness—was a preparation to love you. You would laugh at me, Tito, if you knew what sort of man I used to think I should marry—some scholar with deep lines in his face, like Alamanno Rinuccini, with rather grey hair, who would agree with my father in taking the side of the Aristotelians and be willing to live with him. I used to think about the love read of in poets, but I never dreamed anything like that could happen to me here in Florence in our old library. And then *you* came, Tito, and were so much to my father, and I began to believe that life could be happy for me too."

"My goddess! is there any woman like you?" Tito exclaimed, admiring the blended majesty and simplicity in her.

"But, dearest," he continued, somewhat timidly, "if you minded more about our marriage, you would persuade your father and Messer Bernardo not to think of any more delays. But you seem not to mind."

"Yes, Tito, I will, I do mind. But I am sure my godfather will urge more delay now because of Dino's death. He has never agreed with my father about disowning Dino, and you know he has always said we ought to wait until you have been at least a year in Florence. Do not think hardly of my godfather. I know he is prejudiced and narrow, yet he is very noble. He has often said it is folly in my father to want to keep his library apart so it may bear his name; yet he would try to carry out my father's wish. That seems to me very great and noble—that power of respecting a feeling which he does not share or understand."

"I have no rancour against Messer Bernardo for thinking you too precious for me, my Romola," Tito said, and that was true. "But your father, then, knows of his son's death?"

"Yes, I told him—I could not help it. I told him where I had been and that I had seen Dino die, but nothing else; and he has commanded me not to speak of it again. But he has been very silent this morning, and has had those restless movements which always go to my heart; they look as if he were trying to get outside the prison of his blindness. Let us go to him now. I had persuaded him to try to sleep, because he sleeps little at night. Your voice will soothe him, Tito: it always does."

"And not one kiss? I have not had one," Tito said in his gentle, reproachful tone, which gave him an air of dependence very charming in a creature with such rare gifts that seemed to excuse presumption.

A sweet pink blush spread quickly over Romola's face and neck as she bent toward him. It seemed impossible that their kisses could ever become common things.

"Let us walk once round the loggia," Romola said, "before we go down."

"There is something grim and grave to me always about Florence," Tito remarked as they paused before the house, looking over the opposite roofs to the other side of the river. "Even in its merriment there is something shrill and hard—biting rather than gay. I wish we lived in Southern Italy, where thought is broken, not by weariness, but by delicious languors such as never seem to come over the 'ingenia acerrima Florentina.' I should like to see you under that southern sun, lying among the flowers, subdued into mere enjoyment, while I bent over you and touched the lute and sang to you some little unconscious strain that seemed all one with the light and the warmth. You have never known that happiness of the nymphs, my Romola."

"No; but I have dreamed of it often since you came. I am very thirsty for a deep draught of joy—for a life all bright like you. But we will not think of it now, Tito; it seems to me as if there would always be pale sad faces among the flowers, and eyes that look in vain. Let us go."

The Portrait.

Tito departed from the Via de' Bardi that day with a heart swelling in exultant satisfaction, convinced at last that the shadow of threatened peril had been entirely dispelled. Yet, as the immediate presence of Romola and her father faded from his view, his thoughts drifted back to those futile hours of dread. He recalled with a shudder the actions he had taken, realizing now that he would never have parted with his ring had he possessed true foresight. To surrender a gem he had professed to cherish would have appeared sordid to Romola and her circle; he would have needed to feign a noble purpose, a desire to make a special gift with the proceeds. At that moment, however, Tito felt a nauseating weariness of all simulation. He was safely clear of the consequences that might have arisen from that initial deception, and the weight of it had vanished. Kind fortune had granted him immunity, and he felt it was only fair that she should reap the reward. Who truly suffered? The results for Baldassarre remained too murky to calculate, but Tito desired now to be free from any hidden shackles that might chafe beneath his ties to Romola. Unaware that the very delight in this immunity was deadening the sensibilities required to save him from future entanglements, he moved forward with a lightness he did not fully comprehend.

After all, the sale of the ring was a trifling matter. Was it equally slight that little Tessa lived under a delusion, her small head filled with expectations destined for disappointment? Should he seek her out alone to undeceive her immediately, or leave the revelation to time and chance? Happy dreams were pleasant, yet they ended swiftly with the daylight and the stir of life. The image of her—sweet, pouting, innocent, and round—was impossible to banish from his mind. He considered taking her a present to cheer her, perhaps to observe if her stepfather treated her more cruelly now that her mother was gone. Or, he mused, should he undeceive her at once and then inform Romola, so they might secure a happier fate for the poor child? No. That unfortunate incident involving the *cerretano* and the marriage, compounded by his allowing Tessa to depart in delusion, must never be known to Romola. Since no enlightenment could erase the memory from Tessa's mind, there would always be a risk of betrayal; moreover, even a child might harbor gall when her love proved unrequited. Yes, she must be in love with him, and that made it prudent that he see her no more. Yet, it was merely a trifling adventure, the sort a country girl might ponder until some ruddy peasant won her affection, at which point she would break her silence and discover her freedom. *Dunque*—good-bye, Tessa! Kindest wishes! Tito resolved that the silly affair of the *cerretano* would bear no further consequences for himself. People often believed their own resolutions to be ironclad. As for the fifty-five florins, the purchase-money for the ring, he had already decided what to do with a portion of it. He conceived an ingenious plan that would ease his conscience regarding the missing ring and serve as a safeguard against the recurrence of Romola's monkish fancies, which were especially repugnant to him. With this purpose fixed in his mind, he turned toward the Via Gualfonda to seek Piero di Cosimo, the artist whose mastery of fantastic mythological design was essential to Tito's scheme.

Entering the courtyard where Piero's dwelling stood, Tito observed the heavy iron knocker, thickly bound in wool and ingeniously secured with cords. Remembering the painter's habit of stuffing his ears against intrusive noise, Tito was unsurprised by this defense against visitors' thunder. He tapped modestly with his knuckles, then escalated to a more importunate shaking of the door. In vain! Just as Tito prepared to withdraw, blaming himself for wasting time on a visit he could wait for at Nello's, a little girl emerged carrying a basket of eggs. She approached the door, stood on tiptoe, and pushed up a small iron plate sliding in grooves. Peering through the aperture, she called out in a piping voice, "Messer Piero!"

Moments later, the bolts clicked, the door swung open, and Piero appeared in a red night-cap and a loose brown serge tunic, sleeves rolled to the shoulder. He darted a look of surprise at Tito but, without further acknowledgment, reached out to take the basket from the child. Re-entering the house, he soon returned with the empty basket, asking, "How much to pay?"

"Two grossoni, Messer Piero; they are all ready boiled, my mother says."

Piero extracted the coins from the leather pouch at his belt, and the little maiden trotted away, casting upward glances of awed admiration at the surprising young signor.

Piero's gaze, however, was far less complimentary as he addressed Tito. "What do you want at my door, Messer Greco? I saw you this morning at Nello's; if you had asked me then, I could have told you that I see no man in this house without knowing his business and agreeing with him beforehand."

"Pardon, Messer Piero," Tito replied with his characteristic imperturbable good humor. "I acted without sufficient reflection. I remembered nothing but your admirable skill in inventing pretty caprices, when a sudden desire for something of that sort prompted me to come to you."

The painter's manners were notoriously odd to everyone, so this reception was not a special affront. Even if Tito had suspected offensive intent, the impulse to resentment would have been weaker than his desire to conquer goodwill. Piero made a grimace habitual to him when spoken to with flattering suavity. He grinned, stretching the corners of his mouth and pressing down his brows to defy any divination of his feelings beneath that kind of stroking.

"And what may that need be?" he asked after a pause. In his heart, he was tempted by the hinted opportunity to apply his invention.

"I require a very delicate miniature device drawn from certain fables of the poets, which you will know how to combine for me. It must be painted on a wooden case—I will show you the size—in the form of a triptych. The interior may be simple gilding; it is on the exterior that I wish the device. It is a favorite subject with you Florentines—the triumph of Bacchus and Ariadne—but I desire it treated in a new way. A story in Ovid will provide the necessary hints. Young Bacchus must be seated in a ship, his head bound with clusters of grapes, a spear entwined with vine-leaves in his hand: dark-berried ivy must wind about the masts and sails, the oars must be thyrsi, and flowers must wreathe themselves about the poop; leopards and tigers must crouch before him, and dolphins sport around. But I want the fair-haired Ariadne beside him, made immortal with her golden crown—that is not in Ovid's story, but no matter, you will conceive it all—and above them, young Loves, such as you know how to paint, shooting with roses at the points of their arrows—"

"Say no more!" Piero interrupted. "I have Ovid in the vulgar tongue. Find me the passage. I love not to be choked with other men's thoughts. You may come in."

Piero led the way through the first room, where a basket of eggs rested on the open hearth near a heap of broken shells and a bank of ashes. In strange keeping with that sordid litter stood a low bedstead of carved ebony, covered carelessly with a piece of rich oriental carpet that looked as if it had once served to cover the steps to a Madonna's throne. Beside it was a carved *cassone*, or large chest, adorned with painted devices on its sides and lid. There was hardly any other furniture in the large room except casts, wooden steps, easels, and rough boxes, all festooned with cobwebs.

The next room was larger but even more crowded. Apparently, Piero was keeping the Festa, for the double door beneath the window, which admitted the painter's light from above, was thrown open, revealing a garden—or rather a thicket—where fig-trees and vines grew in tangled, trailing wildness among nettles and hemlocks, and a tall cypress lifted its dark head from a stifling mass of yellowish mulberry leaves. It seemed as if that dank luxuriance had begun to penetrate even within the walls of the wide, lofty room. In one corner, amidst a confused heap of carved marble fragments and rusty armor, tufts of long grass and dark feathery fennel had made their way, and a large stone vase, tilted on one side, seemed to be pouring out the ivy that streamed around. Hanging about the walls were pen and oil sketches of fantastic sea-monsters; dances of satyrs and maenads; Saint Margaret's resurrection from the devouring dragon; Madonnas bathed in supernal light; studies of plants and grotesque heads. On irregular, rough shelves, a few books were scattered among great drooping bunches of corn, bullocks' horns, pieces of dried honeycomb, stones with patches of rare-colored lichen, skulls and bones, peacock feathers, and large birds' wings. Rising from the dirty litter of the floor were life-sized figures: one in the frock of a Vallombrosan monk, strangely surmounted by a helmet with a barred visor, another smothered in brocade and skins hastily tossed over it. Among this heterogeneous still life, several speckled and white pigeons were perched or strutting, too tame to fly at the entrance of men; three corpulent toads crawled in an intimate, friendly manner near the door-stone; and a white rabbit, apparently the model for the creature frightening Cupid in the picture of Mars and Venus placed on the central easel, twitched its nose with content on a box full of bran.

"And now, Messer Greco," Piero said, gesturing for Tito to sit on a low stool near the door, then standing over him with folded arms, "do not try to see everything at once, like Messer Domeneddio, but let me know how large you would have this same triptych."

Tito indicated the required dimensions, and Piero marked them on a piece of paper.

"And now for the book," Piero said, reaching down a manuscript volume.

"There's nothing about the Ariadne there," Tito replied, handing over the passage. "But you will remember I want the crowned Ariadne by the side of the young Bacchus: she must have golden hair."

"Ha!" Piero said abruptly, pursing his lips again. "And you want them to be likenesses, eh?" he added, looking down into Tito's face.

Tito laughed and blushed. "I know you are great at portraits, Messer Piero; but I could not ask Ariadne to sit for you, because the painting is a secret."

"There it is! I want her to sit to me. Giovanni Vespucci wants me to paint him a picture of Oedipus and Antigone at Colonos, as he has expounded it to me: I have a fancy for the subject, and I want Bardo and his daughter to sit for it. Now, you ask them; and then I'll put the likeness into Ariadne."

"Agreed, if I can prevail with them. And your price for the Bacchus and Ariadne?"

"Baie! If you get them to let me paint them, that will pay me. I'd rather not have your money: you may pay for the case."

"And when shall I sit for you?" Tito asked. "For if we have one likeness, we must have two."

"I don't want your likeness; I've got it already," Piero replied. "Only I've made you look frightened. I must take the fright out of it for Bacchus."

As he spoke, Piero laid down the book and went to look among some paintings propped against the wall. He returned with an oil-sketch in his hand.

"I call this as good a bit of portrait as I ever did," he said, examining it as he advanced. "Yours is a face that expresses fear well, because it's naturally a bright one. I noticed it the first time I saw you. The rest of the picture is hardly sketched; but I've painted *you* in thoroughly."

Piero turned the sketch and held it toward Tito's eyes. He saw himself with his right hand uplifted, holding a wine-cup, in the attitude of triumphant joy, yet with his face turned away from the cup, displaying an expression of such intense fear in the dilated eyes and pallid lips that a cold stream ran through his veins, as if he were being thrown into sympathy with his imaged self.

"You are beginning to look like it already," Piero said with a short laugh, moving the picture away again. "He's seeing a ghost—that fine young man. I shall finish it some day, when I've settled what sort of ghost is the most terrible—whether it should look solid, like a dead man come to life, or half transparent, like a mist."

Tito, somewhat ashamed of himself for a sudden sensitiveness strangely opposed to his usual easy self-command, said carelessly, "That is a subject after your own heart, Messer Piero—a revel interrupted by a ghost. You seem to love the blending of the terrible with the gay. I suppose that is the reason your shelves are so well furnished with death's-heads, while you paint those roguish Loves running away with the armor of Mars. I begin to think you are a Cynic philosopher in the pleasant disguise of a cunning painter."

"Not I, Messer Greco; a philosopher is the last sort of animal I should choose to resemble. I find it enough to live, without spinning lies to account for life. Fowls cackle, asses bray, women chatter, and philosophers spin false reasons—that's the effect the sight of the world brings out of them. Well, I am an animal that paints instead of cackling, or braying, or spinning lies. And now, I think, our business is done; you'll keep to your side of the bargain about the Oedipus and Antigone?"

"I will do my best,"

Messer Bernardo del Nero remained as steadfast in his counsel as Romola had anticipated: the marriage must wait until Easter. In this, Bardo yielded entirely to the guidance of his wise and pragmatic friend. Yet, even Bernardo, though immune to the personal charm Tito exerted over others, could not wholly ignore the seductive argument of success that holds sway among men of the world. Tito was ascending rapidly through the highest circles. He had won the favor of the young Cardinal Giovanni de' Medici, who had even hinted at inviting him into his learned retinue for an upcoming journey to Rome. This bright Greek, whose tongue was ever ready yet never quarrelsome, became a cherished presence at the lavish suppers of the Via Larga and at Florentine games where he did not claim to excel, yet admired the incomparable skill of Piero de' Medici with the utmost grace. Through an unbroken sequence of events, Tito's reputation as an agreeable companion in "magnificent" society rendered his learning and talent all the more radiant; he possessed genuine accomplishment sufficient to prevent any exaggerated estimation from proving hazardous. Messer Bernardo, burdened by old prejudices and attachments, found these arguments slowly dismantling his newer, weaker reservations regarding the young Greek stranger, who was perhaps a little too supple. To the aged Florentine, it became impossible to disregard the recommendation of standing well with the most distinguished families. Since Tito was now fully received into that circle whose views constituted the unquestioned standard of social value, it seemed irrational to deny that there was no longer any obstacle to satisfaction in the prospect of such a son-in-law for Bardo, and such a husband for Romola.

It was undeniable that Tito's arrival had marked the dawn of a new life for both father and daughter, surpassing even the first promise. The blind old scholar—whose proud truthfulness would never descend into the commerce of feigned and preposterous admiration that formed the fabric of learned intercourse, varied only by a corresponding excess in vituperation—had fallen into neglect even among his fellow citizens. When mentioned, it was usually said that, while his blindness and the loss of his son were pitiable misfortunes, he was tiresome in contending for the value of his own labors; that his discontent was somewhat inconsistent in a man who had once been openly indifferent to religious rites and who, in days past, had refused offers from various quarters on the slight condition that he take orders, without which it was difficult for patrons to support a scholar. But since Tito's coming, the monotony of thought surrounding Bardo's name had vanished. The old man was understood to have ceased his plaints, and the fair daughter was no longer to be confined in dowerless pride, waiting for a *parentado*. The winning manners and growing favor of the handsome Greek, expected to enter into the dual relation of son and husband, helped transform the new interest into something thoroughly friendly. It was no longer rare for a visitor to enliven the quiet library. Elderly men came from an indefinite prompting to renew former intercourse that arises when an old acquaintance begins to be newly talked about; and young men whom Tito had asked permission to bring once found it easy to return when they overtook him on his way to the Via de' Bardi, resting their hands on his shoulder and falling into easy chat with him. For it was pleasant to behold Romola's beauty; to see her, like the type of womanly majesty described by old Firenzuola, "sitting with a certain grandeur, speaking with gravity, smiling with modesty, and casting around, as it were, an odour of queenliness;" and she seemed to unfold like a strong white lily under this genial breath of admiration and homage. It mattered little to her amidst her new bright life in Tito's love.

Tito had even become the instrument of strengthening the hope in Bardo's mind that he might, before his death, receive the longed-for security concerning his library: that it should not be merged into another collection, nor transferred to a body of monks to bear the name of a monastery, but should remain forever the Bardi Library, for the use of the Florentines. For the old habit of trusting in the Medici could not die out while their influence remained the strongest lever in the State; and Tito, once possessing the ear of Cardinal Giovanni de' Medici, might accomplish more even than Messer Bernardo towards winning the desired interest, for he could demonstrate to a learned audience the peculiar value of Bardi's collection. Tito himself spoke sanguinely of such a result, eager to cheer the old man, and conscious that Romola repaid those gentle words to her father with a sort of adoration that no direct tribute to herself could have won.

This question of the library became the subject of numerous discussions between Bernardo del Nero and Romola as Christmas passed and the prospect of the marriage drew near—but always out of Bardo's hearing. For Bardo nursed a vague belief, which they dared not disturb, that his property, apart from the library, was adequate to meet all demands. He would not even, except under a momentary pressure of angry despondency, admit to himself that the will by which he had disinherited Dino would leave Romola the heir of nothing but debts; or that he needed anything from patronage beyond the security that a separate locality should be assigned to his library, in return for a deed of gift by which he made it over to the Florentine Republic.

"My opinion is," said Bernardo to Romola during a consultation beneath the loggia, "that since you are to be married, and Messer Tito will have a competent income, we should begin to wind up affairs and ascertain exactly the sum necessary to save the library from being touched, instead of letting the debts accumulate any longer. Your father needs nothing but his shred of mutton and his macaroni every day, and I think Messer Tito may engage to supply that for the years that remain; he can let it be in place of the *morgen-cap*."

"Tito has always known that my life is bound up with my father's," said Romola. "And he is better to my father than I am; he delights in making him happy."

"Ah, he is not made of the same clay as other men, is he?" said Bernardo, smiling. "Thy father has thought of shutting woman's folly out of thee by cramming thee with Greek and Latin; but thou hast been as ready to believe in the first pair of bright eyes and the first soft words that have come within reach of thee, as if thou couldst say nothing by heart but Paternosters, like other Christian men's daughters."

"Now, godfather," said Romola, shaking her head playfully, "as if it were only bright eyes and soft words that made me love Tito! You know better. You know I love my father and you because you are both good, and I love Tito too because he is so good. I see it, I feel it, in everything he says and does. And if he is handsome, too, why should I not love him the better for that? It seems to me beauty is part of the finished language by which goodness speaks. You know *you* must have been a very handsome youth, godfather"—she looked up with one of her happy, loving smiles at the stately old man—"you were about as tall as Tito, and you had very fine eyes; only you looked a little sterner and prouder, and—"

"And Romola likes to have all the pride to herself?" said Bernardo, not inaccessible to this pretty coaxing. "However, it is well that in one way Tito's demands are more modest than those of any Florentine husband of fitting rank that we should have been likely to find for you; he wants no dowry."

Thus it was settled between Messer Bernardo del Nero, Romola, and Tito. Bardo assented with a wave of the hand when Bernardo told him that he thought it would be well now to begin to sell property and clear off debts; being accustomed to think of debts and property as a sort of thick wood that his imagination never even penetrated, still less got beyond. And Tito set about winning Messer Bernardo's respect by inquiring, with his ready faculty, into Florentine money-matters, the secrets of the *Monti* or public funds, the values of real property, and the profits of banking.

"You will soon forget that Tito is not a Florentine, godfather," said Romola. "See how he is learning everything about Florence."

"It seems to me he is one of the *demoni*, who are of no particular country, child," said Bernardo, smiling. "His mind is a little too nimble to be weighted with all the stuff we men carry about in our hearts."

Romola smiled too, in happy confidence.

The final week of the Carnival had swollen the veins of Florence to bursting. The streets thrummed with a chaotic vitality, a cacophony of masqued processions chanting songs introduced by Lorenzo the Magnificent, and the *rigoletto*, a favored round dance footed beneath a pale, frosty sky. Practical jokes ranged from the harmless scattering of comfits to the malicious hurling of stones. The boys and striplings, a formidable element in Florentine crowds, had reached the height of their unmanageable energy, acting like tree-crickets in their noise. Their immemorial privilege was to bar the path with poles until a tribute was paid for suppers and bonfires, culminating in the standing entertainment of stone-throwing. This was not a monotonous affair; the resulting maiming varied, and it was not uncommon for a single casualty to be killed. Thus, the pleasures of the Carnival were checkered, a grotesque tapestry of grossness and barbarity that a painter would struggle to render without turning the canvas to the wall, save for the grave historical purpose of justifying a reforming zeal often condemned for its narrowness. Yet, amidst this, there remained a more innocent, picturesque merriment, born of a people with quick animal spirits and sensitive organs, lacking the heavy sottishness of the north or the stealthy fierceness of the south that turns a brawl into a dagger-thrust.

It was high morning, yet the carnival spirits lingered in a lazy recapitulation of the night's jests. Tito Melema walked briskly toward the Via de' Bardi, accompanied by Young Bernardo Dovizi—the keen-eyed Cardinal da Bibbiena of later portraits. They held an animated discourse on a subject seemingly unrelated to the sights and sounds pushing past them along the Por' Santa Maria. Yet, as they discussed, smiled, and gesticulated, both cast frequent, quick glances around. At the turn toward the Lung' Arno, leading to the Ponte Rubaconte, Tito's rapid survey revealed someone he desperately wished to avoid recognition at that precise moment. His mind was thoroughly preoccupied; he looked forward to a unique occasion in his life: his betrothal, set for the evening. The ceremony had been resolved upon suddenly. While preparations had been underway for some time—chiefly Tito's application of florins to furnish rooms in Bardo's dwelling, which had always been scantily furnished save for the library—it had been intended to defer both betrothal and marriage until after Easter, when Tito's year of probation, insisted upon by Bernardo del Nero, would conclude. However, an express proposition arrived inviting Tito to follow Cardinal Giovanni to Rome to assist Bernardo Dovizi with his superior knowledge of Greek in arranging a library. With no possibility of declining what lay so plainly on the road to advancement, Tito became urgent in his entreaties that the betrothal occur before his departure. There would be less delay upon his return, and it would be less painful to part if he and Romola were outwardly as well as inwardly pledged, possessing a claim that defied Messer Bernardo or anyone else to nullify. For the betrothal, with rings exchanged and mutual contracts signed, constituted more than half the legality of marriage, to be completed later by the nuptial benediction. Romola's feelings met Tito's in this wish, and the consent of the elders was won.

Now, Tito hastened, amidst arrangements for his departure the next day, to snatch a morning visit to Romola, to exchange any last words needed before their evening meeting. It was not a time when any recognition could be pleasant, let alone one by Tessa. It was unmistakably Tessa whom he caught sight of moving with a timid, forlorn look toward that very turn of the Lung' Arno. As he continued his talk with the young Dovizi, an uncomfortable undercurrent of consciousness told him Tessa had seen him and would certainly follow. There was no escaping her along this direct road by the Arno and over the Ponte Rubaconte. She would not dare to speak or approach while he was not alone, so he continued to keep Dovizi with him until they reached Bardo's door. He quickened his pace, weaving new threads of conversation, yet the sense that Tessa trailed behind him, though physically unseen, grew stronger and more irritating. Perhaps it was worse because a certain tenderness and pity for the poor little thing made the determination to escape without visible notice an unagreeable resource. Yet Tito persevered, carrying his companion to the door, cleverly managing his "addio" without turning his face in a direction where importunate blue eyes might catch him. Ascending the stone steps, he tried to banish unpleasant thoughts by convincing himself that Tessa might not have seen him, or, if she had, might not have followed.

But perhaps because that possibility could not be relied upon strongly, when the visit ended, he emerged with a quick step and an air of unconsciousness regarding anything to his right or left. Human eyes, however, take in a wide angle without asking leave of the will, and Tito knew there was a little figure in a white hood standing near the doorway. He knew it quite well before he felt a hand laid firmly on his arm. It was a real grasp, not a light, timid touch; for poor Tessa, seeing his rapid step, had started forward with a desperate effort. When he stopped and turned, her face wore a frightened look, as if she dreaded the effect of her boldness.

"Tessa!" Tito said, with more sharpness in his voice than she had ever heard. "Why are you here? You must not follow me—you must not stand about door-places waiting for me."

Her blue eyes widened with tears, and she said nothing. Tito feared something worse than ridicule if he were seen in the Via de' Bardi with a girlish *contadina* looking pathetically at him. It was a street of high, silent dwellings, not of traffic, but Bernardo del Nero, or someone almost as dangerous, might appear at any moment. Even if it had not been the day of his betrothal, the incident would have been awkward and annoying. Yet it would be brutal—impossible—to drive Tessa away with harsh words. That accursed folly with the *cerretano* should have lain buried for months and now spring up as this unseasonable crop of vexation! He could not speak harshly, but he spoke hurriedly.

"Tessa, I cannot—must not talk to you here. I will go on to the bridge and wait for you there. Follow me slowly."

He turned and walked fast to the Ponte Rubaconte, leaning against the wall of a quaint little house rising at even distances on the bridge, looking toward the way Tessa would come. It would have softened a much harder heart than Tito's to see the little thing advancing, her round face much paled and saddened since he had parted from it at the door of the "Nunziata." Happily, it was the least frequented of the bridges, and there were scarcely any passengers. He lost no time in speaking as she approached.

"Now, Tessa, I have very little time. You must not cry. Why did you follow me this morning? You must not do so again."

"I thought," Tessa whispered, struggling against a sob that rose immediately at the new timbre of Tito's voice, "I thought you wouldn't be so long before you came to take care of me again. And the *patrigno* beats me, and I can't bear it any longer. And always when I come for a holiday I walk about to find you, and I can't. Oh, please don't send me away from you again! It has been so long, and I cry so now, because you never come to me. I can't help it, for the days are so long, and I don't mind about the goats and kids, or anything—and I can't—"

Sobs came fast now, accompanied by great tears. Tito felt he could do nothing but comfort her. Send her away—yes, he must do that, at once. But it was all the more impossible to tell her anything that would leave her in a state of hopeless grief. He saw new trouble in the background, but the difficulty of the moment was too pressing to weigh distant consequences.

"Tessa, my little one," he said in his old caressing tones, "you must not cry. Bear with the cross *patrigno* a little longer. I will come back to you. But I'm going now to Rome—a long, long way off. I shall come back in a few weeks, and then I promise you to come and see you. Promise me to be good and wait for me."

It was the well-remembered voice again, and the mere sound was half enough to soothe Tessa. She looked up at him with trusting eyes, still glittering with tears, sobbing all the while despite her utmost efforts to obey. Again he said, gently, "Promise me, my Tessa."

"Yes," she whispered. "But you won't be long?"

"No, not long. But I must *go now*. And remember what I told you, Tessa. Nobody must know that you ever see me, else you will lose me for ever. And now, when I have left you, go straight home, and never follow me again. Wait till I come to you. Good-bye, my little Tessa: I *will* come."

There was no help for it; he must turn and leave her without looking behind to see how she bore it, for he had no time to spare. When he did look round, he was in the Via de' Benci, where he could not see what was happening on the bridge; but Tessa was too trusting and obedient not to do exactly what he had told her.

Yes, the difficulty was at an end for that day, yet this return of Tessa, at a moment when it was impossible to put an end to all difficulty by undeceiving her, was an unpleasant incident to carry in his memory. But Tito's mind was just now thoroughly penetrated with a hopeful first love, associated with all happy prospects flattering to his ambition; and that future necessity of grieving Tessa could be scarcely more to him than the far-off cry of some little suffering animal buried in the thicket to a merry cavalcade in the sunny plain. When, for the second time that day, Tito hastened across the Ponte Rubaconte, the thought of Tessa caused no perceptible diminution of his happiness. He was well muffled in his mantle, less perhaps to protect him from the cold than from the additional notice that would have been drawn upon him by his dainty apparel. He leaped up the stone steps by two at a time and said hurriedly to Maso, who met him, "Where is the damigella?"

"In the library; she is quite ready, and Monna Brigida and Messer Bernardo are already there with Ser Braccio, but none of the rest of the company."

"Ask her to give me a few minutes alone; I will await her in the *salotto*."

Tito entered a room fitted up in the utmost contrast to the half-pallid, half-sombre tints of the library. The walls were brightly frescoed with "caprices" of nymphs and loves sporting under the blue among flowers and birds. The only furniture besides the red leather seats and the central table were two tall white vases and a young faun playing the flute, modeled by a promising youth named Michelangelo Buonarotti. It was a room that gave a sense of being in the sunny open air.

Tito kept his mantle round him and looked toward the door. Not long after, Romola entered, all white and gold, more than ever like a tall lily. Her white silk garment was bound by a golden girdle falling with large tassels, and above that was the rippling gold of her hair, surmounted by the white mist of her long veil, fastened on her brow by a band of pearls—the gift of Bernardo del Nero—which was now parted from her face so that it all floated backward.

"Regina mia!" said Tito, taking her hand and kissing it, still keeping his mantle round him. He could not help going backward to look at her again, while she stood in calm delight, with that exquisite self-consciousness which rises under the gaze of admiring love.

"Romola, will you show me the next room now?" Tito said, checking himself with the remembrance that time might be short. "You said I should see it when you had arranged everything."

Without speaking, she led the way into a long, narrow room painted brightly like the other, but only with birds and flowers. The furniture was all old; there were old, faded objects for feminine use or ornament arranged in an open cabinet between the two narrow windows. Above the cabinet hung the portrait of Romola's mother, and below this, on top of the cabinet, stood the crucifix Romola had brought from San Marco.

"I have brought something under my mantle," Tito said, smiling. Throwing off the large loose garment, he showed the little tabernacle painted by Piero di Cosimo. The painter had carried out Tito's intention charmingly, thus far atoning for his long delay. "Do you know what this is for, my Romola?" he added, taking her hand and leading her toward the cabinet. "It is a little shrine, which is to hide away from you for ever that remembrancer of sadness. You have done with sadness now; and we will bury all images of it—bury them in a tomb of joy. See!"

A slight quiver passed across Romola's face as Tito took hold of the crucifix. But she had no wish to prevent his purpose; on the contrary, she herself wished to subdue certain importunate memories and questionings which still flitted like unexplained shadows across her happier thought.

He opened the triptych and placed the crucifix within the central space; then, closing it again, he took out the key, set the little tabernacle in the spot where the crucifix had stood, and said, "Now, Romola, look and see if you are satisfied with the portraits old Piero has made of us. Is it not a dainty device? and the credit of choosing it is mine."

"Ah! it is you—it is perfect!" Romola said, looking with moist, joyful eyes at the miniature Bacchus

November 17, 1494. Eighteen months had passed since Tito and Romola were wedded under the Easter sun, a union blessed with a shower of comfits that promised sweetness for their double life. Yet, since that spring, the air of Florence had shifted, thickening with the weight of history. Just as every blossom depends on the sap flowing from the root, the private fortunes of the couple were now tethered to the grand, trembling currents of Italian politics.

Only a week prior, the ancient spirit of the Republic had surged back into the hearts of the Florentines. The great bell in the palace tower had shattered the silence with an alarm, summoning the populace to arms. With rusted weapons and improvised clubs, they had driven the Medici from their throne. The gate of San Gallo slammed shut on Piero, fleeing toward Bologna with his mercenaries in panic, and barred the path of his younger brother, the Cardinal, who escaped disguised as a Franciscan monk. A price was placed on their heads, houses were sacked in accordance with old precedents, and the ignominious portraits of past conspirators were scrubbed from public walls. The exiles were welcomed home, and the half-grown tyrants were ejected from their splendid nest in the Via Larga. The Republic had, for the moment, reclaimed its will.

Now, however, the great palace in the Via Larga was being dressed for a different occupant. Drapery draped the streets in unfamiliar colors; banners spilled from windows; carpets and tapestries covered every step where exceptional feet might tread. This was the visible proof of a city brimming with anticipation. The stream of color flowed from the palace, past the Cathedral, through the Piazza della Signoria, and across the Ponte Vecchio to the Porta San Frediano. There, near the gate facing Pisa, a platform and canopy awaited the Signoria. Messer Luca Corsini, a doctor of law, felt his heart flutter with the anticipation of delivering a Latin oration. Every chief elder prepared himself, smoothing their chins and adjusting their silk *luccos*, while the well-born youths inspected their new tunics, styled after the French fashion, hoping to impress the stranger with a peculiar grace. A vast procession of clergy, from the Archbishop in his radiance to trains of black, white, and grey monks, consulted early in the morning on how to marshal their relics and sacred banners, ready to greet the illustrious visitor at three o'clock in the afternoon.

This was an unprecedented guest. He had crossed the Alpine passes with an army Italy had never witnessed: thousands of terrible Swiss, hardened to fight for love, hate, or coin; a host of gallant cavaliers; and an infantry where every hundredth man carried an arquebus. More terrifying still were the bronze cannons, hurling iron balls instead of stones, drawn by horses rather than oxen, capable of firing twice before a city could repair the breach. Some compared this newcomer to Charlemagne, the rebuilder of Florence and conqueror of degenerate kings; others saw in him the likeness of Cyrus, the liberator of the chosen people. He arrived with glorious projects: to march through Italy amid jubilation, to satisfy conflicting complaints at Rome, to seize the Kingdom of Naples by hereditary right and sword, and from there to launch a crusade against the Turks, cutting them down or converting them to Christ. This was the scheme of the Most Christian King, Charles the Eighth of France, son of the subtle Louis XI, whose shadow loomed over the strongest Christian monarchy of the age.

On a general level, the spectacle seemed grandiose, fit to revive memories of divine dispensations. A widespread conviction held that the arrival of the French king and his host was an event beyond the ordinary order of Providence—a moment when marble statues might sweat, phantom warriors fight in the air, and beasts bear monstrous offspring. This belief rested less on the sheer magnitude of the invasion than on the moral emotions of the times, finding its most remarkable voice in a single man.

That man was Fra Girolamo Savonarola, Prior of the Dominican convent of San Marco. On a September morning, as news of the French army's entry rang in men's ears, he preached in the Cathedral from the text, "Behold I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth." He believed this was supreme guidance, interpreting the "flood" as a symbol of both avenging wrath and purifying mercy. His audience, comprising the most cultivated spirits of the age, listened with shuddering awe. Savonarola possessed a rare power to imprint his beliefs upon others, swaying varied minds. Four years prior, he had proclaimed from Florence's chief pulpit that a scourge was descending to purify the Church. He appeared to hold a mission akin to the Hebrew prophets, viewing the Florentines as a second chosen people. While prophecy in that age was often like a farthing candle illuminating small corners of destiny, Savonarola's vision was a mighty beacon shining far out to warn and guide. To the soberest minds, the supernatural character of his insight was attested by the peculiar conditions of the age.

At the close of 1492, following the death of Lorenzo de' Medici, Italy had enjoyed a peace unthreatened by near danger. There was no fear of famine, for the seasons had been bountiful; new palaces rose in fair cities, and villas dotted pleasant slopes. Those who had more than their share showed no fear for those who had less. Citizens' armor grew rusty, and populations seemed tame, licking the hands of masters who paid for ready-made armies as easily as goods from Smyrna. Even the fear of the Turk had faded, replaced by the Pope's willingness to accept bribes for prospective poisoning rather than plan conquest. Altogether, the world seemed a handsome establishment for the lucky and wise, a realm where lust, obscenity, lying, and treachery were pleasant and useful when properly managed. Patronage of learning and fine arts adorned this substantial delight of tyranny, allowing flattery to be spoken in the choicest Latin and sublime artists to paint the holy and the unclean with equal skill. The Church, though disgraced in its head and lacking vital belief in its lower members, was more prosperous than in past days. The heavens smiled above, and below, there were no signs of earthquake.

Yet, even then, Savonarola had been preaching for two years that a scourge was at hand, that the world was not framed for hypocrites, libertines, and oppressors. From amidst those smiling heavens, he saw a sword hanging—the sword of God's justice, soon to descend with purifying punishment. In brilliant Ferrara, seventeen years prior, the contradiction between men's lives and their professed beliefs had destroyed his appetite for the world, driving him into the cloister at twenty-three. He believed God had entrusted the Church with the sacred lamp of truth, but saw that corruption had turned it into a sepulcher. As scandals multiplied and hypocrisy gave way to impudence, he asked if the world had ceased to have a righteous Ruler. Reason itself declared vengeance imminent; unless the Church were reclaimed, how could the promises of converting heathens and subjecting the world to the one true law be fulfilled? He had seen his belief reflected in visions, frequent since his youth.

The real force of Savonarola's demonstration lay in his burning indignation at wrong, his fervent belief in an Unseen Justice that would end it, and an Unseen Purity that abhorred uncleanness. To his ardent, power-loving soul, the faith in a supreme Ruler merged with the faith in speedy divine interposition to punish and reclaim.

Meanwhile, beneath the splendid masquerade of dignities, conditions worked slowly to disturb the general festivity. Ludovico Sforza, holding the ducal crown of Milan and desiring to wear it himself rather than let it rest on a feeble nephew, feared the Spanish-born King Ferdinand and Crown Prince Alfonso of Naples. These Neapolitans, disliking the cruelty and treachery useless to themselves, objected to poisoning a near relative for a Lombard usurper. The Neapolitan royalties feared their suzerain, Pope Alexander Borgia. All three anxiously watched Florence, lest its midway territory determine the game by underhand backing. All four, along with every small state in Italy, feared Venice—the cautious, stable, and strong power stretching its arms across the Adriatic to the western ports.

It was thought that Lorenzo de' Medici had prevented the fatal outbreak of these jealousies by maintaining the old Florentine alliance with Naples and the Pope while persuading Milan of its general advantage. But young Piero de' Medici's rash vanity quickly nullified his father's wary policy. Ludovico Sforza, roused to suspicion of a league against him, decided to invite the French king to march into Italy and, as heir of the house of Anjou, take possession of Naples. Ambassadors, orators as they were called in those haranguing times, went and came. A recusant cardinal, determined not to acknowledge a Pope elected by bribery and his own particular enemy, also traveled, seconding the invitation with hot rhetoric. The young king seemed to lend a willing ear. By 1493, the rumor spread that Charles the Eighth of France was about to cross the Alps with a mighty army. The Italian populations, accustomed since the fall of the Roman Empire to look for an arbitrator from afar, began to vaguely regard his coming as a means of avenging wrongs and redressing grievances.

In that rumor, Savonarola heard the assurance that his prophecy was being verified. What filled the ears of ancient prophets but the distant tread of foreign armies coming to do the work of justice? He no longer looked vaguely to the horizon for the coming storm; he pointed to the rising cloud. The French army was the new deluge to purify the earth from iniquity; Charles the Eighth was the instrument elected by God, as Cyrus had been of old. All men who desired good rather than evil were to rejoice in his coming, for the scourge would fall destructively on the impenitent alone. Let any city of Italy, let Florence above all—Florence beloved of God, to whose ear the warning voice had been specially sent—repent and turn from its ways like Nineveh, and the storm-cloud would roll over it leaving only refreshing raindrops.

Fra Girolamo's word was powerful, yet now that the new Cyrus had been three months in Italy and was not far from Florence's gates, his presence was expected with mixed feelings, where fear and distrust certainly predominated. It was not understood that he had redressed any grievances; the Florentines clearly had nothing to thank him for. He held their strong frontier fortresses, which Piero de' Medici had surrendered without securing honorable terms. He had done nothing to quell the alarming revolt of Pisa, encouraged by his presence to throw off the Florentine yoke. Orators, even with a prophet at their head, could win no assurance from him except that he would settle everything once within the walls of Florence. Still, there was satisfaction in knowing that the exasperating Piero had been pelted out for the ignominious surrender of the fortresses, and in that act of energy, the spirit of the Republic had recovered some of its old fire.

The preparations for this equivocal guest were not entirely those of a city resigned to submission. Behind the bright drapery and banners symbolic of joy, preparations of another sort were made with common accord by government and people. Hidden within the walls were hired soldiers of the Republic, hastily called from surrounding districts. Old arms were furbished, sharp tools and heavy cudgels laid carefully at hand to be snatched up on short notice. Excellent boards and stakes formed potential barricades, and a good supply of stones waited to make a surprising hail from upper windows. Above all, the people were in a humor for fighting any personage supposed to have designs of hectoring over them, having lately tasted that new pleasure with much relish. This mood was not diminished by the sight of occasional parties of Frenchmen arriving beforehand to choose their quarters, some with a hawk on their left wrist and metaphorically a piece of chalk in their right hand to mark Italian doors. Especially as credible historians imply that many sons of France were characterized by a swagger that must have whetted the Florentine appetite for a little stone-throwing.

This was the temper of Florence on the morning of November 17, 1494.

The sky above the Piazza del Duomo was a dull, slate grey, yet the square itself blazed with the artificial brilliance of a festival. Blue drapery hung heavy in the air, and constellations of yellow lilies and coats of arms dotted the canopy. Banners unfurled at the angles of the Baptistery, though the marble steps of the Duomo remained bare, trodden by the multitude. It was the hour of the Advent sermons, a solemn duty that could not be dispensed with even as the streets wore their holiday colors.

Yet, not all feet moved with the purpose of worship. High and low mingled in a brisk, restless tide, driven by errands rather than piety. Groups clustered in conversation, some eager to miss the sermon, others intent on ignoring it entirely. But the faces of these apparent loungers betrayed no leisurely contentment. Instead, they wore the sharp tension of men waiting for a storm. They listened with keen interest to a single speaker, yet constantly scanned the periphery, their eyes darting at every new arrival.

At the corner where the Piazza's artificial light faded into the sombre grey of the Via de' Cerretani, a distinct cluster of workers stood out against the festive backdrop. Their bare, brawny arms and soiled garments marked them as men of labor, and almost all carried tools that could easily serve as weapons. They gathered around Ser Cioni, a notary whose biting words had once drawn contempt in the Mercato but now commanded a complacent humor from a populace that felt the wind shifting in their favor.

"Never talk to me of bloodthirsty Swiss or fierce French infantry," Ser Cioni declared, his voice incisive. "They might as well be in mountain passes as in our streets. Peasants have destroyed the finest armies of our condottieri when they trapped them between precipices. Tell me, Florentines, need we fear any army in our own streets?"

"That is true, Ser Cioni," replied a dyer, his hands stained with crimson that mimicked blood, a small hatchet tucked into his belt. "Those French cavaliers who strutted in their doublets recently saw a sample of our dinner. I was carrying my cloth near Ognissanti when I saw my masters looking round as if the houses of the Vespucci and the Agli were poor lodging. They eyed us Florentines like top-knotted cocks, pitying our inability to strut. 'Yes, my fine Galli,' I said, 'stick out your stomachs; I have a meat-axe in my belt that will go inside you all the easier.' Then the great bell lowed, and I knew something had happened. I threw down my cloth, grabbed my axe, and ran after them toward the Vigna Nuova. 'What is it, Guccio?' I asked. 'I think it's the Medici coming back,' he said. *Bembè!* I expected so! We reared a barricade, trapping them, and a swarm of our Ciompi arrived, one wielding a great scythe that mowed off a cavalier's feather. It is true! The girls peppered stones to frighten them. Alas, Piero de' Medici never returned; it was a pity, for we would have left him neither legs nor wings."

"Well spoken, Oddo," agreed a young butcher, knife at his belt. "Piero will be a long while before he dares return; he looked as frightened as a hunted chicken when we hustled him in the piazza. He is a coward, or he would have made a better stand with his horsemen. But we shall swallow no Medici again, whatever the French King demands."

"But I dislike those French cannons they speak of," interjected Goro, his face swollen with two years of grievances. "San Giovanni defend us! If Messer Domeneddio means so well by us as your Frate claims, Ser Cioni, why not send the French to Naples instead?"

"Ay, Goro," the dyer nodded. "That is a question worth asking. Why not send them to Naples by Bologna? Or to Arezzo? We would not have minded their going to Arezzo."

"Fools!" Ser Cioni began, attempting to rally them to the cause of Florence's glory, but his words were drowned by a sudden cry: "Look there!"

All heads turned toward the Via de' Cerretani. Advancing was a brilliant party: Lorenzo Tornabuoni, distinguished and imposing; a French nobleman in elaborate white linen and gorgeous embroidery; two other Florentines of high birth in handsome dresses; and, to the left of the Frenchman, a figure that eclipsed all brocade. He wore only black, for he was in mourning, though a red mantle awaited him for the procession as Latin Secretary to the Ten. Tito Melema had become indispensable in his dealings with the French guests, his familiarity with Southern Italy and fluency in the French tongue earning him favor. He had visited the French camp at Signa often, and now the lustre of good fortune shone upon him. He smiled, listened, and explained with his usual graceful ease, though a keen observer might have noted a subtle change—the final departure of moral youthfulness, the distinct self-conscious adoption of a role in life. His face remained soft, his eyes pellucid, yet something indefinable had vanished, like the light in the morning twilight.

The Frenchman gathered instructions on ceremony before riding back to Signa, pausing now for a final survey of the Piazza del Duomo, where the royal procession would halt for religious rites. The party attracted every eye, yet the gaze was not entirely cordial. Whispers flew regarding the Frenchman's hoof-shaped shoes—a delicate flattery of royal superfluity—while snarls against the "Mediceans" were carefully suppressed. Lorenzo Tornabuoni possessed the power to disguise annoyance, and Tito, with his natural disposition to overcome ill-will through good humor, felt the unimpassioned detachment of an alien toward the native's deepest passions.

Pausing where they could view the Duomo obliquely, the group noticed the festoons over the central doorway. Tornabuoni beckoned to Piero di Cosimo, who lounged before Nello's shop. An animated discussion ensued, becoming highly amusing as the Frenchman marveled at Piero's pungent statements, which Tito translated literally. Even the snarling onlookers grew curious, their faces wearing expressions of half-smiling humiliation as they realized they were excluded from the joke. It was a delightful moment for Tito; he was the only one capable of making such an amusing interpreter, and he basked in the approving glances of the crowd, unaware of the shifting tides beneath the surface.

While the rainbow light bathed the laughing group in the Piazza, the grey light of the unadorned streets told a darker tale. Here, the French dress and hoofed shoes were conspicuous targets for a growing number of non-admiring Florentines. In the van of the crowd walked three men in scanty clothing, their hands bound by cords, ropes fastened around their necks and bodies so that a tug could throttle them. Their captors were French soldiers, stimulating the prisoners to beg with broken Italian phrases and strokes from the knotted ends of their ropes.

Two of the prisoners obeyed, holding out their bound hands to every Florentine they met, pleading in piteous tones: "For the love of God and the Holy Madonna, give us something towards our ransom! We are Tuscans: we were made prisoners in Lunigiana."

But the third man remained obstinately silent under the lashes of the knotted cord. He was vastly different from his companions. While they were young and hardy, looking like sturdy mendicants stripped by avarice, this man had passed the boundary of old age, perhaps fifty or sixty. His beard, grown long in neglect, and the thick, straight hair framing his baldness were nearly white. His thickset figure remained firm and upright despite emaciation, expressing a strange energy in spite of his years. This was carried in his dark eyes and strong dark eyebrows, which held a strangely isolated intensity against his yellow, bloodless, deep-wrinkled face and lank grey hairs. Yet, there was a fitfulness in his eyes that contradicted his flashes of energy; after looking round with quick fierceness at windows and faces, they fell again with a lost, wandering look. His lips were motionless, his hands held resolutely down. He would not beg.

The sight provoked growing exasperation among the Florentines. Initially, many gave money, some in automatic response to the appeal of God, others in unquestioning awe of the French soldiery, a fear that the soldiers themselves relied upon as a guarantee of immunity. But as the group moved deeper into the city, this compliance vanished. The crowd swelled into a troop of men and boys, chanting a chorus of intelligible jeers. The soldiers, inclined to use their weapons, were checked by the necessity of holding their prisoners securely, hurrying now in hopes of finding shelter in a hostelry.

"French dogs!"
"Bullock-feet!"
"Snatch their pikes from them!"
"Cut the cords and make them run! They'll run as fast as geese—don't you see they're web-footed?"

These cries, vaguely understood as threats, seemed to invite action rather than provoke it.

"Santiddio! Here's a sight!" cried the dyer, recognizing the tumult. "And the fools do nothing but hoot. Come along!" He snatched his axe from his belt and ran to join the crowd, followed by the butcher and his companions, save for Goro, who hastily retreated up a narrow passage.

The sight of the dyer, advancing with blood-red arms and an uplifted axe, stirred the crowd. He did nothing more than thrust himself among his fellow citizens, flourishing his blade, serving as a stirring symbol of street-fighting, like the waving of a gonfalon. The first sign that fire was ready to burst forth was as rapid as a leaping tongue of flame: it was the act of the conjuror's impish lad, Lollo. Dancing and jeering before the ingenuous boys who made up the majority of the crowd, Lollo possessed no great compassion for the prisoners, but he was conscious of an excellent knife. To jump forward, cut a rope, and leap back before the soldier could strike seemed an amusing and dexterous piece of mischief. As the people jostled more vigorously, Lollo felt his moment had come. He was close to the eldest prisoner. In an instant, he severed the cord.

"Run, old one!" he piped into the prisoner's ear as the cord split, then set the example of running as if aided by wings, like a scared fowl.

The prisoner's senses were not too slow to seize the opportunity. The idea of escape had been a constant presence, and the temper of the crowd had fueled his hope. He ran immediately, but his speed alone would have sufficed only if the Florentines had not instantly rushed between him and his captor. He fled into the Piazza, but quickly heard the tramp of feet behind him. The other two prisoners had been released, and the soldiers struggled and fought their way after them in a tardigrade fashion, impeded by their hoof-shaped shoes and attacked, though not resolutely, by the people. One of the younger prisoners turned up the Borgo di San Lorenzo, diverting some of the hubbub, but the main struggle remained toward the Piazza, where all eyes turned with alarmed curiosity. The cause could not be precisely guessed, for the French dress was screened by the impeding crowd.

"An escape of prisoners!" exclaimed Lorenzo Tornabuoni as he and his party turned just against the steps of the Duomo, seeing a prisoner rush past them. "The people are not content with having emptied the Bargello the other day. If there is no other authority in sight, they must fall on the sbirri to secure freedom for thieves. Ah! There is a French soldier: that is more serious."

The soldier struggled along the north side of the Piazza, but his prey had taken the other direction. That object was the eldest prisoner, who had wheeled round the Baptistery and was running toward the Duomo, determined to take refuge in that sanctuary rather than trust to his speed. But as he mounted the steps, his foot received a shock; he was precipitated toward the group of signori, whose backs were turned to him, and could recover his balance only by clutching one of them by the arm.

It was Tito Melema who felt that clutch. He turned his head and saw the face of his adoptive father, Baldassarre Calvo, close to his own.

The two men looked at each other, silent as death. Baldassarre, with dark fierceness and a tightening grip of the soiled, worn hands on the velvet-clad arm; Tito, with cheeks and lips all bloodless, fascinated by terror. It seemed a long while to them—it was but a moment.

The first sound Tito heard was the short laugh of Piero di Cosimo, who stood close by and was the only person who could see his face.

"Ha, ha! I know what a ghost should be now."

"This is another escaped prisoner," said Lorenzo Tornabuoni. "Who is he, I wonder?"

"Some madman, surely," said Tito.

He hardly knew how the words had come to his lips; there are moments when our passions speak and decide for us, and we seem to stand by and wonder. They carry an inspiration of crime that accomplishes in an instant the work of long premeditation.

The two men had not taken their eyes off each other, and it seemed to Tito, after he had spoken, that some magical poison had darted from Baldassarre's eyes, rushing through his veins. But the next instant, the grasp on his arm relaxed, and Baldassarre had disappeared within the church.

"You are easily frightened, though," Piero remarked, his laughter cutting through the tension like a blade. "My portrait lacks the ferocity of the original. Yet, the old man truly possessed a tiger's gaze; I must return to the Duomo to study him once more."

"It is hardly pleasant to be seized by a madman, if indeed he is one," Lorenzo Tornabuoni replied, offering a polite defense for Tito's trembling. "Perhaps he is merely a ruffian. We shall discover the truth soon. However, we must determine if we possess the authority to halt this disturbance between our citizens and your countrymen," he added, turning his gaze toward the French soldier.

The group moved forward, swords drawn, a silent phalanx of quiet onlookers parting to clear their path. Tito followed, compelled by necessity to learn what others already knew of Baldassarre. The initial paralysis of terror was rapidly giving way to the frantic calculations that mortal danger forces upon the timid.

The mob of men and boys, prone more to jeering and tormenting the soldier than inflicting serious harm, parted instantly at the sight of the nobles with steel in hand. The Frenchman was interrogated. He and his companions had merely escorted their prisoners into the city to solicit ransom: two were Tuscan soldiers captured in Lunigiana, while the third, an elderly man, had accompanied a party of Genoese who had clashed with French foragers near Fivizzano. He might be mad, but he posed no threat. The soldier knew nothing further, unable to comprehend a single word the old man uttered. Tito listened, deaf to the surrounding chatter until Tornabuoni addressed him directly.

"Will you return with us, Melema? Or, since Messere is departing for Signa, would it be wise to follow the current fashion and attend the Friar? He will be like a torrent in full flood this morning. It is what we must all do to preserve our Medicean skins. I myself would go if I had the leisure."

Tito's face had regained its color, and he managed a smile of forced gaiety.

"Naturally, I am among the admirers of the inspired orator," he said smoothly. "Unfortunately, I shall be occupied with the Segretario until the procession begins."

"I shall enter the Duomo to examine that savage old man again," Piero declared.

"Then, Piero mio, have the charity to show him to one of the hospitals for travelers," Tornabuoni suggested gently. "The monks may ascertain whether he requires confinement in a cage."

The party dispersed. Tito turned toward the Palazzo Vecchio, where he intended to meet Bartolommeo Scala. The distance was short, yet for Tito, it stretched out like the agonizing minutes of a waking dream. The brief intervals of street and piazza were filled with memories, premonitions, and torturing fears that could have spanned months. He felt as though a serpent had begun to coil around his limbs.

Baldassarre alive and present in Florence was a living revenge, a coiling viper that would not rest until it had crushed its prey. It was not in that man's nature to let an injury pass unavenged. His love and hatred burned with a passionate fervor that subjugated all else, driving a man to sacrifice himself to his passion as if worshipping a deity through self-destruction. Baldassarre had loosened his grip and vanished. Tito understood this well: it meant the vengeance was being studied, refined to ensure its certainty.

If he had not spoken those decisive words—"He is a madman"—if he could have summoned the mental fortitude to admit his recognition of Baldassarre, would the risk have been less? He might have claimed he believed Baldassarre dead. The only witnesses capable of contradicting him were Fra Luca, who was deceased, and the crew of the companion galley that had delivered the news of the pirate encounter. The odds were infinite against Baldassarre having met any of that crew again. Tito thought with bitter resentment that a timely, well-crafted falsehood might have spared him from fatal consequences. Yet, uttering such a lie would have demanded perfect self-command during a moment of convulsive shock. He seemed to have spoken without preconception; the words had leaped forth like a sudden birth, nurtured in the darkness.

Tito was subject to that inexorable law of human souls: we prepare ourselves for sudden deeds through the reiterated choice of good or evil, which gradually hardens character.

Now, there was but one chance: Baldassarre's failure to find his revenge. And then, a thought more actively cruel than any he had previously entertained struck him: might there be some truth in his own unpremeditated words? Enough truth, at least, to support his denial should Baldassarre attempt to identify him? The old man appeared strange and wild; with his eager heart and fevered brain, suffering had likely driven him to madness. If so, the vengeance seeking to inflict disgrace might be baffled.

Yet, there existed another form of vengeance that no ingenious lying could parry. Baldassarre belonged to a race for whom the thrust of the dagger feels as natural an impulse as the tiger's leap. Tito shrank with shuddering dread from disgrace, but he also harbored a physical terror inseparable from a soft, pleasure-loving nature—a fear that prevents a man from meeting wounds and death as a welcome relief from shame. His thoughts immediately sought some hidden defensive armor to protect him from a vengeance no subtlety could deflect.

He marveled at the power of the passionate fear that possessed him. It was as if he had been struck by a blighting disease, suddenly transforming the joyous sense of youth into pain.

One resource remained. He could have turned back, sought Baldassarre again, confessed everything—to Romola, to the world. But he never considered this. True repentance, which severs all moorings to evil, demands more than selfish fear. He possessed no sense that strength and safety lay in truth; the only strength he trusted was his ingenuity and his dissimulation. Now that the initial shock, which had betrayed the treacherous signs of fear, had passed, he hoped to be prepared for all emergencies through cool deceit and defensive armor.

It was a defining characteristic of Tito's experience at this crisis that no direct measure for removing Baldassarre ever occurred to him. Every other possibility swept through his mind, even flight from Florence itself, yet he never conceived a scheme to eliminate his enemy. His dread generated no active malignity; he would still have preferred not to cause pain to any mortal. He had simply chosen to make life easy for himself—to carry his human lot in a way that pinched him nowhere. That choice had, at various times, landed him in unexpected positions. The question now was not whether he should share the common pressure of destiny with his suffering fellow-men, but whether all the resources of lying would suffice to save him from being crushed by the consequences of that habitual choice.

Within the Duomo.

As Baldassarre forced his way behind the heavy curtain, his wrists bound tight and the rough hemp rope constricting his neck and torso, he halted abruptly. The interior of the cathedral did not match the hollow, dead expectation he had carried in his mind. He had imagined a cavern of silence, lined with lifeless idols and unlit candles, where only a few distant figures might murmur a monotone chant. Instead, he found himself confronted by a sea of living, breathing humanity.

The crowd was a tapestry of Florence itself: magistrates in fine wool, ladies of noble bearing, and the rough-hewn faces of artisans and peasants alike. They sat in breathless stillness, their gazes fixed upward toward the pulpit nestled between the nave and the choir. There, a Dominican friar with dark hair and stern features stood holding a crucifix, his voice cutting through the air.

For the first few moments, Baldassarre remained oblivious to the sermon. Though his entry had been silent, the rope around his neck marked him instantly as a fugitive. Yet, in a sanctuary, a prisoner was safe. His gaunt, aged face, etched with the lines of wild misery, invited pity rather than fear. As he stood frozen, his eyes drifting aimlessly from the vast congregation to the stone floor beneath him, the initial suspicion faded. The crowd, captivated by the preacher's rising power, turned their attention back to the pulpit, leaving Baldassarre to drift into the periphery of their collective awe.

Among those who had glanced at him was Romola. She had entered late through a side door, her position granting her a clear view of the main entrance. Her gaze lingered on Baldassarre with a profound intensity. The grey hairs framing his temples and the visible weight of suffering on his face struck a chord deep within her, awakening a lifelong sensitivity to the sorrows of the aged. She seemed certain that their eyes had met in that fleeting moment, but Baldassarre had seen nothing but a blur of faces. His consciousness was fractured, a mere flash of startled awareness lost in the violent turmoil of his own emotions. The memory of Tito burned like a fever dream, blending with a desperate thirst and physical anguish. No thought of the future could take root in this soil; only a bitter realization of his own weakening strength and a vague, all-encompassing distrust shaped his mind.

Suddenly, the air seemed to crackle with a sound that resonated like the thunder of his own inner rage. A voice, dripping with triumphant certainty, pierced his marrow: "The day of vengeance is at hand!"

Baldassarre shuddered, lifting his head. Too distant to discern the preacher's features clearly, he saw only an outstretched arm and the raised crucifix. Yet, he panted for those threatening words as if they were a promise of salvation. The preacher paused, slowly lowering his arm until he rested the cross upon the pulpit's edge. He crossed his arms over his chest and scanned the multitude, challenging every eye to meet his gaze.

"All ye in Florence are my witnesses," the voice boomed, echoing off the vaulted ceiling. "I spoke not in a corner. Four years ago, before the signs of war and tribulation appeared, I proclaimed the coming scourge. I lifted my voice like a trumpet to the princes and people of Italy, declaring that your cup of iniquity is full. Behold, the thunder of the Lord gathers to shatter it. What you drink as pleasant wine shall be poured out upon you as molten lead."

He turned his gaze specifically toward the clergy. "To you, O priests, who mock the Presence in the sanctuary, who declare the Mercy-seat bare and believe you may sin behind the veil unpunished: I say, God's presence shall return as a consuming fire. Your sacred vestments shall become winding-sheets of flame. Where there should be sweet music, there shall be shrieks; where soft couches, thorns; where the breath of wantons, pestilence. Trust not in your gold or silver, nor in your high fortresses. Though built of iron and adamant, the Most High shall instill terror into your hearts, causing you to flee like women. He shall break mighty men without number and replace them with others."

"And since Scripture declares that God reveals His will to His prophets, He has chosen me, His unworthy servant, to make His purpose known through the living Word and the deeds of Providence. By the ministry of angels, He has shown me visions. His word possesses me so completely that I am but a forest branch shaken by the wind of heaven; I cannot remain silent, even if I am mocked. For four years, in defiance of scoffers, I have preached three truths delivered by the Lord: that in these times God will regenerate His Church, that before this regeneration comes a scourge over all Italy, and that these things will come quickly."

"But hypocrites, cloaking their hatred of the truth with a show of love, have told me, 'Leave your prophecies; it is enough to teach virtue.' To them I answer: 'Yes, in your hearts you say God lives afar off, His word is a parchment written by dead men, and He does not rebuke nations as He did in the days of old. But I cry again in your ears: God is near, not afar. His judgments do not change. He is the God of armies; the storm, the fire, and the pestilence are His ministers, driven by the breath of His angels to strike the chosen land that has forsaken the covenant. And thou, O Italy, art that chosen land. Has not God placed His sanctuary within thee, and hast thou polluted it? Behold, the ministers of His wrath are upon thee—they are at thy very doors!'"

Savonarola's voice had climbed to a peak of impassioned force before falling suddenly into a profound silence. His hands dropped to his sides, then clasped quietly before him. This silence was not empty; it was a spell as potent as his voice. Men and women sat motionless, faces upturned like breathing statues, until the voice returned in clear, low tones.

"Yet there is a pause—even as in the days when Jerusalem was destroyed, there was a pause that the children of God might flee. There is stillness before the storm: lo, there is blackness above, yet not a leaf quakes. The winds are stayed that the voice of God's warning may be heard. Hear it now, O Florence, chosen city in the chosen land! Repent and forsake evil; do justice; love mercy; cast out all uncleanness from among you. Then the spirit of truth and holiness shall fill your souls, breathe through your streets, and the pestilence shall not enter, nor shall the sword pass over you unhurt."

"For the sword hangs from the sky; it quivers; it is about to fall! The sword of God upon the earth, swift and sudden! Did I not tell you years ago that I beheld the vision and heard the voice? And behold, it is fulfilled! Is there not a king with his army at your gates? Does not the earth shake with the tread of horses and the wheels of swift cannon? Is there not a fierce multitude that can lay bare the land as with a sharp razor? I tell you the French king with his army is the minister of God. God shall guide him as a hand guides a sharp sickle, and the joints of the wicked shall melt before him, mown down as stubble. He that flees shall not escape, he that escapes shall not be delivered. And the tyrants who built their thrones upon the vices of the multitude, and the unbelieving priests who traffic in souls and fill the sanctuary with fornication, shall be hurled from their soft couches into burning hell. The pagans and those who sinned under the old covenant shall stand aloof and say: 'Lo, these men have brought the stench of a new wickedness into the everlasting fire.'"

"But thou, O Florence, take the offered mercy. See! The Cross is held out to you; come and be healed. Which nation in Italy has received a token like yours? The tyrant is driven out; the men who held bribes in their left hand and rods in their right have gone forth, and no blood has been spilled. Now, cast away every other abomination, and you shall be strong in the strength of the living God. Wash yourselves from the black pitch of your vices, which have made you like heathens; put away the envy and hatred that have made your city a nest of wolves. Then no harm shall happen to you. The passage of armies shall be to you as a flight of birds, rebellious Pisa shall be restored to you, and famine and pestilence shall stay far from your gates. You shall be a beacon among the nations. But mark this: while you suffer the accursed thing to lie in the camp, you shall be afflicted and tormented, even though a remnant among you may be saved."

These warnings had been spoken with incisive authority, but in the next sentence, the preacher's voice melted into a strain of desperate entreaty.

"Listen, O people, over whom my heart yearns as a mother yearns over the children she has travailed for! God is my witness that but for your sakes I would willingly live as a turtle in the depths of the forest, singing low to my Beloved, who is mine and I am his. For you I toil, for you I languish, for you my nights are spent in watching, and my soul melts away for very heaviness. O Lord, thou knowest I am willing—I am ready. Take me, stretch me on thy cross. Let the wicked who delight in blood, who rob the poor, and who defile the temple of their bodies, wag their heads and sneer at me. Let the thorns press upon my brow, and let my sweat be anguish—I desire to be made like thee in thy great love. But let me see the fruit of my travail—let this people be saved! Let me see them clothed in purity; let me hear their voices rise in concord as the voices of angels; let them see no wisdom but in thy eternal law, no beauty but in holiness. Then they shall lead the way before the nations, and the people from the four winds shall follow them, gathered into the fold of the blessed. For it is thy will, O God, that the earth shall be converted unto thy law; it is thy will that wickedness shall cease and love shall reign. Come, O blessed promise; and behold, I am willing—lay me on the altar. Let my blood flow and the fire consume me; but let my witness be remembered among men, that iniquity shall not prosper forever."

During this final appeal, Savonarola stretched out his arms and lifted his eyes to heaven. His strong voice alternated between trembling emotion and renewed energy, but the passion with which he offered himself as a victim became too overwhelming for further speech, ending in a sob. Every shifting tone vibrated through the audience, shaking them into answering emotion. Even those with moderate faith in the Friar's prophetic mission, who in cooler moments loved him little, were swept along by the great wave of feeling rising from sympathies deeper than theory. A loud, responding sob rose instantly from the vast multitude as Savonarola fell to his knees, burying his face in his mantle. In that moment, he felt the rapture and glory of martyrdom without its agony.

In that great sob of the multitude, Baldassarre's joined theirs. Perhaps no other human present vibrated more strongly to the preacher's tones than he, yet his vibration was like a harp with all strings wrenched away save one. That threat of fiery, inexorable vengeance—a future where the hated sinner might be pursued and held by an avenger in an eternal grapple—came to him like the promise of an unquenchable fountain to an unquenchable thirst. The doctrines of the sages, his old contempt for priestly superstition, had fallen away from his soul like a forgotten language. If he could have remembered them, what answer could they have given to his great need compared to the answer given by this voice of energetic conviction?

The thunder of denunciation fell upon his passion-wrought nerves with the force of self-evidence. His thought never ventured beyond it into questions; he was possessed by it as a war-horse is possessed by the clash of sounds. No word that was not a threat touched his consciousness; he had no fiber to be thrilled by anything else. But the fierce, exultant delight he felt at the idea of perpetual vengeance found its climax and relieving outburst in the preacher's words of self-sacrifice. To Baldassarre, those words brought only a vague, triumphant sense that he too was devoting himself—signing with his own blood the deed by which he gave himself over to an unending fire, which would seem but coolness to his burning hatred.

"I rescued him—I cherished him—if I might clutch his heart-strings forever! Come, O blessed promise! Let my blood flow; let the fire consume me!"

The single remaining cord vibrated to its utmost. Baldassarre clutched his own palms, driving his long nails into the flesh, and burst into a sob with the rest.

While Baldassarre stood transfixed by the thunderous voice of Savonarola, he remained unaware that another figure had slipped through the rear doorway, standing in the shadows to watch him. It was Piero di Cosimo. The painter cared little for the sermon itself; his purpose was singular—to observe the escaped prisoner. As the preacher paused, allowing the congregation to surrender to a wordless emotional swell, the newcomer stepped forward and laid a hand upon Baldassarre's arm.

Baldassarre turned, his face still streaked with slow-moving tears, though a vigorous sigh suggested the storm within him was spent. The painter spoke softly.

"Shall I cut your cords? I have heard how you were taken."

Baldassarre hesitated, his gaze sharpening with suspicion at the intruder. Finally, he nodded. "If you will."

"Better step outside," Piero suggested.

Baldassarre eyed him warily once more. Seeing the doubt, Piero smiled, drew a knife, and severed the bonds. He began to suspect that the prisoner's madness was not entirely unfounded; there was a peculiar intensity in the man's expression. *Well,* he mused, *if he causes trouble, he will be tied again quickly. Let the poor devil have a chance, at least.*

"You fear me," Baldassarre murmured, his voice low. "You do not wish to know my name."

Baldassarre crossed his arms, savoring the long-departed sensation of muscle and strength. His look softened, taking on a quiet resolve. "No. I have nothing to tell."

"As you wish," Piero replied, though he offered a shrug. "Yet perhaps you seek shelter? We Florentines are hospitable to travelers with torn doublets and empty bellies. There is a hospital for the poor outside our gates. If you like, I can guide you there. The French soldier who captured you has been sent away."

Baldassarre nodded silently, accepting the offer, and the two men walked out together.

As they moved along the Via dell' Oriuolo toward the gate of Santa Croce, Piero broke the silence. "Would you not sit for a portrait? I am a painter, and I would pay well for such a likeness."

Suspicion flared again in Baldassarre's eyes. "No."

"Ah!" Piero said, his tone curt. "Very well. Go straight ahead; you will find the Porta Santa Croce. Outside lies the hospital for travelers. So, you decline my services?"

"I thank you for what you have already done. I require nothing more."

"It is as it should be," Piero muttered, turning away.

*A mysterious old tiger,* the artist thought, watching Baldassarre's retreating back. *Truly worth painting. Ugly, carved with deep lines, as if the plow and the harrow had tilled over his very heart. A stark contrast to my bland, smiling Messer Greco—my *Bacco trionfante*, who has wed the fair Antigone against all history and reason. Ah! His scholar's blood curdled uncomfortably at the sight of that old fellow's grip!*

When Piero re-entered the Piazza del Duomo, the vast multitude that had listened to Fra Girolamo was streaming out through every door. Their haste to resume their daily duties testified to the profound weight of the sermon that had held them captive. The artist leaned against the angle of the Baptistery, observing the departing throng with delight. He marveled at the variety of their garments and the sharp, characteristic faces—faces reminiscent of those Masaccio had captured fifty years prior, and those Domenico Ghirlandaio had not yet fully left behind.

This morning marked a peculiar occasion. The Frate's audience, usually multifarious, displayed an even more complete cross-section of Florence's classes and political factions. There were men of high birth, accustomed to public office, who had become conspicuous not only as enemies of the Medici and champions of popular government but as thorough *Piagnoni*, embracing the Frate's doctrines with fervor. Among them were men of authoritative presence, like Francesco Valori, perhaps sharing a hot, arrogant temperament, gratified by the immediate divine authority to bring about freedom in their own image. Others, like Soderini, possessed less of the ardent *Piagnone* and more of the wise politician.

At their sides stood men of family, like Piero Capponi—brave, unindoctrinated lovers of sober republican liberty who preferred action to argument, holding no specific grudge against any idea that kept the Medici out and made room for public spirit. Beside them were doctors of law, whose studies of Accursius had not extinguished their ardour, preventing them from becoming enthusiastic *Piagnoni*; Messer Luca Corsini, for instance, who was destined to raise his learned arms in street stone-throwing for the cause of religion, freedom, and the Frate.

Among the dignitaries carrying their black *lucco* or furred mantles with habitual authority, there were many with contemplative, sensitive faces: scholars inheriting names like Strozzi and Acciajoli, already minded to take the cowl and join the community of San Marco; artists driven to new heights by Savonarola's teaching, such as the young painter who had recently surpassed himself in his fresco of the divine child in the Frate's bare cell—unconscious yet that he would one day wear the tonsure himself and be known as Fra Bartolommeo. There was the mystic poet Girolamo Benevieni, perhaps hastening to carry tidings of the beloved Frate's imminent arrival to his friend Pico della Mirandola, who was never to see another morning.

Well-born women appeared, attired with such scrupulous plainness that their refined grace was the sole distinction separating them from their less aristocratic sisters. A predominant proportion belonged to the genuine *popolani* or middle class, belonging to both the Major and Minor Arts, conscious of purses threatened by war-taxes. More striking, perhaps, than all other classes were the long stream of poorer tradesmen and artisans. Their faith and hope in his Divine message varied from the rude, undiscriminating trust in him as the friend of the poor and enemy of the oppressive rich, to an eager tasting of biblical subtleties that took a peculiar hold on the sedentary artisan, illuminating the long, dim spaces beyond the board where he stitched with a pale flame that seemed to him the light of Divine science.

Yet, scattered among these devoted disciples were many who were not his followers at all. Some were Mediceans who, from fear and policy, had begun to feign deference to the prevailing spirit of the popular party. Others were sincere advocates of free government who viewed Savonarola merely as an ambitious monk—half sagacious, half fanatical—who had made himself a powerful instrument with the people and must be accepted as an important social fact. There were even bitter enemies: members of the old aristocratic anti-Medicean party determined to seize the reins once more for certain chief families, or licentious young men who detested him as the killjoy of Florence.

The sermons in the Duomo had already become political incidents, attracting the ears of curiosity and malice as well as faith. Men of ideas, like young Niccolò Machiavelli, went to observe and write reports to friends in country villas. Men of appetites, like Dolfo Spini, bent on hunting down the Frate as a public nuisance who made game scarce, went to feed their hatred and lie in wait for grounds of accusation.

Perhaps no preacher ever wielded such massive influence as Savonarola, yet no preacher ever worked with such heterogeneous materials. One secret of this influence lay in the highly mixed character of his preaching. Baldassarre, wrought into an ecstasy of self-martyring revenge, was only an extreme case among the partial and narrow sympathies of that audience. In Savonarola's sermons, there were strains that appealed to the finest susceptibilities of human nature, alongside elements that gratified low egoism, tickled gossiping curiosity, and fascinated timorous superstition. His need for personal predominance, his labyrinthine allegorical interpretations of Scripture, his enigmatic visions, and his false certitude regarding Divine intentions never ceased, in his own large soul, to be ennobled by fervid piety, a passionate sense of the infinite, active sympathy, and a clear-sighted demand for the subjection of selfish interests to the general good—a quality he shared with the greatest of mankind.

But for the mass of his audience, the entire weight of his preaching lay in his strong assertion of supernatural claims, his denunciatory visions, and the false certitude that gave his sermons the urgency of a political bulletin. Having once held that audience in his mastery, it was necessary to his nature—and necessary for their welfare—that he should keep it. The effect was inevitable. No man ever struggles to retain power over a mixed multitude without suffering vitiation; his standard must become their lower needs rather than his own best insight.

The mysteries of human character were seldom presented in a way more fitted to check the judgments of facile knowingness than in Girolamo Savonarola. Yet, we can afford him a reverence that requires no shutting of the eyes to fact if we regard his life as a drama accompanied by great inward modifications during its outward changes. Up to this period, when his direct action on political affairs had only just begun, it is probable that his imperious need of ascendancy burned undiscernibly within the strong flame of his zeal for God and man.

It was the fashion of old, when an ox was led out for sacrifice to Jupiter, to chalk the dark spots and give the offering a false show of unblemished whiteness. Let us fling away the chalk and boldly say: the victim is spotted, but it is not therefore in vain that his mighty heart is laid on the altar of men's highest hopes.

The Garment of Fear.

By six o'clock, the hearts of most Florentines had settled into a weary relief that the arrival of the new Charlemagne was finally concluded. When the thunderous roll of drums, the piercing blast of trumpets, and the heavy tramp of hooves along the Pisan road had mingled with the frantic pealing of church bells, it was indeed a majestic spectacle for those perched upon turreted roofs. From their vantage points, they watched the long, winding procession of terrible pomp against the backdrop of green hills and valleys. Though the sky offered no sunshine to illuminate the banners, spears, and silken surcoats, the absence of a thick dust cloud allowed the details to stand out with stark clarity. Tall and tough Scottish archers, ponderous Swiss halberdiers, and nimble Gascons ready to scale walls marched alongside cavalrymen who resembled knight-errants with their indomitable spears and chargers. It was a comforting assurance that this array of strength would injure none but the enemies of God. With such confidence, viewing the nobles and knights, the youthful pages of noble lineage, the jewelled sword-hilts, the satin scarves embroidered with pious symbols, and the transcendent canopy borne above the Most Christian King became a less dubious pleasure. As an old diarist noted, simply halting behind the wonders of the royal visit: "It was great magnificence."

Yet for the Signoria, who had waited on their platform against the gates before marching out to meet the mighty guest, the grandeur of the scene had been obscured by unsettling sensations. Had Messer Luca Corsini's Latin welcome remained legible, it might have been less confusing when the rain began to fall, creating an impatience in both men and horses that shattered his well-studied periods. This forced the scholarly representatives to offer a makeshift greeting in impromptu French. However, this sudden chaos created a golden opportunity for Tito. Stationed behind the Signoria among the secretaries, he found himself thrust forward when the dignitaries were pressed by the approaching horses.

"Somebody step forward and say a few words in French," Soderini urged. But no high-ranking official wished to risk a second public failure. "You, Francesco Gaddi—you can speak." Gaddi, distrusting his own quickness, hesitated and pushed Tito forward, saying, "You, Melema."

Tito stepped forward instantly, speaking the necessary few words in French with an air of profound deference that came as naturally to him as breathing. He then withdrew gracefully, allowing the King to pass. The presence of mind that had deserted him during the terrifying crisis of the morning was now a ready instrument. It was the mark of an excellent livery servant to never forsake his master when danger was not visible. Yet, when complimented on his timely service, Tito laughed it off as trivial, ensuring that Gaddi received the credit for the improvised welcome. No wonder Tito was popular; the touchstone by which men judge us is most often their own vanity.

Other aspects of the day had proven even more disastrous than anticipated. The Florentine procession of clergy and laity had become so choked that they were forced to take a makeshift route through the back streets, meeting the King only at the Cathedral. Furthermore, the young monarch, seated beneath the canopy with his lance resting on his thigh, looked less like a Charlemagne and more like a hastily modeled grotesque. It might have been wished that the scourge of Italian wickedness and "Champion of the honour of women" possessed a less miserable leg, fewer toes, a mouth less like a reptile's slit, and a head of less exorbitant outline. Yet, the thin leg rested upon cloth of gold and pearls, and the face was merely a small interruption amidst black velvet, gold, blazing rubies, and the brilliant tints of the embroidered canopy—"It was great magnificence."

The people cried out "Francia, Francia!" with an enthusiasm proportional to the splendor of the canopy, which they subsequently tore to pieces as their spoil, following immemorial custom. Royal lips duly kissed the altar, and despite the mischances, the King and his retinue were lodged in the Palace of the Via Larga. The nobles were dispersed among the great houses of Florence, and the terrible soldiery were encamped in the Prato and other open quarters. The business of the day was ended.

However, the streets still presented a surprising aspect, unseen by Florentines under the November stars before. Instead of a gloom broken only by feeble lamps before saintly images or streams of redder light from open doorways, lamps were suspended at the windows of every house. Men could now walk along no less securely and commodiously than by day—"It was great magnificence."

Along these illuminated streets, Tito Melema walked at about eight o'clock in the evening on his way home. He had exerted himself throughout the day under the pressure of hidden anxieties and had finally escaped unnoticed from the midst of after-supper gaiety. Now, at leisure to face his circumstances, he hoped to adjust himself to all probabilities and shed his childish fear. If only he had not lacked the presence of mind necessary to recognize Baldassarre during that surprise! It would have been happier for him on all accounts; he still winced under the sense that he was deliberately inflicting suffering upon his father. He would have preferred Baldassarre to be prosperous and happy. But he had left himself no second path now; there could be no conflict anymore. The only thing remaining was to take care of himself.

As these thoughts occupied his mind, he advanced from the Piazza di Santa Croce along the Via dei Benci. As he neared the angle turning into the Borgo Santa Croce, his ear was struck by a music that was not the sound of evening revelry, but of vigorous labor—the music of the anvil. Tito gave a slight start and quickened his pace, for the sounds suggested a welcome thought. He knew they came from the workshop of Niccolò Caparra, the famous resort for all Florentines who cared for curious and beautiful iron-work.

"What makes the giant at work so late?" Tito thought. "But so much the better for me. I can do that little bit of business tonight instead of tomorrow morning."

Preoccupied as he was, he could not help pausing a moment in admiration as he approached the workshop. The wide doorway, standing at the truncated angle of a great block of houses, was surmounted by a loggia roofed with fluted tiles and supported by stone columns with roughly carved capitals. Against the red light framed by the outline of the tiles and columns stood in black relief the grand figure of Niccolò, his huge arms rising and falling rhythmically, first hiding and then disclosing the profile of his firm mouth and powerful brow. Two slighter ebony figures, one at the anvil and the other at the bellows, served to set off his superior massiveness.

Tito darkened the doorway with a very different outline, standing in silence, knowing it was useless to speak until Niccolò should deign to pause and notice him. This did not occur until the smith had beaten the head of an axe to the due sharpness of edge and dismissed it from his anvil. In the meantime, Tito had satisfied himself by a glance around the shop that the object of his search had not disappeared.

Niccolò gave an unceremonious but good-humored nod as he turned from the anvil and rested his hammer on his hip.

"What is it, Messer Tito? Business?"

"Assuredly, Niccolò; else I should not have ventured to interrupt you when you are working out of hours, since I take that as a sign that your work is pressing."

"I've been at the same work all day—making axes and spear-heads. And every fool that has passed my shop has put his pumpkin-head in to say, 'Niccolò, wilt thou not come and see the King of France and his soldiers?' and I've answered, 'No: I don't want to see their faces—I want to see their backs.'"

"Are you making arms for the citizens, then, Niccolò, that they may have something better than rusty scythes and spits in case of an uproar?"

"We shall see. Arms are good, and Florence is likely to want them. The Frate tells us we shall get Pisa again, and I hold with the Frate; but I should be glad to know how the promise is to be fulfilled if we don't get plenty of good weapons forged? The Frate sees a long way before him; that I believe. But he doesn't see birds caught with winking at them, as some of our people try to make out. He sees sense, and not nonsense. But you're a bit of a Medicean, Messer Tito Melema. Ebbene! so I've been myself in my time, before the cask began to run sour. What's your business?"

"Simply to know the price of that fine coat of mail I saw hanging up here the other day. I want to buy it for a certain personage who needs a protection of that sort under his doublet."

"Let him come and buy it himself, then," said Niccolò, bluntly. "I'm rather nice about what I sell, and whom I sell to. I like to know who's my customer."

"I know your scruples, Niccolò. But that is only defensive armour; it can hurt nobody."

"True: but it may make the man who wears it feel himself all the safer if he should want to hurt somebody. No, no; it's not my own work; but it's fine work of Maso of Brescia. I should be loth for it to cover the heart of a scoundrel. I must know who is to wear it."

"Well, then, to be plain with you, Niccolò mio, I want it myself," said Tito, knowing persuasion was useless. "The fact is, I am likely to have a journey to take—and you know what journeying is in these times. You don't suspect *me* of treason against the Republic?"

"No, I know no harm of you," said Niccolò, in his blunt way again. "But have you the money to pay for the coat? For you've passed my shop often enough to know my sign: you've seen the burning account-books. I trust nobody. The price is twenty florins, and that's because it's second-hand. You're not likely to have so much money with you. Let it be till tomorrow."

"I happen to have the money," said Tito, who had been winning at play the day before and had not emptied his purse. "I'll carry the armour home with me."

Niccolò reached down the finely-wrought coat, which fell together into little more than two handfuls.

"There, then," he said, when the florins had been counted out on his palm. "Take the coat. It's made to cheat sword, or poniard, or arrow. But, for my part, I would never put such a thing on. It's like carrying fear about with one."

Niccolò's words held an unpleasant intensity of meaning for Tito. But he smiled and replied,

"Ah, Niccolò, we scholars are all cowards. Handling the pen doesn't thicken the arm as your hammer-wielding does. Addio!"

He folded the armour under his mantle and hastened across the Ponte Rubaconte.

The Young Wife.

While Tito hurried across the bridge, the new steel armor hidden beneath his cloak, Romola paced the floor of the old library, her thoughts fixed on his return. Outside, the city had turned out to greet the French King and his nobility; almost every window had opened to witness the spectacle. Romola's had remained shut. It had been three months since her father's sudden death, a silence that had fallen over her household as abruptly as the event itself.

Earlier that evening, when the bell had tolled for the customary hour, her father Bardo had asked, "Is not Tito coming to write?" He had feared a refusal, yet Romola had seen the restless energy in his face. She had gently excused him, noting his obligation to a supper at the Cardinal's. Bardo, momentarily pacified by the hope of news regarding the library, had fallen silent. Then, flushing with a sudden urgency, he had commanded, "I must go on without him, Romola. Get the pen. He brings no new text, but I must speak of the New Platonists. I shall die, and nothing will be done."

Romola had stood ready with the pen, but the silence that followed was absolute. Her father never spoke again.

In the hours since, Romola had wrestled with a complex mixture of grief and a strange, quiet resignation. She told herself that her life with Tito would now be more perfect, a dream of undivided happiness finally realized. Yet, she acknowledged the subtle bitterness that had always lurked beneath the surface of their union. It was not Tito's fault; he remained gentle, tender, and endlessly accommodating. But the burden of her father's monotonous, exacting demands was a load only she could bear, and even she had found the patience required to sustain it eroding over the years. Tito, once unwearying in his novelty, now seemed to escape the suffocating atmosphere of their shared solitude with a charming gaiety that left Romola with a small, aching heartache. She convinced herself that their natures were simply different—his light and social, hers absorbing and domestic—and that her own inferiority lay in her inability to match his brilliance. To preserve her love, she had to suppress every rising impulse of pride or resentment, straining herself to subdue her nature to his.

Now, with her father gone, the weight of his legacy pressed heavily upon her. The library, the fruit of his lifetime of toil, was her sole sacramental obligation. It was safe from creditors thanks to Bernardo del Nero's advance, but the political winds had shifted violently. The Medici were expelled, and the famous collections in the Via Larga faced dispersal. The Florentine State, facing war and the need for French subsidies, would likely sell the manuscripts for cash. To Romola, these grave political upheavals mattered only insofar as they threatened the fulfillment of her father's wish. Her entire ardour, once directed toward her husband, was now concentrated on this singular duty.

Seeking to understand the forces shaping Florence, she had attended Fra Girolamo's sermon in the Duomo that morning. The fanatical preacher's voice had stirred something deep within her, a strange sympathy with the call for martyrdom that transcended her daily concerns. Yet, this emotion felt transient, lying outside the sanctuary of her true life. As she waited for Tito, she resolved to hide her growing interest in public affairs, fearing it might isolate her from him. She needed his return to restore the balance, to confirm that their union could still flow in one current.

When the great door finally creaked open, Romola hastened to the top of the stone steps. Tito appeared, and the sight of him brought a flush of joy to her face, making her seem more lovely than on the day of their wedding. He greeted her with a forced smile, attributing his lateness to fatigue. Inside, the fire crackled warmly, but Tito's demeanor was distant. He dismissed the library as too cold, preferring their private rooms, a remark that stung Romola deeply. She had expected solicitude, not indifference.

"I am not well, Romola," he admitted eventually, rubbing his face as if trying to shake off a shadow. "Do not be surprised if I am peevish."

Romola knelt beside him, caressing his hair, but her touch stopped abruptly when she felt something hard beneath his tunic. "What have you got under your clothes, Tito? Something as hard as iron?"

"It is chain-armour," he replied calmly. "I must wear it constantly."

"What threatens you?" she asked, terrified.

"Everyone is threatened who is not a rabid enemy of the Medici," Tito said, putting his hand on her neck to break the tension. "I am suspected of being an envoy. Men like Bernardo are protected by their families; I am a Greek with no one to avenge me."

Romola shuddered at the thought of him in danger, imagining the armor as a malignant shell replacing his sensitive humanity. "Will you not give it up?" she pleaded.

"If you do not mind my being stabbed or shot, why should I mind?" he teased, though a flicker of pain crossed his face.

Later, Tito recounted the day's events: the rain interrupting Luca Corsini's speech, the clumsy French welcome, and the chaotic display of armor and jewels at the Tornabuoni house. He spoke of the flattery and the food, eager to share the details of his day, yet his eyes remained distant.

Romola mentioned her visit to the Duomo and her reaction to Fra Girolamo's sermon. Tito reacted with playful warning, suggesting she had caught a touch of fanaticism. He described a wild-eyed prisoner who had run into the church to escape a French soldier, a man who had wept openly.

"I saw that man," Tito said suddenly, his voice dropping. "I was outside with Lorenzo Tornabuoni when he ran in. He escaped from a French soldier. Did you see him when you came out?"

"No," Romola answered softly. "Piero di Cosimo took him away. But you want rest, Tito? You feel ill?"

"Yes," he said, rising. The horrible sense that he must live in continual dread of what Baldassarre had said or done pressed upon him like a cold weight.

Four days hence, Romola set forth for the dwelling of Piero di Cosimo in the Via Gualfonda. The streets she traversed were thick with a tense, mutual scrutiny: Frenchmen gazing upon Florence with an air of arrogant discovery, and Florentines staring back with a mixture of resentment and wary observation. The atmosphere was far from cordial. Having initially played the gracious host, the city now found itself weary of its "too superior" guests. The French, having tasted the fruits of conquest elsewhere, now viewed Florence through the lens of imperial entitlement. They spoke of leaving a viceroy behind and restoring the Medici, treating the republic as a conquered prize despite the singular logic of their claim—that the only crime of Florence was the policy of a disowned man. The Florentines, however, were resolved not to bow. This defiance rippled through the Old Palace in heated councils and manifested in the defiant banners fluttering in the piazzas, turning the thoroughfares into a perilous promenade for ladies of birth. Yet, Romola, cloaked in her heavy black veil and mantle, accompanied by the steady presence of old Maso, felt a shield against the prying eyes of the crowd.

Her haste to reach the painter's studio was born of a specific, gnawing anxiety. A copy of her father's likeness, painted by Piero in the guise of Oedipus, remained unfinished. Piero was a man of fickle devotion; when the demand was not absolute, he would abandon a canvas for months, tucking it away in a corner or coffer until it risked total oblivion. Though Romola was his favorite and he inclined to grant her wishes, no general goodwill could guard against his sudden whims. He had promised completion within the week, and Romola's nerves frayed with the thought of losing the only existing image of her father in his days of blindness. To lose that image was to lose a vital thread of memory, and the guilt of such potential neglect drove her to vigilance. Love, she knew, demanded more than mere affection; it required perfect loyalty of heart, aiming for its own completeness through the preservation of the beloved's true form.

By special favor, she was permitted to enter without prior warning. She lifted the iron slide and called out in a flute-like tone, mimicking the little maiden with the eggs who once visited Titus. Piero answered quickly, though his explanation upon opening the door offered no compliment.

"Ah, Madonna Romola, is it you?" he exclaimed. "I thought my eggs had arrived; I wanted them."

"I have brought you something superior to hard eggs, Piero," Romola replied, smiling as she drew back her veil. She took the basket from Maso and stepped inside. "I know you appreciate these treats when they come without trouble. Confess, do you?"

"Yes, when they arrive as effortlessly as the light," Piero admitted, folding his arms and gazing down at the sweetmeats as Romola uncovered them. He then lifted his eyes to her face and hair, his gaze sharpening with a painter's admiration as her hood, weighed down by the veil, fell backward. "But I suspect you bring these sweets to stop my mouth while you scold me. Very well, proceed to the next room; you will find I have made progress on the picture, though it remains incomplete. I take care never to promise what I cannot guarantee:"

The door leading to the wild garden stood shut, and the painter was already at work. However, he was not attending to Romola's commission. That portrait stood propped against the wall, and Piero stooped to lift it, intending to move it into the proper light. In shifting the canvas, he inadvertently revealed another—a small oil sketch of Tito, upon which he had made significant additions only days prior. It was diminutive compared to the other works, standing far within the frame, and Piero, prone to forgetfulness regarding his own arrangements, was unaware of what he had exposed. As he peered at a detail in the painting he held, preparing to place it on an easel, Romola gasped, her face flushing with astonishment.

"That is Tito!"

Piero turned, offering a silent shrug, vexed by his own lapse in memory.

Still staring at the sketch in bewilderment, Romola turned to the painter, her voice tinged with puzzled alarm. "What a strange picture! When did you paint this? What does it signify?"

"A mere fancy," Piero said, removing his skull-cap and scratching his head, adopting the familiar grimace used to mask deeper emotions. "I required a handsome young face for it, and your husband's was the ideal choice."

He moved forward, stooping to the picture. With his back to Romola, he pretended to conduct a final inspection before setting it aside as unworthy of display. But Romola, recalling the fact of the chain-armour and struck by the eerie coincidence linking Tito to the imagery of fear, stepped to his elbow.

"Do not put it away; let me look again. That man with the rope around his neck—I saw him. I saw you approach him in the Duomo. What compelled you to place him in a picture with Tito?"

Seeing no better recourse than partial truth, Piero hesitated. "It was an accident. The man was fleeing—running up the steps—and caught hold of your husband; I suppose he stumbled. I happened to be there and saw it. I thought the savage-looking old fellow made a fitting subject. But it is worthless, merely a freakish daub of mine." He spoke with contempt, moving the sketch away with decisive air and placing it on a high shelf. "Come and view the Oedipus."

He had displayed too much anxiety in concealing the sketch, inadvertently confirming the very unease he sought to suppress—that there existed something unpleasant, something disadvantageous to Tito, in the circumstances surrounding the painting. This impression silenced Romola; her pride and delicacy recoiled from further questioning, fearing that inquiries might imply even a whisper of suspicion against her husband. In a quiet tone, she merely asked, "He was a strange, pitiful-looking prisoner. Do you know anything more of him?"

"No more," Piero replied. "I showed him the way to the hospital, that is all. Now, observe the face of Oedipus; it is nearly finished. Tell me your thoughts."

Romola gave her full attention to the portrait of her father, standing in long silence before it.

"Ah," she finally said, "you have achieved what I desired. You have captured the listening look." Turning to him with bright, moist eyes, she added, "My good Piero, I am deeply grateful."

"Now that is what I cannot bear in you women," Piero retorted impatiently, kicking aside the clutter on the floor. "You pour out feelings where there is no cause. Why should you be grateful for a picture you paid for, especially when I make you wait? If I paint, it is for my own pleasure and credit to execute it well. Are you to thank a man for not being a rogue or a fool? It suffices if he thanks Messer Domeneddio for granting him such a nature. But women imagine walls are held together with honey."

"You crusty Piero! I forgot how snappish you are. Here, take this crisp sweetmeat," Romola said, smiling through her tears and offering a treat from the basket.

Piero accepted it with the grace of a proverbial bear dreaming of pears—truly enjoying the gift, yet accustomed to concealing his pleasures and pains beneath a shaggy exterior. "It is good, Madonna Antigone," he remarked, reaching for another. He had subsisted on hard eggs for two weeks. Romola stood opposite, her fresh anxiety momentarily suspended by the sight of this naive enjoyment.

"Good-bye, Piero," she said eventually, setting down the basket. "I promise not to thank you if you finish the portrait soon and well; I shall simply tell you that you were bound to do it for your own credit."

"Good," Piero replied curtly, assisting her with deftness to fold her mantle and veil.

Once the door closed behind her, Piero thought, *I am glad she asked no more questions about that sketch. I should be sorry for her to guess that I considered her fine husband a good model for a coward. But I made light of it; she will not think of it again.*

Piero was too sanguine, a common failing of open-hearted men attempting clever simulation. Yet, the thought of the picture pressed increasingly upon Romola as she walked homeward. She could not help weaving together the two threads of the chain-armour and the encounter Piero described between her husband and the prisoner, both occurring on the morning the armor was adopted. Had Tito perceived that look of terror in the painter's eyes? What could it all signify?

"It means nothing," she tried to assure herself. "It was a mere coincidence. Shall I ask Tito about it?" Her mind concluded, *No: I will not question him about anything he did not reveal spontaneously. It is an offense against the trust I owe him.* Yet her heart whispered, *I dare not ask him.*

There was a terrible flaw in that trust; she feared any hasty movement, just as men who hold something precious and desperately wish to believe it remains unbroken often hesitate to test its integrity.

"The old fellow has vanished; he headed for Arezzo first thing the next morning. No doubt the stench of the French made him sick after being their prisoner. I stopped by the hospital to ask if those monkish cooks had managed to determine whether he was still in his right mind. They told me he showed no signs of madness—only a total refusal to engage, acting as though he were planting a vineyard fifty miles away. He was a mysterious old tiger. I would have liked to know more about him."

These words were spoken by Piero di Cosimo within the confines of Nello's shop on the twenty-fourth of November, a mere week since the French entered Florence. The air was thick with anticipation; a party of six or seven gathered at the unusual hour of three in the afternoon, driven by the city's feverish expectation of a decisive political turning point. Every public seat was occupied, and every shopkeeper without a wife or deputy stood at his threshold, thumbs hooked in his belt, watching the street. The thoroughfares were dotted with artisans pausing or drifting lazily like floating debris, poised to surge forward impetuously at the slightest provocation.

Nello had been strumming his lute while half-sitting on the shop counter, his gaze fixed on the piazza.

"Ah," he declared, setting down the instrument with emphasis, "I would not have missed that spectacle of the French soldiers waddling in their broad shoes after their fleeing prisoners for a gold florin! That is the price of leaving my shop to shave magnificent chins. It is always so: whenever I abandon this navel of the world, something dramatic happens in my piazza."

"Yes, you should have been there," Piero replied in his sharp, cutting tone, "just to witness your favorite Greek trembling as though Satanasso had seized him. I delight in seeing your ever-ready Messeri caught in a sudden gale, forced to reveal their linings despite themselves. What color do you suppose a man's liver turns when he resembles a bleached deer the moment a chance stranger grabs him?"

"Piero, keep your vinegar for your own eggs!" Nello retorted. "What is there against my *bel erudito* for looking startled when he felt claws upon him and saw an unchained madman at his side? Your scholar is not like those beastly Swiss and Germans, whose heads are built only for battering-rams and whose appetites are so voracious they consider eating a cannonball before breakfast acceptable. We Florentines value qualities in a man beyond that vulgar commodity called bravery, which is acquired by hiring dullards at a set price per dozen. Tell you what: once men realized they possessed more brains than oxen, they set the oxen to pull their plows; and when we Florentines discovered we had superior intellects to others, we set them to fight for us."

"Treason, Nello!" a voice cried from the inner room. "That is not the doctrine of the State. Florence is sharpening its weapons, and the last authenticated vision from the Frate depicted Mars standing atop the Palazzo Vecchio, his arm resting on the shoulder of San Giovanni Battista, who offered him a piece of honeycomb."

"It is well, Francesco," Nello said calmly. "Florence possesses a few thick skulls suitable for bombarding Pisa; there will remain the finer spirits at home to perform the thinking and the shaving. As for our Piero here, if he prizes valor so highly, let him take his largest brush as a weapon and his palette as a shield, and challenge the widest-mouthed Swiss he can find in the Prato to single combat."

"Go on, Nello," Piero grumbled. "Thy tongue runs on as usual, like a mill when the Arno is swollen—whether there is grain or not."

"Excellent grain, I tell thee. It would be as logical to expect a weathered painter like thee to enjoy having a javelin thrust into thy belly as to expect a man whose wits have been honed by the classics to relish having his handsome face clawed by a wild beast."

"There you go, assuming people will put their legs into a sack because you call it a pair of hose," Piero countered. "Who mentioned a wild beast, or an unarmed man charging into battle? Fighting is a trade, and it is not mine. I would be a fool to chase danger, but I could face it if it came to me."

"How is it you fear the thunder so, then, my Piero?" Nello pressed, determined to corner the accuser. "You ought to understand why one man is shaken by what seems trivial to another—you who hide with the rats the moment a storm breaks."

"That is because I possess a particular sensitivity to loud noises; it has nothing to do with my courage or my conscience."

"Well, and Tito Melema may have a peculiar sensitivity to being grabbed unexpectedly by prisoners who have fled from French soldiers. Men are born with antipathies; I myself cannot abide the smell of mint. Tito was born with an aversion to old prisoners who stumble and clutch. Ecco!"

A general laugh erupted at Nello's defense, revealing that Piero's dislike for Tito was not shared by the company. The painter, wearing an unreadable grimace, pulled tow from his *scarsella* and stuffed his ears in indignant contempt, while Nello continued triumphantly.

"No, my Piero, I cannot afford to have my *bel erudito* disparaged; nor can Florence, with her scholars molting off her at the tender age of forty. Our Phoenix Pico has gone straight to Paradise, as the Frate informs us; and the incomparable Poliziano, not two months ago, departed to—well, let us hope he is not among the eminent scholars in the Malebolge."

"By the way," interjected Francesco Cei, "have you heard that Camilla Rucellai has surpassed the Frate in prophecy? Two years ago she foretold that Pico would die in the time of lilies. He died in November. 'Not at all the time of lilies,' scoffed the critics. 'Go to!' replies Camilla; 'I meant the lilies of France, and they seem close enough under your nostrils.' I say, 'Euge, Camilla!' If the Frate can prove any of his visions fulfilled as accurately, I shall declare myself a Piagnone tomorrow."

"You are somewhat too flippant regarding the Frate, Francesco," observed Pietro Cennini, the scholar. "We are all indebted to him these past weeks for preaching peace and the cessation of party quarrels. Those of small discernment would gladly see the people slip the Frate's leash just now. And if the Most Christian King remains obstinate today and refuses to sign what is fair and honorable for Florence, Fra Girolamo is the man we must trust to bring him to reason."

"You speak truth, Messer Pietro," Nello agreed. "The Frate is one of the firmest nails Florence has to hang upon—at least, that is the opinion of the most respectable chins I have the honor of shaving. Yet young Messer Niccolò remarked the other morning—and doubtless Francesco means the same—there is as wonderful a power of stretching the meaning of visions as in Dido's bull's hide. It seems a dream may signify whatever follows it. As our Franco Sacchetti says, a woman dreams overnight of a serpent biting her, breaks a drinking cup the next day, and cries out, 'Look you, I thought something would happen—it is plain now what the serpent meant.'"

"But the Frate's visions are not of that sort," Cronaca insisted. "He does not merely predict what will happen—that the Church will be scourged and renovated, and the heathens converted—he declares it shall happen quickly. He is no slippery pretender who provides loopholes for himself; he is—"

"What is this? What is this?" Nello exclaimed, leaping from the counter and thrusting his head out the door. "People are streaming into the piazza, shouting. Something must have occurred in the Via Larga. Aha!" he burst forth with delighted astonishment, stepping out laughing and waving his cap.

The rest of the company hastened to the door. News from the Via Larga was precisely what they had awaited. Yet they were not little surprised by the manner of its arrival. Carried above the shoulders of the crowd on a bench apparently snatched from the street sat Tito Melema, smiling in amused resignation at the compulsion under which he labored. His cap had slipped from his head, hanging by the *becchetto* loosely wound around his neck. As he spotted the group at Nello's door, he raised his fingers in beckoning recognition. In the next instant, he leaped from the bench onto a cart laden with bales standing in the broad space between the Baptistery and the steps of the Duomo, while the people swarmed around him with the noisy eagerness of poultry awaiting feed.

Silence fell when he began to speak in his clear, mellow voice.

"Citizens of Florence! I have no warrant to tell the news except your will. But the news is good, and will harm no man in the telling. The Most Christian King is signing a treaty that is honorable to Florence. But you owe it to one of your citizens, who spoke a word worthy of the ancient Romans—you owe it to Piero Capponi!"

Immediately a roar of voices erupted. "Capponi! Capponi! What said our Piero?" "Ah! He would not stand being sent from Herod to Pilate!" "We knew Piero!" "Orsù! Tell us, what did he say?"

When the roar of insistence subsided slightly, Tito began again.

"The Most Christian King demanded a little too much—he was obstinate—and said at last, 'I shall order my trumpets to sound.' Then, Florentine citizens! Your Piero Capponi, speaking with the voice of a free city, replied, 'If you sound your trumpets, we will ring our bells!' He snatched the copy of the dishonorable conditions from the secretary's hands, tore it into pieces, and turned to leave the royal presence."

Again there were loud shouts, followed by impatient demands for more.

"Then, Florentines, the high majesty of France felt, perhaps for the first time, all the majesty of a free city. And the Most Christian King himself hastened from his place to call Piero Capponi back. The great spirit of your Florentine city accomplished its work by a great word, without need of the great actions that lay ready behind it. And the King has consented to sign the treaty, which preserves both the honor and the safety of Florence. The banner of France will float over every Florentine galley in sign of amity and common privilege, but above that banner will be written the word 'Liberty!'"

"That is all the news I have to tell; is it not enough?—since it is for the glory of every one of you, citizens of Florence, that you have a fellow-citizen who knows how to speak your will."

As the shouts rose again, Tito looked around with inward amusement at the various crowd, each elated by the notion that Piero Capponi had somehow represented them—that he was the mind whereof Capponi was the mouthpiece. He enjoyed the humor of the incident, which had suddenly transformed him, an alien and a friend of the Medici, into an orator tickling the ears of the people blatant for some unknown good they called liberty. He felt quite glad that he had been seized and hurried along by the crowd as he emerged from the palace in the Via Larga with a commission to the Signoria. It was very easy, very pleasant, this exercise of speaking to general satisfaction: a man who knew how to persuade need never be in danger from any party; he could convince each that he was feigning with all the others. The gestures and faces of weavers and dyers were certainly amusing when viewed from above in this manner.

Tito was beginning to feel at ease in his armor, and at this moment was entirely unconscious of it. He stood with one hand holding his recovered cap and the other at his belt, a light of complacent smile in his long, lustrous eyes, as he made a parting reverence to his audience before springing down from the bales—when suddenly his glance met that of a man who possessed none of the amusing aspect of the exulting weavers, dyers, and woolcarders. This man's face was clean-shaven, his hair close-clipped, and he wore a decent felt hat. A single glance would hardly have sufficed to assure anyone but Tito that this was the face of the escaped prisoner who had seized him on the steps. But to Tito, it came not simply as the face of the escaped prisoner, but as a face with which he had been familiar many years prior.

It seemed all compressed into a second—the sight of Baldassarre looking at him, the sensation shooting through him like a fiery arrow, and the act of leaping from the cart. He would have leaped down in the same instant, whether he had seen Baldassarre or not, for he was in a hurry to reach the Palazzo Vecchio; this time he had not betrayed himself by look or movement, and he said inwardly that he should not be taken by surprise again; he should be prepared to see this face rise up continually like the intermittent blotch that appears in diseased vision. But this reappearance of Baldassarre, so much more in his own likeness, tightened the pressure of dread: the idea of his madness lost its likelihood now that he was shaven and clad like a decent, though poor, citizen. Certainly, there was a great change in his face; but how could it be otherwise? And yet, if he were perfectly sane—in possession of all his powers and all his learning—why was he lingering in this way before making known his identity? It must be for the sake of making his scheme of vengeance more complete. But he did linger: that at least gave an opportunity for flight. And Tito began to think that flight was his only resource.

But while he, with his back turned on the Piazza del Duomo, had lost the recollection of the new part he had been playing, and was no longer thinking of the many things which a ready brain and tongue made easy, but of a few things which destiny had somehow made very difficult, the

The Avenger's Secret.

It was the first time Baldassarre had ventured into the Piazza del Duomo since his flight. A fierce longing pulled him toward the pulpit where the remarkable monk preached, yet he recoiled from returning to the very spot where he had stood half-naked, hair unkempt, a rope around his throat, branded a madman. The sting of Tito's words—"some madman, surely"—was not merely in their cruelty; it was in the sudden, bitter realization that he might indeed be powerless to prove them false. Alongside his burning desire for vengeance rose a cold, paralyzing doubt: could he actually achieve it? It felt as though Tito had been guided by a diabolical prompter who had whispered Baldassarre's deepest shame into the traitor's ear. He was not mad; he carried the pitiful mark of sanity, the clear awareness of his own shattered faculties. He measured his own feebleness. With the first surge of vindictive rage came a vague caution, like that of a wild beast fierce yet weak, or an insect pausing in a tremor of distrust because its footing had failed. This distrust, this refusal to take any step that might betray his condition, had driven him to reject Piero di Cosimo's friendly overtures.

He had exercised equal caution at the hospital, answering the brethren's questions only that he had been captured by the French on his way from Genoa. Yet his age, and the peculiar cadence of his speech, marked him as different from the ordinary mendicants and poor travelers sheltered there. The monks, moved by pity, offered him extra charity: a coarse woolen tunic against the chill, a pair of peasant shoes, and a few *danari*, the smallest Florentine coins, to aid his journey. He departed for the road to Arezzo early in the morning, but halted at the first small town. There, he spent a couple of coins to be shaved and to have his tangled hair cut short, restoring it to its former style. The barber possessed a small hand-mirror of bright steel. It had been years since Baldassarre had looked upon his reflection. Now, as his gaze fell upon the glass, a new thought pierced his mind. "Was he so altered that Tito truly did not know him?" The thought arrested his impetuous currents with a painful shock; his hand trembled like a leaf as he reached for the mirror. He needed to see himself before shaving. The barber, noting his shakiness, held the glass steady.

No, he was not so changed. He recognized the wrinkles he had known three years prior; they were merely deeper now. The same rough, clumsy skin formed little superficial bosses on his brow, like cipher-marks; it was only yellower, resembling a lifeless rind. That shaggy white beard was no disguise to eyes that had scrutinized him for sixteen years, eyes that should have searched for him with the expectation of finding him transformed, as one searches for a beloved among bodies cast up by the sea. There was a difference in his glance, but it was a difference that should only have made recognition more startling; for is not a known voice all the more thrilling when heard as a cry? Yet the doubt was folly; he felt Tito knew him. He pushed the mirror away. The strong currents rushed on again, and the energies of hatred and vengeance reawakened.

He retraced his steps toward Florence but refused to enter the city until dusk. Turning aside from the highroad, he sat by a small pool shadowed on one side by alder bushes still sprinkled with yellow leaves. It was a calm November day, and the sight of the pool's still surface suggested itself as a mirror. He wanted to contemplate himself slowly, something he had dared not do before the barber. Sitting on the pool's edge, he bent forward to study his image.

Was there something wandering and imbecile in his face—something mirroring the chaos within his mind?

Not now. When he examined himself with eager inquiry, there was an intense purpose in his eyes. But at other times? Yes, undoubtedly. In the long hours of vague aching for an unremembered past, when he sat in dark loneliness visited by whispers that died mockingly as he strained to catch them, and by forms that approached and floated away as he reached futilely for them, his glance must have been filled with frustration and amazement. More horribly, when the thick cloud parted for a moment and he sprang forward with hope, only to see it roll shut again, leaving him helpless as before, there must have been a blank confusion in his face, like a man suddenly struck blind.

Could he prove anything? Could he even begin to allege a case with the confidence that his train of thought would not break? Would anyone believe he had once possessed a mind filled with rare knowledge, busy with close thoughts, ready with varied speech? That laboriously gathered store had slipped away. Was it utterly and forever gone, like waters from an urn lost in the wide ocean? Or was it still within him, imprisoned by some obstruction that might one day shatter?

It might be so; he clung to this hope. Since the day he had first walked feebly from his straw couch and felt a new darkness within him under the sunlight, his mind had undergone changes, partly gradual and persistent, partly sudden and fleeting. As his bodily strength returned, so had his self-command and the energy of his will; he had recovered the memory of that part of his life closely enwrought with his emotions. But he felt more and more constantly and painfully the uneasy sense of lost knowledge. Yet, once or twice, when strongly excited, he had seemed momentarily to possess his past self entirely, as old men doze for an instant and regain the consciousness of their youth. He seemed again to see Greek pages and understand them, again to feel his mind moving unbenumbed among familiar ideas. It had been but a flash, and the closing darkness seemed the more horrible; but might not the same thing happen again, for longer periods? If it would only come and stay long enough for him to achieve revenge—devise an exquisite suffering that a mere right arm could never inflict!

Raising himself from his stooping posture, he folded his arms and attempted to concentrate all his mental force on the plan he must immediately pursue. He had to wait for knowledge and opportunity, and while waiting, he needed means of living without begging. What he dreaded above all was that anyone should think him a foolish, helpless old man. No one must know that half his memory was gone; the lost strength might return. If it were only for a little while, that might be enough.

He knew how to begin gathering information about Tito. He had repeated the words "Bratti Ferravecchi" so constantly after they were uttered to him that they never slipped from his mind for long. A man in Genoa, on whose finger he had seen Tito's ring, had told him that the ring was bought in Florence from a young Greek, well-dressed with a handsome dark face, in the shop of a *rigattiere* named Bratti Ferravecchi, located in the street also called Ferravecchi. This discovery caused a violent agitation in Baldassarre. Until then, he had clung with the tenacity of his fervent nature to his faith in Tito, never believing himself wilfully forsaken. At first, he had thought, "My bit of parchment has never reached him; that is why I am still toiling at Antioch. But he is searching; he knows where I was lost: he will trace me out and find me at last." Then, when taken to Corinth, he induced his owners, by assuring them he would be sought and ransomed, to secure against any inquiries regarding him at Antioch. At Corinth, he thought joyfully, "Here, at last, he must find me. Here he is sure to touch, whichever way he goes." But before another year had passed, the illness came, rising with body and mind so shattered that he was worse than worthless to his owners, except for the sake of the ransom that never arrived. Sitting helpless in the morning sunlight, he began to think, "Tito has been drowned, or they have made *him* a prisoner too. I shall see him no more. He set out after me, but misfortune overtook him. I shall see his face no more." Sitting in his new feebleness and despair, supporting his head between his hands with blank eyes and lips moving uncertainly, he looked so much like a hopelessly imbecile old man that his owners were content to be rid of him, allowing a Genoese merchant, who had compassion on him as an Italian, to take him aboard his galley. In a voyage of many months through the Archipelago and along the seaboard of Asia Minor, Baldassarre recovered his bodily strength, but upon landing at Genoa, he felt such a weary sense of desolation that he almost wished he had died of that illness at Corinth. There was just one possibility hindering this wish: that Tito might not be dead, but living in a state of imprisonment or destitution. If he lived, there was still a hope for Baldassarre—faint, perhaps, and likely to be long deferred, but still a hope, that he might find his child, his cherished son again; might yet again clasp hands and meet face to face with the one being who remembered him as he had been before his mind was broken. In this state of feeling, he had chanced to meet the stranger who wore Tito's onyx ring. Though Baldassarre would have been unable to describe the ring beforehand, the sight of it stirred the dormant fibers, and he recognized it. That Tito, nearly a year after his father had been parted from him, should be living in apparent prosperity at Florence, selling the gem which he ought not to have sold till the last extremity, was a fact Baldassarre shrank from trying to account for. He was glad to be stunned and bewildered by it, rather than to have any distinct thought; he tried to feel nothing but joy that he should behold Tito again. Perhaps Tito had thought his father dead; somehow the mystery would be explained. "But at least I shall meet eyes that will remember me. I am not alone in the world."

And now again Baldassarre said, "I am not alone in the world; I shall never be alone, for my revenge is with me."

It was as the instrument of that revenge, as something merely external and subservient to his true life, that he bent down again to examine himself with hard curiosity—not, he thought, because he cared for a withered, forsaken old man, whom nobody loved, whose soul was like a deserted home where the ashes were cold upon the hearth and the walls were bare of all but the marks of what had been. It is in the nature of all human passion, the lowest as well as the highest, that there is a point where it ceases to be properly egoistic, and becomes like a fire kindled within our being to which everything else in us is mere fuel.

He looked at the pale, black-browed image in the water until he identified it with that self from which his revenge seemed a thing apart; and he felt as if the image too heard the silent language of his thought.

"I was a loving fool—I worshipped a woman once, and believed she could care for me; and then I took a helpless child and fostered him; and I watched him as he grew, to see if he would care for me only a little—care for *me* over and above the good he got from me. I would have torn open my breast to warm him with my life-blood if I could only have seen him care a little for the pain of my wound. I have labored, I have strained to crush out of this hard life one drop of unselfish love. Fool! men love their own delights; there is no delight to be had in me. And yet I watched till I believed I saw what I watched for. When he was a child he lifted soft eyes towards me, and held my hand willingly: I thought, this boy will surely love me a little: because I give my life to him and strive that he shall know no sorrow, he will care a little when I am thirsty—the drop he lays on my parched lips will be a joy to him... Curses on him! I wish I may see him lie with those red lips white and dry as ashes, and when he looks for pity I wish he may see my face rejoicing in his pain. It is all a lie—this world is a lie—there is no goodness but in hate. Fool! not one drop of love came with all your striving: life has not given you one drop. But there are deep draughts in this world for hatred and revenge. I have memory left for that, and there is strength in my arm—there is strength in my will—and if I can do nothing but kill him—"

But Baldassarre's mind rejected the thought of that brief punishment. His whole soul had been thrilled into immediate, unreasoning belief in that eternity of vengeance where he, an undying hate, might clutch forever an undying traitor, and hear that fair, smiling hardness cry and moan with anguish. But the primary need and hope was to see a slow revenge under the same sky and on the same earth where he himself had been forsaken and had fainted with despair. And as soon as he tried to concentrate his mind on the means of attaining his end, the sense of his weakness pressed upon him like a frosty ache. This despised body, which was to be the instrument of a sublime vengeance, must be nourished and decently clad. If he had to wait, he must labor, and his labor must be of a humble sort, for he had no skill. He wondered whether the sight of written characters would so stimulate his faculties that he might venture to try finding work as a copyist; *that* might win him some credence for his past scholarship. But no! He dared trust neither hand nor brain. He must be content to do the work most like that of a beast of burden: in this mercantile city, many porters must be wanted, and he could at least carry weights. Thanks to the justice that struggled in this confused world in behalf of vengeance, his limbs had regained some of their old sturdiness. He was stripped of all else that men would give coin for.

But the new urgency of this habitual thought brought a new suggestion. There was something

"My Romola," Tito announced on the second morning following his harangue in the Piazza del Duomo, "grand visitors arrive today. The Milanese Count returns, accompanied by the Seneschal de Beaucaire, the great favorite of the Cristianissimo. I know you disdain the smiling ceremonies required by such rustling magnates, figures we shall scarcely behold again. Since they intend to inspect our antiquities and library, perhaps you should suspend your labors and visit your cousin Brigida."

Romola perceived the subtext in his invitation and immediately acquiesced. Yet, returning moments later, hooded and mantled, she remarked, "Oh, what a long breath Florence will draw when the gates fly open and the last Frenchman walks out! Even you, my Tito, seem weary of your patience; confess it. Ah, your brow burns."

He leaned over his desk, pen in hand, and she placed her palm upon his head, intending a parting caress. This posture was habitual; Tito was accustomed to lift his head, lean back slightly, and gaze upward when her hand touched him. But now, he felt as paralyzed as if her hand were a leaden cowl. Instead of rising, he spoke in a light tone, his ink continuing its steady flow.

"The French are as eager to depart Florence as wasps leaving a ripe pear once they have fastened upon it."

Romola, acutely sensitive to the absence of his customary warmth, withdrew her hand and declared, "I am going, Tito."

"Farewell, my sweet one. I must remain at home. Take Maso with you."

Tito did not lift his gaze. Romola departed without further word. In the quiet of marriage, trivialities often mark epochs; that morning, for the first time, she acknowledged not merely that Tito had changed, but that he had altered specifically toward her. Was the cause within herself? She might have suspected so had not the facts of the armor and the painting suggested an external catastrophe, a mystery entirely opaque to her.

The moment Romola vanished from the house, Tito laid down his pen and looked up, finding delightful security in the sight of parchment and broken marble alone. He was disgusted with himself for failing to meet her gaze and behave as usual. He would have chosen to be kinder than ever, yet he could not suddenly master an involuntary shrinking from her presence—a subtle recoil born of the very traits that drove him to desire her affection. He stood on the brink of a step he knew would provoke her deep indignation; he would face much unpleasantness before winning her forgiveness. Tito could never easily confront displeasure; his nature abhorred defiance, and every inclination leaned toward preserving her tenderness. He was not tormented by sentimental scruples, which he had quickly argued away as irrelevant to solid utility, yet his lack of scruples did not shield him from dread. Unscrupulousness removes many burdens, but not toothache, wounded vanity, or the profound loneliness for which the world offers no cure but a healthy jaw and a just, loving soul. At this moment, Tito felt that no device could save him from the pain of the impending collision with Romola; no bland persuasion could cushion the shock driving him forward like a timid animal urged to a desperate leap by the terror of teeth and claws closing in.

A secret conviction had long held that his tenacious adherence to Bardo's wishes regarding the library had become, under current difficulties, a piece of sentimental folly depriving both himself and Romola of substantial advantage. Perhaps this thought would never have crystallized into action but for the events of the past week, which introduced a new motive and a rare opportunity. Indeed, it was only after his dread intensified by seeing Baldassarre regain his sanity, and only when he began to feel compelled to flee Florence, that he resolved to exercise his legal right to sell the library before the chance presented by French and Milanese bidders slipped away. For if he were forced to leave Florence, he would not do so as a destitute wanderer. Accustomed to an agreeable existence, he wished to carry with him all means to retain those conditions. He desired, above all, to take Romola with him—and, if possible, to carry no infamy. Success had awakened in him an appetite for pleasures dependent on advantageous social standing; at no point could flight under dishonor appear as a temptation, but only as a hideous alternative, even with a bag of diamonds, leading to the life of an adventurer. He could not free himself from the regard of Florentines who treated him with polite distance, still less from Romola. She was the wife of his first love—he still loved her; she belonged to the furniture of life he shrank from parting with. He winced under her judgment, uncertain how far her revulsion might extend, and the sense of power a husband possesses, which makes him risk betrayals a lover never dares, proved insufficient to counteract Tito's unease. This was the leaden weight too strong for his will, preventing him from raising his head to meet her eyes. Her pure light brought too near the prospect of a coming struggle. Yet it could not be avoided; if they were to leave Florence, they needed money. Indeed, Tito could not arrange his life to his satisfaction without a considerable sum, and that problem of ordering his life had been the source of all his wrongdoing. He would have been equal to any sacrifice that was not unpleasant.

The rustling magnates arrived and departed, bargains were struck, and Romola returned home, though nothing grave was spoken that night. Tito was merely gay and chatty, pouring forth stories and descriptions of the French visit, a liveliness Romola interpreted as an effort. She attributed it to his consciousness that she had been wounded in the morning, accepting it as an act of penitence, while inwardly aching at the sign of growing distance—the offense neither dared to name.

The following day, Tito remained away until late night. It was a marked day for Romola, for Piero di Cosimo, spurred to greater industry by the fear that he might have caused her pain in the past week, had sent home her father's portrait. She had propped it against the back of his old chair and gazed at it when the door opened behind her and Bernardo del Nero entered.

"It is you, godfather! How I wish you had come sooner! It is already dusk," Romola said, moving toward him.

"I have just come to tell you good news, knowing Tito has not yet returned," Bernardo replied. "The French king moves off tomorrow; not before it is high time. There has been another clash between our people and his soldiers this morning. But there is now a chance for the city to regain order and trade to resume."

"That is joyful," Romola said. "But it is sudden, is it not? Tito seemed to think yesterday there was little prospect of the king's departure."

"He has been well barked at, that is the reason," Bernardo smiled. "His own generals opened their throats quite sufficiently, and finally our Signoria sent the mastiff of the city, Fra Girolamo. The Cristianissimo was frightened by that thunder and has ordered a move. I fear there will be little agreement among us when he is gone, but at least all parties are glad not to have Florence stifled with soldiery any longer, and the Friar barked this time to some purpose. Ah, what is this?" he added as Romola, clasping his arm, led him before the picture. "Let us see."

He began to unwind his long scarf while she arranged a seat for him.

"Do you not want your spectacles, godfather?" Romola asked anxiously, wishing he might see exactly what she saw.

"No, child, no," Bernardo said, uncovering his grey head as he sat with firm erectness. "For seeing at this distance, my old eyes are perhaps better than your young ones. Old men's eyes are like old men's memories; they are strongest for things far away."

"It is better than having no portrait," Romola said apologetically after a brief silence. "It is less like him now than the image I hold in my mind, but that might fade with the years." She rested her arm on the old man's shoulder, drawn strongly toward him by their shared interest in the dead.

"I do not know," Bernardo mused. "I almost think I see Bardo as he was when young better than this picture shows him when old. Your father possessed great fire in his eyes when young. It was what I could never understand—that he, with his fiery spirit, seemingly more impatient than mine, could hang over books and live with shadows all his life. However, he had put his heart into that."

Bernardo gave a slight shrug at the end, but Romola discerned in his voice a feeling that accorded with her own.

"And he was disappointed to the last," she said involuntarily. Immediately fearing her words might be taken as an accusation against Tito, she continued hurriedly, "If we could only see his longest, dearest wish fulfilled just to his mind!"

"Well, so we may," Bernardo said kindly, rising and putting on his cap. "The times are cloudy now, but fish are caught by waiting. Who knows? When the wheel has turned often enough, I may be Gonfaloniere yet before I die; and no creditor can touch these things." He glanced around the room. Turning to her, he patted her cheek. "And you need not fear my dying; my ghost will claim nothing. I have taken care of that in my will."

Romola seized the hand resting against her cheek and pressed it to her lips in silence.

"Haven't you been scolding your husband for keeping away from home so much lately? I see him everywhere but here," Bernardo said, eager to change the subject.

She felt the flush spread over her neck and face as she replied, "He has been very much wanted; you know he speaks so well. I am glad to know that his value is understood."

"You are contented then, Madonna Orgogliosa?" Bernardo asked, smiling as he moved to the door.

"Assuredly."

Poor Romola! There was one thing that would have made the pang of disappointment in her husband harder to bear: that anyone should know he gave her cause for disappointment. This might be a woman's weakness, but it is closely allied to a woman's nobleness. She who willingly lifts the veil of her married life has profaned it from a sanctuary into a vulgar place.

The following dawn brought with it the departure of the French, an event that stirred the entire city of Florence with a feverish excitement. For Romola, amidst the general rejoicing, there lingered a faint, almost superstitious hope that the departure of these foreign guests might also wash away the specific anxieties concerning Tito. Their presence had lasted barely eleven days, yet within that brief span, she had endured a depth of sorrow she had never known before. It was on the very day of their arrival that Tito had donned that hateful armor, a physical manifestation of his terror. Though logic offered her no clear reason why their exit should dismantle the cause of his fear—the terrifying image of a prisoner seizing him, as Piero had sketched it—she felt certain that removing the burden of their company would strip away the tangible association of her pain.

Clad in her mantle, Romola stood beneath the loggia at the house's summit, watching the distant glimpses of the troops and the royal retinue crossing the bridges toward the Porta San Piero, the gateway leading to Siena and Rome. Even after the gates had fallen shut, she lingered, eager to feel the vibration of the great bell peal that marked the finality of their departure. Dusk had settled when she finally descended into the library. Lighting her lamp, she resolved to quell the agitation that had paralyzed her all day and return to her work of copying the catalogue. Tito had left early; she did not expect him until later. Once he arrived, she planned to retreat to the charming salon adorned with dancing nymphs and birds—a space he had once deemed too chilly and gloomy for her comfort.

To her profound surprise, Tito entered before she had even begun her labor. Her initial thought was of the cheerlessness of the vast, dark room, illuminated only by a solitary oil lamp at the far end, with the fire nearly extinguished. She hastened toward him.

"Tito, dearest, I did not know you would return so soon," she said, her voice tinged with nervousness as she raised her white arms to loosen the *becchetto* from his neck.

"Am I not welcome, then?" he replied, offering one of his brightest smiles. He embraced her, yet playfully held his head back from her touch.

"Tito!" she exclaimed, the word vibrating with a tone of affectionate reproach. He kissed her fondly, stroking her hair in his customary manner, seemingly unconcerned with removing his mantle. Romola quivered with delight. All the turmoil of the day had sharpened her sensitivity to the return of this familiar tenderness. "It will come back," she whispered to herself. "The old happiness will perhaps return. He is like himself again."

Yet, Tito was striving with great effort to appear as his former self; his heart hammered with a secret, consuming anxiety.

"If I had anticipated your return so quickly," Romola said, helping him finally shed his wrappings, "I would have prepared a small festival to honor this joyful ringing of the bells. I did not intend to be here in the library when you came home."

"Never mind, sweet," he dismissed her concern casually. "Do not worry about the fire. Come—come and sit down."

A low stool stood beside his chair, the place where Romola habitually rested when conversing with him. She leaned her arm upon his knee, mimicking the gesture she had once shared with her father, and gazed upward at him. He had not yet noticed the portrait looming nearby, nor had she mentioned it, allowing the thought to fester in her mind.

"I have been listening to the clang of the bells for the first time, Tito," she began. "I enjoyed being shaken and deafened by them; I fancied myself a Bacchante possessed by a divine rage. Do not the people look very joyful tonight?"

"Joyful, indeed, in a sour and pious fashion," Tito replied, shrugging his shoulders. "But in truth, those left behind in Florence have little cause for joy. It seems to me the most reasonable grounds for gladness would be to have fled the city entirely."

Tito had struck the desired note without apparent premeditation. He spoke without emphasis, yet his grave demeanor prompted an anxious query from Romola.

"Why, Tito? Are there fresh troubles?"

"No need for fresh ones, my Romola. There are three powerful factions in the city, all poised to tear each other apart. And if the Frate's party proves strong enough to silence the others, as seems likely, life will be as pleasant and amusing as a funeral. They already simmer with plans for a Great Council; should they succeed, the man who sings sacred Lauds the loudest will be the most eligible for office. Furthermore, the city will be drained by the payment of this massive subsidy to the French king and the war to reclaim Pisa. The prospect would be dismal enough without the rule of fanatics. On the whole, Florence will be a delightful haunt for those worthies who entertain themselves by visiting crypts and lashing themselves, but for everything else, the exiles have the better of it. For my own part, I have been seriously considering that we would be wise to leave Florence, my Romola."

She started. "Tito, how could we leave Florence? Surely you do not think I could abandon it—at least, not yet, not for a long while." Her voice turned cold and trembling, finding difficulty in its articulation. Tito must know the reasons weighing heavily in her mind.

"That is merely a fabric of your own imagination, my sweet one. Your secluded life has led you to place undue stress on trivial matters. You know I told you before our marriage that I wished we were somewhere other than Florence. Had you seen more places and more people, you would understand what I mean when I say there is something in the Florentines that reminds me of their cutting spring winds. I prefer people who take life less eagerly; and it would be good for my Romola, too, to witness a new life. I should like to dip her slightly in the soft waters of forgetfulness."

He leaned forward, kissing her brow and resting his hand on her fair hair once more. Yet, she felt his caress no more than if he had kissed a mask. She was too agitated by the chasm widening between their minds to register the contact of his lips.

"Tito, it is not because I suppose Florence is the pleasantest place in the world that I refuse to quit it. It is because I—because we must fulfill my father's wish. My godfather is old; he is seventy-one; we cannot leave him alone."

"It is precisely those superstitions that cling to your mind like bedimming clouds, my Romola, which constitute a major reason why I wish we were two hundred leagues from Florence. I am compelled to take charge of you against your own will: if those dear eyes, so tender in their gaze, see falsely, I must see for them and save my wife from wasting her life on impracticable dreams."

Romola sat silent and motionless. She could not blind herself to the direction of his words: he sought to persuade her that they could deposit the library in a monastery or find other means to sever their ties to Florence. She was determined never to submit her mind to his judgment on this matter of duty to her father; she was inwardly prepared to endure any pain in resistance. Yet, this determination remained latent in these first moments, crushed by the heart-wrenching realization that she and Tito were now openly divided in their wishes. He welcomed her silence; despite his fears regarding the strength of her feeling, it was impossible for him, confined within the narrowness of a merely clever and unimpassioned man, not to overestimate the persuasiveness of his own arguments. His conduct did not appear ugly to himself, nor did his imagination suffice to reveal exactly how it appeared to Romola. He continued in the same gentle, remonstrating tone.

"You know, dearest—and your own clear judgment always showed you—that the notion of isolating a collection of books and antiquities, attaching a single name to them forever, holds no valid, substantial good for its object. Moreover, it is liable to be defeated in a thousand ways. Witness what has become of the Medici collections! For my part, I consider it even blameworthy to entertain such petty views of appropriation. Why should anyone reasonably rejoice that Florence should possess the benefits of learned research and taste more than any other city? I understand your feeling regarding the wishes of the dead; but wisdom must place a limit on such sentiments, or lives might be continually wasted in futile devotion—like praising deaf gods forever. You gave your life to your father while he lived; why should you demand more of yourself?"

"Because it was a trust," Romola said in a low but distinct voice. "He trusted me, he trusted you, Tito. I did not expect you to feel anything else about it—to feel as I do—but I did expect you to feel that."

"Yes, dearest, of course I should feel it on a point where your father's real welfare or happiness was concerned; but there is no question of that now. If we believed in purgatory, I should be as anxious as you to have masses said; and if I believed it could now pain your father to see his library preserved and used in a rather different way from what he had set his mind on, I should share the strictness of your views. But a little philosophy should teach us to rid ourselves of those air-woven fetters that mortals hang round themselves, spending their lives in misery under the mere imagination of weight. Your mind, which seizes ideas so readily, my Romola, is able to discriminate between substantial good and these brain-wrought fantasies. Ask yourself, dearest, what possible good can these books and antiquities do, stowed together under your father's name in Florence, more than they would do if they were divided or carried elsewhere? Nay, is not the very dispersion of such things in hands that know how to value them one means of extending their usefulness? This rivalry of Italian cities is very petty and illiberal. The loss of Constantinople was the gain of the whole civilized world."

Romola was still under the painful pressure of the new revelation Tito was making of himself, her resistance finding no strong vent. As his fluent talk fell upon her ears, a rising contempt stirred within her, heightening her awareness of her bruised, despairing love for the Tito she had married and believed in. Her nature, possessed by the energies of strong emotion, recoiled from this hopelessly shallow readiness which professed to appropriate the widest sympathies yet lacked a pulse for the nearest. She still spoke like one restrained from showing all she felt. She had only drawn her arm away from his knee, sitting with her hands clasped before her, cold and motionless as locked waters.

"You talk of substantial good, Tito! Are faithfulness, and love, and sweet grateful memories no good? Is it no good that we should keep our silent promises on which others build because they believe in our love and truth? Is it no good that a just life should be justly honored? Or, is it good that we should harden our hearts against all the wants and hopes of those who have depended on us? What good can belong to men who have such souls? To talk cleverly, perhaps, and find soft couches for themselves, and live and die with their base selves as their best companions."

Her voice had gradually risen until there was a ring of scorn in the final words. She made a slight pause, but he saw other words quivering on her lips and chose to let them come.

"I know of no good for cities or the world if they are to be made up of such beings. But I am not thinking of other Italian cities and the whole civilized world—I am thinking of my father, and of my love and sorrow for him, and of his just claims on us. I would give up anything else, Tito, I would leave Florence—what else did I live for but for him and you? But I will not give up that duty. What have I to do with your arguments? It was a yearning of *his* heart, and therefore it is a yearning of mine."

Her voice, having been tremulous, became full and firm. She felt she had been urged to say all that was needful. She thought, poor thing, there was nothing harder to endure than this struggle against Tito's suggestions as against the meaner part of herself.

He began to see clearly that he could not persuade her into assent; he must take another course and show her that the time for resistance was past. That, at least, would end the struggle; and if the disclosure were not made by himself that night, it must be made another way. This necessity nerved his courage, and his experience of her affectionateness and unexpected submissiveness since their marriage encouraged him to hope that, at last, she would accommodate herself to his will.

"I am sorry to hear you speak in that spirit of blind persistence, my Romola," he said quietly, "because it obliges me to give you pain. But I partly foresaw your opposition, and as a prompt decision was necessary, I avoided that obstacle and decided without consulting you. The very care of a husband for his wife's interest compels him to that separate action sometimes—even when he has such a wife as you, my Romola."

She turned her eyes upon him in breathless inquiry.

"I mean," he answered her look, "that I have arranged for the transfer, both of the books and of the antiquities, where they will find the highest use and value. The books have been bought for the Duke of Milan; the marbles, bronzes, and the rest are going to France. Both will be protected by the stability of a great Power, instead of remaining in a city exposed to ruin."

Before he had finished speaking, Romola had started from her seat, standing up to look down at him with tightened hands falling before her, and, for the first time in her life, with a flash of fierceness in her scorn and anger.

"You have *sold* them?" she asked, as if she distrusted her own ears.

"I have," said Tito, shrinking back slightly. The scene was unpleasant; the descending scorn already scorched him.

"You are a treacherous man!" she said, with something grating in her voice as she looked down at him.

She was silent for a minute, and he sat still, feeling that ingenuity

Baldassarre wandered through Florence seeking the cheapest shelter, his feet drawn inevitably toward the only uneven patch of ground within the city walls. From this vantage point, elevated above the rooftops, one could see past the urban sprawl to the protective hills and the distant valley, visible only through the gap carved by the Arno. While part of this terrain was the famous stone-quarry of Bogoli, Baldassarre ascended the slope behind the Via de' Bardi, known locally as the hill of San Giorgio. Bratti had informed him that Tito resided on this street, and Baldassarre hoped to find a hiding place among the scattered dwellings here. Having grown accustomed to the vast, open sky over the years, the claustrophobic labyrinth of narrow Florentine alleys intensified his sense of isolation and the foggy decay of his memory.

The hill was largely garden land, save for a jagged section of rough ground scarred by a landslide that had destroyed houses centuries prior. Perched atop this broken earth stood a peculiar, truncated tower-like structure with fluted tiles, adjacent to a small outhouse wedged against a ruinous stone wall. Beneath a dying mulberry tree, its final leaves fluttering into the open doorways, a withered, hardy old woman untied a goat with two kids. Baldassarre noted that one section of the outbuilding housed livestock, while the other stood empty save for tools and straw—the perfect refuge he sought.

He approached the woman, but it took persistent shouting near her ear to penetrate her silence. Initially, she responded only with head shakes and muffled denials of "No lodging," her tone betraying a profound deafness. Undeterred, Baldassarre explained that he was a destitute stranger from overseas, unable to afford hostels, and offered a few quattrini weekly for the straw. The woman remained dubious, muttering to herself, until a new idea sparked. She retrieved a hatchet, gesturing to a log half-buried in litter, and proposed a bargain: if he chopped it up, he might sleep there for one night.

Agreeing, Baldassarre began to chop. Monna Lisa watched with arms akimbo, a smile of cunning satisfaction playing on her lips. *"It has lain there since my old man died,"* she thought, *"What then? I might as well have put a stone on the fire. He chops well, though he speaks a foreign tongue and looks odd. I couldn't have gotten it done cheaper. And if he only needs straw, I can make him run errands up and down the hill. Who needs to know? A hidden sin is half forgiven. He is a stranger; he won't notice *her*. I'll tell her to keep her tongue still."*

The object of her silent threat possessed a pair of blue eyes fixed on a large round hole in the shutter of the upper window. The shutter was closed not for punishment, but because the opposite window alone boasted glass; the chill weather made the four-inch aperture sufficient for spying. Though the hole was too high, forcing the small observer to stand on a rickety stool, Tessa endured the discomfort willingly. Drawn by the strange voice, she had darted across her room to peer out, remaining there until the wood was split and Baldassarre entered the outhouse as dusk settled, sinking onto the straw.

A powerful temptation seized Tessa. She desired to share her supper with the old man, to converse with him in a way she could not with the deaf Monna Lisa. Strangers were transient figures, living nowhere specific, and while disobedience weighed heavily on her conscience, the confession next Easter seemed manageable alongside her minor faults of dozing over beads and occasional petulance toward Monna Lisa. With an excited, pouting expression, she adjusted her dark-green serge gown, red girdle, and string of red glass beads, her brown hair neatly knotted with a silver pin. She wore a single new pride: a fine gold ring.

Sitting on the stool, her soul fluttered with the thrill of this forbidden transgression. She had been strictly commanded to make no acquaintances, warned that such friendships would turn her happiness into lead, yet she had obeyed so thoroughly that she kept her face shaded at church. Fear of her stepfather, Nofri, had aided her compliance, but this old man was merely a sleeping stranger, likely unaware of Nofri's existence. If she fed him, he would be pleased and silent. Monna Lisa's objections could be ignored; consequences mattered only after the deed was done.

Knowing supper was being prepared—a mountain of cheesy macaroni fragrant enough to tame any wanderer—Tessa descended the stairs with innocent inquiry, quickly knitting her brow into a peremptory frown like a kitten asserting dominance. She ordered the old woman upstairs, declaring her intention to eat below. Minutes later, lantern in one hand and a wooden bowl of macaroni in the other, she kicked gently at the outhouse door. Baldassarre, roused from a somber reverie, doubted his wakefulness as he opened the door to this surprising little handmaid, whose wide eyes broke into his dismal solitude with delight.

"I've brought you some supper," she shouted, leaning close to his ear as if addressing the deaf. "Sit down and eat it, while I stay with you."

Surprise and distrust overwhelmed Baldassarre, yet he felt no impulse to reject the visitor. He sank passively onto the straw as Tessa placed herself beside him, set the bowl on his lap, and positioned the lantern, crossing her hands and nodding significantly. *"Yes, you may really eat it,"* her gesture declared. In her excitement, she had forgotten he could hear, falling back on her habitual pantomime and shouting.

The invitation was welcome; he had been gnawing dry bread and craved warmth. Tessa watched him eat, initially wary of his fierce gaze, until she ventured closer again. "I like my supper, don't you?" she cried.

Baldassarre returned a look of mild kindness, resembling a dog touched by affection but unable to smile. "Yes," he said, "but I can hear well—I'm not deaf."

"It is true; I forgot," Tessa exclaimed, clasping her hands. "But Monna Lisa is deaf, and I live with her. She's a kind old woman, and I'm not frightened. We live very well; we have plenty of nice things. I can have nuts if I like. I used to work, but I didn't like it; I preferred feeding the mules. I'd love to see poor Giannetta again. We only have a goat and two kids now. I used to talk to the goat because there was no one else but Monna Lisa. But now I have something else—can you guess what it is?"

She pulled her head back, offering a challenging smile as if presenting a riddle.

"No," Baldassarre replied dreamily, setting aside his bowl. This young, prattling creature seemed a memory from his own youth.

"You like me to talk to you, don't you?" Tessa pressed. "But you must not tell anybody. Shall I fetch you some cold sausage?"

He shook his head, his expression now so mild that Tessa relaxed. "Well, then, I have a little baby. Such a pretty *bambinetto*, with tiny fingers and nails! Not old yet; born at the Nativita, Monna Lisa says. I was married one Nativita, a long time ago, and nobody knew. Oh, Santa Madonna! I didn't mean to tell you that!"

Tessa stiffened, biting her lip, watching Baldassarre as if expecting a dramatic reaction. But he seemed indifferent, perhaps due to the nature of strangers. "Yes," she continued aloud, "you are a stranger; you don't live anywhere or know anybody, do you?"

"No," Baldassarre murmured, thinking more than answering, "I only know one man."

"His name is not Nofri, is it?" Tessa asked anxiously.

"No," Baldassarre noticed her fear and clarified. "Is that your husband's name?"

The mistake amused Tessa. She laughed and clapped her hands. "No, indeed! But I must not tell you anything about my husband. You would never think what he is—not at all like Nofri!" She laughed again at the absurd contrast between the gruff name Nofri and her husband's image.

"But I don't see him very often," she said more seriously. "Sometimes I pray to the Holy Madonna to send him oftener, and once she did. But I must go back to my *bimbo* now. I'll bring it to show you tomorrow. You would like to see it. Sometimes it cries and makes a face, but only when it's hungry, Monna Lisa says. You wouldn't think it, but Monna Lisa had babies once, and they are all dead old men. My husband says she will never die now, because she's so well dried. I'm glad of that, for I'm fond of her. You would like to stay here tomorrow, shouldn't you?"

"I should like to have this place to come and rest in, that's all," Baldassarre said. "I would pay for it, and harm nobody."

"No, indeed; I think you are not a bad old man. But you look sorry about something. Tell me, is there anything you shall cry about when I leave you by yourself? *I* used to cry once."

"No, child; I think I shall cry no more."

"That's right; and I'll bring you some breakfast, and show you the *bimbo*. Good-night."

Tessa departed with her bowl and lantern, closing the door behind her. To Baldassarre, this loving apparition was no more than a faint rainbow against the blackness for a man wrestling in deep waters. He scarcely thought of her again until his dreamy waking faded into the vivid disturbances of sleep.

Tessa, however, dwelt deeply on him. Upon entering the house, she immediately confessed her actions to Monna Lisa, insisting the stranger be allowed to rest whenever he wished. The old woman, hoping to make him a useful tenant, feigned reluctance, shaking her head and claiming Messer Naldo would be angry. Tessa did not believe this; Naldo had never objected to strangers who lived nowhere, and this old man knew only one person who was not Nofri.

"Well," Monna Lisa finally conceded in her thick undertone, "if I let him stay for a while and carry things up the hill for me, thou must keep thy counsel and tell nobody."

"No," Tessa countered, "I'll only tell the *bimbo*."

"And then," Monna Lisa whispered, "God may love us well enough not to let Messer Naldo find out anything. For he never comes here but at dark; and as he was here two days ago, it's likely he'll never return until the old man is gone."

"Oh me! Monna," Tessa clasped her hands, "I wish Naldo had not to go such a long, long way sometimes before he comes back again."

"Ah, child! the world's big, they say. There are places behind the mountains, and if people go night and day, they get to Rome, and see the Holy Father."

Tessa looked submissive to this mystery, rocking her baby and singing vague, loving syllables that mimicked a triple chime.

The next morning, eager for more dialogue and the joy of showing her baby, Tessa was unusually industrious. However, before she could prepare his breakfast, she found Monna Lisa employing Baldassarre as a water carrier. She deferred her prayers, rushing down to insist he sit on his straw so she could sit beside him while he ate. This posture made the new companionship doubly delightful for Tessa, recalling her own days sitting on straw with goats and mules.

"I will not let Monna Lisa give you too much work," she said, bringing steaming broth and soft bread. "I don't like much work, and I daresay you don't. I like sitting in the sunshine and feeding things. Monna Lisa says work is good, but she does it all herself, so I don't mind. She's not a cross old woman; you needn't be afraid. Now, eat that, and I'll go fetch my baby to show you."

Soon she returned with the small mummy-case. The baby looked lively, possessing unusually large dark eyes, though lacking more than a hint of a future nose.

"This is my baby," Tessa said, seating herself close. "You didn't think it was so pretty, did you? It is like the little Gesu, and I should think the Santa Madonna would be kinder to me now, is it not true? But I have not much to ask for, because I have everything now—only that I should see my husband oftener. You may hold the *bambino* a little if you like, but I think you must not kiss him, because you might hurt him."

She spoke the prohibition with a tone of soothing excuse, and Baldassarre could not refuse to hold the small package. "Poor thing! poor thing!" he said in a deep voice that held a strangely threatening quality beneath its apparent pity. It did not seem to him that this guileless woman could reconcile him to the world; rather, she appeared to be with him against it, a creature who would need vengeance.

"Oh, don't you be sorry for me," she said. "Though I don't see him often, he is more beautiful and good than anybody else in the world. I say prayers to him when he's away. You couldn't think what he is!"

She looked at Baldassarre with a wide, mysterious glance, taking the baby back and almost wishing he would question her as if desperate to know more.

"Yes, I could," Baldassarre said, rather bitterly.

"No, I'm sure you never could," Tessa insisted earnestly. "You thought he might be Nofri," she added with triumphant conclusiveness. "But never mind; you couldn't know. What is your name?"

He rubbed his hand over his knitted brow, then looked at her blankly. "Ah, child, what is it

No Place for Repentance.

Messer Naldo returned sooner than anyone anticipated, arriving on the evening of the twenty-eighth of November, merely eleven days after his previous visit. This brevity proved he had not ventured far beyond the mountains, and the scene that unfolded in the Via de' Bardi that night serves to illuminate the impulse that drew his steps toward the hill of San Giorgio.

When Tito first secured this dwelling for Tessa upon his return from Rome, more than a year and a half prior, he convinced himself he acted solely under the constraint of his own benevolence following the unfortunate incident that led the innocent Tessa to believe he was her husband. While it was true that his kindness flowed naturally toward such a trusting, pretty creature, it was equally true that Tito harbored feelings of affection for her distinct from any calculated gain. Though he might have preferred freedom from her company had he not been captivated by her charm, he was not in love with Tessa. His heart belonged, for the first time, to an entirely different woman—Romola. Her presence possessed him with such intensity that the mere sweep of her long tresses across his cheek seemed to vibrate through the hours. All the youthful, ideal passion within him had been awakened by her. His fiber was too refined, his intellect too bright, to succumb to the habits of a gross pleasure-seeker. Yet, he had spun a web around himself and Tessa that he felt incapable of breaking. In the initial moments after the mock marriage, he had been prompted to leave her under an illusion by a distinct calculation of his own potential needs; but since that critical moment, it seemed the web had spun itself in spite of him, growing like a vine over which he held no power. The elements of kindness and self-indulgence were difficult to distinguish in a soft nature like Tito's. The annoyance he had felt under Tessa's persistent pursuit on the day of his betrothal, coupled with his thorough intention to reveal the truth when he fulfilled his promise to see her again, served as sufficient proof to him that he had ultimately left Tessa under her delusion and provided her a home because he was overcome by his own kindness. In these days of his first devotion to Romola, he required a self-justifying argument. He had learned to find solace in the fact that she was deceived about certain matters. Yet, every strong feeling constructs its own conscience, possesses its own piety—much like the bond between a son and a mother, which can sometimes endure even amidst the foulest corruption. Tito could not yet find peace committing a secret offense against his wedded love.

Consequently, he exercised extreme caution to preserve the secrecy of this transgression. Monna Lisa, who, like many of her class, rarely left her habitation except to visit a few specific shops or attend confession once a year, knew nothing of his true name or whereabouts. She only knew that he paid her handsomely to ensure her comfort and cared little for the rest, save that she had grown fond of Tessa and found pleasure in the duties for which she was compensated. There was clearly some mystery at play, given that Tessa was a peasant girl (*contadina*) while Messer Naldo was a gentleman; but for all Monna Lisa knew, he might have been a real husband. Tito had thoroughly frightened Tessa into silence regarding the circumstances of their union by warning her that if she broke that silence, she would never see him again. Furthermore, Monna Lisa's deafness, which made it impossible to communicate with her without significant premeditation, had saved Tessa from any incautious revelation to her, such as the slip of the tongue she had made while speaking with Baldassarre. For a long while, Tito's visits were so infrequent that it seemed plausible he undertook journeys between them. These were prompted chiefly by a desire to ensure all was well with Tessa. Although he always found the visit more pleasant than the prospect of it—always renewing his appreciation for that pretty, ignorant lovingness and trust—he had not yet felt a pressing need for it. However, he was determined, if possible, to preserve the simplicity upon which this charm depended; to keep Tessa a genuine peasant and not place the small field-flower among conditions that would rob it of its grace. He would have been horrified to see her dressed in the attire of any rank higher than her own; the piquancy of her conversation would vanish if things began to acquire new relations for her, if her world expanded and her pleasures became less childish. The squirrel-like enjoyment of nuts at her discretion marked the standard of the luxuries he had provided. By this means, Tito saved Tessa's charm from being sullied, and he also, through a convenient coincidence, spared himself from aggravating expenses that were already becoming burdensome to a man whose funds were entirely consumed by his avowed habits of life.

Briefly, this was the history of Tito's relationship with Tessa up until a very recent date. It is true that once or twice before Bardo's death, the knowledge that Tessa resided up the hill, with whom it was possible to spend an agreeable hour, had served as an inducement for him to escape the slight weariness of the old man, when, lacking any positive engagement, he might otherwise have borne the weariness patiently and shared Romola's burden. But the moment when he first felt a genuine hunger for Tessa's ignorant lovingness and her belief in *him* had arrived only quite recently, distinctly marked by circumstances as unforgettable as the onset of a malady that permanently vitiated sight and hearing. It was the day he first saw Baldassarre and purchased the armor. Returning across the bridge that night with the coat of mail in his hands, he had felt an unconquerable shrinking from an immediate encounter with Romola. She, too, knew little of the actual world; she, too, trusted him. Yet, he possessed an uneasy consciousness that behind her frank eyes lay a nature capable of judging him, and that any ill-founded trust of hers sprang not from a pretty, brute-like incapacity, but from a nobleness that might prove an alarming touchstone. He desired a little ease, a little repose from self-control, after the agitation and exertions of the day; he wished to be where he could adjust his mind to the morrow without caring how he behaved in the present moment. And there was a sweet, adoring creature within reach whose presence was as safe and unconstraining as that of her own kids—one who would believe any fable and remain utterly unimpressed by public opinion. Thus, on that evening, when Romola waited and listened for him, he turned his steps up the hill.

No wonder, then, that his steps took the same course on this evening, eleven days later, when he had been forced to recoil under Romola's first outburst of scorn. He could not wish Tessa in his wife's place, nor refrain from wishing that his wife should be thoroughly reconciled to him; for it was Romola, and not Tessa, who belonged to the world where all the larger desires of a man possessing ambition and effective faculties must necessarily lie. Yet, he sought a refuge from a standard disagreeably rigorous, from which he could not make himself independent simply by dismissing it as folly; and Tessa's little soul was that inviting refuge.

It was not much past eight o'clock when he ascended the stone steps to the door of Tessa's room. Usually, she heard his entrance and ran to meet him, but not that night. When he opened the door, he saw the reason. A single dim light burned above the dying fire, illuminating Tessa in a kneeling attitude by the head of the bed where the baby lay. Her head had fallen aside onto the pillow, and her brown rosary, which usually hung above the pillow over the picture of the Madonna and the golden palm-branches, lay in the loose grasp of her right hand. She had fallen fast asleep over her beads. Tito stepped lightly across the small room and sat down close to her. She had probably heard the opening of the door as part of her dream, for she had not been looking at him two moments before she opened her eyes. She opened them without any start and remained quite motionless, gazing at him as if the sense of his presence smiling at her shut out any impulse that could disturb that happy passiveness. But when he placed his hand under her chin and stooped to kiss her, she said—

"I dreamed it, and then I said it was dreaming—and then I awoke, and it was true."

"Little sinner!" said Tito, pinching her chin, "you have not said half your prayers. I will punish you by not looking at your baby; he is ugly."

Tessa did not like those words, even though Tito was smiling. A pouting distress clouded her face as she said, bending anxiously over the infant—

"Oh, it is not true! He is prettier than anything. You do not think he is ugly. You will look at him. He is even prettier than when you saw him before—only he is asleep, and you cannot see his eyes or his tongue, and I cannot show you his hair—and it grows—isn't that wonderful? Look at him! It's true his face is very much alike when he is asleep; there is not so much to see as when he is awake. If you kiss him very gently, he won't wake: you want to kiss him, is it not true?"

He satisfied her by giving the small mummy a butterfly kiss, then placing his hand on her shoulder and turning her face toward him, he said, "You like looking at the baby better than looking at your husband, you false one!"

She was still kneeling, and now rested her hands on his knee, looking up at him like one of Fra Lippo Lippi's round-cheeked adoring angels.

"No," she said, shaking her head; "I love you always best, only I want you to look at the bambino and love him; I used only to want you to love me."

"And did you expect me to come again so soon?" said Tito, inclined to make her prattle. He still felt the effects of the agitation he had undergone—still felt like a man who has been violently jarred; and this was the easiest relief from silence and solitude.

"Oh, no," said Tessa. "I have counted the days—to-day I began at my right thumb again—since you put on the beautiful chain-coat that Messer San Michele gave you to take care of you on your journey. And you have got it on now," she said, peering through the opening in the breast of his tunic. "Perhaps it made you come back sooner."

"Perhaps it did, Tessa," he said. "But don't mind the coat now. Tell me what has happened since I was here. Did you see the tents in the Prato, and the soldiers and horsemen when they passed the bridges—did you hear the drums and trumpets?"

"Yes, and I was rather frightened, because I thought the soldiers might come up here. And Monna Lisa was a little afraid too, for she said they might carry our kids off; she said it was their business to do mischief. But the Holy Madonna took care of us, for we never saw one of them up here. But something has happened, only I hardly dare tell you, and that is what I was saying more Aves for."

"What do you mean, Tessa?" said Tito, rather anxiously. "Make haste and tell me."

"Yes, but will you let me sit on your knee? Because then I think I shall not be so frightened."

He took her on his knee and put his arm round her, but looked grave; it seemed that something unpleasant must pursue him even here.

"At first I didn't mean to tell you," said Tessa, speaking almost in a whisper, as if that would mitigate the offense; "because we thought the old man would be gone away before you came again, and it would be as if it had not been. But now he is there, and you are come, and I never did anything you told me not to do before. And I want to tell you, and then you will perhaps forgive me, for it is a long while before I go to confession."

"Yes, tell me everything, my Tessa." He began to hope it was after all a trivial matter.

"Oh, you will be sorry for him: I'm afraid he cries about something when I don't see him. But that was not the reason I went to him first; it was because I wanted to talk to him and show him my baby, and he was a stranger that lived nowhere, and I thought you wouldn't care so much about my talking to him. And I think he is not a bad old man, and he wanted to come and sleep on the straw next to the goats, and I made Monna Lisa say, 'Yes, he might,' and he's away all the day almost, but when he comes back I talk to him, and take him something to eat."

"Some beggar, I suppose. It was naughty of you, Tessa, and I am angry with Monna Lisa. I must have him sent away."

"No, I think he is not a beggar, for he wanted to pay Monna Lisa, only she asked him to do work for her instead. And he gets himself shaved, and his clothes are tidy: Monna Lisa says he is a decent man. But sometimes I think he is not in his right mind: Lupo, at Peretola, was not in his right mind, and he looks a little like Lupo sometimes, as if he didn't know where he was."

"What sort of face has he?" said Tito, his heart beginning to beat strangely. He was so haunted by the thought of Baldassarre that it was already him whom he saw in imagination sitting on the straw not many yards from him. "Fetch your stool, my Tessa, and sit on it."

"Shall you not forgive me?" she said, timidly, moving from his knee.

"Yes, I will not be angry—only sit down, and tell me what sort of old man this is."

"I can't think how to tell you: he is not like my stepfather Nofri, or anybody. His face is yellow, and he has deep marks in it; and his hair is white, but there is none on the top of his head: and his eyebrows are black, and he looks from under them at

For several days, Tito saw little of Romola. The next morning, he approached her with a gentle demeanor, suggesting it would be prudent for her to clear away the smaller personal items from the library, as agents were arriving to pack the antiquities. Leaning in to kiss her forehead, he advised her to retreat to her own chamber, where the small painted tabernacle stood, keeping herself away from the clamor of unfamiliar footsteps. Romola assented quietly, offering no sign of emotion. The night had been a prolonged vigil for her; despite her robust constitution, sensation had dulled into a continuous, dull ache, as though she had been stunned and bruised. Tito sensed her illness but dared not speak of it. Seeing her hand and brow turned to ice, he merely fetched a fur-lined mantle and draped it lightly over her shoulders. In every brief interval he returned, the scene remained unchanged: he attempted to soothe her with unobtrusive acts of tenderness, yet she seemed to have lost the capacity to speak to him or even to look at him.

"Patience!" he murmured to himself. "She will recover, and forgive at last. The bond between us must remain the strongest." When a struck person lies slow to rise and appears untouched, the striker often slides effortlessly into the role of the aggrieved party, feeling no pain himself while acutely aware of his own benevolence since delivering the blow. Yet Tito was not naturally inclined to feel aggrieved; his mind bent constantly toward reconciliation. He would have endured much just to feel Romola's hand rest upon his head again, as it had that morning when he first recoiled from gazing at her.

He found it easier to wait patiently for the return of domestic happiness because his life outside the walls grew increasingly captivating. While a course of action is often the slow outgrowth of an entire character, it usually traces back to a single impression as its apparent origin. Since the moment in the Piazza del Duomo, when Tito, mounted on bales, had tasted the keen pleasure of pleasing the ears of men with any phrase that suited them, his imagination had drifted toward a form of political activity that Florence's turbulent public life might soon demand. However, a fresh dread of Baldassarre, awakened at that same instant, had lain like an immovable rock across that path, urging him to sell the library as preparation for fleeing Florence at the very moment he began to feel a new attraction to the city. That dread was nearly lifted now. He must still wear his armor, preparing himself for demands on his coolness and ingenuity, but he no longer felt compelled to take the inconvenient step of leaving Florence to seek new fortunes. His father had refused the offered atonement, forcing him into defiance; an old man in a strange land, with his memory gone, was too weak to defy such resolve.

Tito's implicit desires were now unfolding into explicit thoughts. As the freshness of young passion faded, life took on for him the aspect of a game blending skill and chance. The game Florence promised was rapid and exciting—a struggle of revolution and party, certain to include ample unavowed action where brilliant ingenuity, discarding all inconvenient beliefs save that "ginger is hot in the mouth," sees the path of superior wisdom.

No sooner had the French guests departed than Florence became as agitated as a colony of ants when an alarming shadow is removed and the camp must be hastily repaired. "How shall we raise funds for the French king? How manage the war with the obstinate Pisan rebels? Above all, how mend our plan of government to ensure magistrates are chosen and laws voted correctly?" Until these questions were answered, trade faced stagnation, and the large body of working men, excluded from citizenship and lacking even a vote to soothe their stomachs, were likely to grow impatient. Something had to be done.

First, the great bell rang, summoning the citizens to a parliament in the Piazza de' Signori. When the crowd was wedged tight and hemmed in by armed men at every outlet, the Signoria—the Gonfaloniere and the eight Priors—emerged and stood by the stone lion on the platform before the Old Palace. They proposed that twenty chief men of the city be granted dictatorial authority for one year, empowered to choose all magistrates and set the government in order. The people shouted their assent, feeling themselves the electors of the Twenty. This kind of "parliament" was an old Florentine fashion, designed to make the will of the few appear as the choice of the many.

The shouting in the square soon ceased, but the debate inside the palace continued. Was Florence to adopt a Great Council in the Venetian mode, where all officers and laws were elected by a wide number of qualified citizens regardless of rank or party? Or was it to be governed by a narrower scheme, preserving the hereditary influence of good families against the dilution of shopkeepers' votes? Doctors of law disputed day after day, far into the night. Messer Pagolantonio Soderini argued excellently for the popular scheme; Messer Guidantonio Vespucci countered with equally excellent reasons for a more aristocratic form. It was a question of boiled or roast meat, prejudged by the palates of the disputants; their excellent arguing might have been prolonged indefinitely without more result than deferring the cooking. The majority inside the palace, holding power already, sided with Vespucci, believing change should be moderate. The majority outside, conscious of little power and many grievances, feared change less.

Outside the palace, a force was gradually giving the vague desires of that majority the character of a determinate will: the preaching of Savonarola. Impelled partly by a spiritual necessity to guide the people and partly by public men who could carry no measures without his aid, he rapidly shifted in his daily sermons from the general to the specific. He moved from urging hearers to postpone private passions for the public good, to telling them precisely what government they must have to achieve it—from "Choose whatever is best for all" to "Choose the Great Council," and "The Great Council is the will of God."

To Savonarola, these were identical propositions. The Great Council was the only practical plan to express a public will large enough to counteract the corrupting influence of party interests; it was a plan that could make honest, impartial public action possible. The purer Florence's government became—the more secure from those who profited from the moral debasement of their fellows—the closer the Florentine people would approach the character of a pure community, worthy to lead the renovation of the Church and the world. Fra Girolamo's mind never stopped short of that sublimest end; the objects toward which he worked always possessed the same moral magnificence. He harbored no private malice and sought no petty gratification. Even in the last terrible days, when ignominy, torture, and the fear of torture laid bare every hidden weakness of his soul, he could tell his importunate judges: "Do not wonder if it seems to you that I have told but few things; for my purposes were few and great."

More than three weeks passed before the library's contents were finally packed and removed. Romola did not shut her eyes or ears to the process; instead, she watched it unfold. The exhaustion born of violent emotion often breeds a dreamy disbelief in the reality of its cause, yet here, in the evenings when the workmen had departed, Romola took her hand-lamp and wandered slowly through the chaos of straw and wooden cases. She paused at every vacant pedestal, every familiar object laid prostrate, driven by a bitter desire to confirm that there was a sufficient reason why her love had vanished and why the world had grown barren for her. As the nights wore on, however, her purpose shifted. She returned no longer merely to assure herself, but because this vivification of pain and despair regarding her father's memory constituted the strongest life remaining in her affections. By December 23rd, she knew the final packages were to leave. She ran to the loggia atop the house, refusing to miss the last pang of watching the slow wheels cross the bridge.

It was a cloudy day, nearing dusk. The Arno ran dark and shivering; the hills were mournful. Florence, viewed from above with its girdling stone towers, possessed a silent, tomb-like quality that unbroken shadow casts upon a city. Santa Croce, where her father lay, was dark amidst that darkness. Slowly crawling over the bridge and vanishing up the narrow street was the white load, appearing like a cruel, deliberate Fate carrying away her father's lifelong hope to bury it in an unmarked grave. Romola felt less that she was witnessing this herself than that her father was conscious of it as he lay helpless beneath the imprisoning stones, where her hand could not reach his to tell him he was not alone.

She stood still even after the load had disappeared, heedless of the cold, soothed by the gloom which seemed to cover her like a mourning garment, shutting out the discord of joy. Suddenly, the great bell in the palace-tower rang out a mighty peal—not the hammer-sound of alarm, but an agitated peal of triumph. One after another, every other bell in every other tower seemed to catch the vibration and join the chorus. As the chorus swelled until the air seemed made of sound, little flames, vibrating as if the sound had caught fire, burst out between the turrets of the palace and on the girdling towers.

That sudden clang and leaping light fell upon Romola like sharp wounds. They were the triumph of demons at the success of her husband's treachery and the desolation of her life. Less than three weeks prior, she had been intoxicated by the sound of those very bells; in the gladness of Florence, she had heard a prophecy of her own joy. Now, the general joy seemed cruel to her. She stood aloof from that common life—that Florence flinging out its loud exultation to stun the ears of sorrow and loneliness. She could never join hands with gladness again, only with those whom the hard nature of gladness chose to forget. In her bitterness, she felt all rejoicing was mockery. Men shouted paeans with their souls full of heaviness, then looked into their neighbors' faces to see if there was truly such a thing as joy. Romola had lost her belief in the happiness she once thirsted for; it was a hateful, smiling, soft-handed thing with a narrow, selfish heart.

She ran down from the loggia, pressing her hands against her ears, and hurried across the antechamber when she was startled by unexpectedly meeting her husband, who was coming to seek her. His step was elastic, and there was a radiance of satisfaction about him not quite usual.

"What! The noise was a little too much for you?" he said, for Romola, starting at the sight of him, had pressed her hands closer to her ears. He took her gently by the wrist, drew her arm within his, and led her into the saloon surrounded by dancing nymphs and fauns. "Florence is gone quite mad at getting its Great Council, which is to put an end to all the evils under the sun, especially to the vice of merriment. You may well look stunned, my Romola, and you are cold. You must not stay so late under that windy loggia without wrappings."

"I was coming to tell you," he continued, "that I am suddenly called to Rome about some learned business for Bernardo Rucellai. I am going away immediately, for I am to join my party at San Gaggio tonight, that we may start early in the morning. I need give you no trouble; I have had my packages made already. It will not be very long before I am back again."

He knew he could expect from her nothing but quiet endurance of what he said and did. He could not even venture to kiss her brow that evening, but merely pressed her hand to his lips and left her. Tito felt that Romola was a more unforgiving woman than he had imagined; her love was not that sweet, clinging instinct, stronger than all judgments, which he now began to see was the great charm of a wife. Still, this petrified coldness was preferable to a passionate, futile opposition. Her pride and her capability of seeing where resistance was useless had their convenience.

But when the door closed on Tito, Romola lost the look of cold immobility which came over her like an inevitable frost whenever he approached. Inwardly, she was very far from being in a state of quiet endurance. The days that had passed since the scene dividing her from Tito had been days of active planning and preparation for the fulfillment of a purpose.

The first thing she did was to call old Maso to her.

"Maso," she said in a decided tone, "we take our journey tomorrow morning. We shall be able now to overtake that first convoy of cloth while they are waiting at San Piero. See about the two mules tonight, and be ready to set off with them at break of day, and wait for me at Trespiano."

She meant to take Maso with her as far as Bologna, and then send him back with letters to her godfather and Tito, telling them she was gone and never meant to return. She had planned her departure so that its secrecy might be perfect, her broken love and life hidden away unscanned by vulgar eyes. Bernardo del Nero had been absent at his villa, willing to escape political suspicions to his favorite occupation of attending to his land, and she had paid him the debt without a personal interview. He did not even know the library was sold, left to conjecture that some sudden piece of good fortune had enabled Tito to raise this sum of money. Maso had been taken into her confidence only so far that he knew her intended journey was a secret; and to do just what she told him was the thing he cared most for in his withered, wintry age.

Romola did not mean to go to bed that night. When she had fastened the door, she took her taper to the carved and painted chest containing her wedding clothes. The white silk and gold lay there, the long white veil and the circlet of pearls. A great sob rose as she looked at them; they seemed the shroud of her dead happiness. In a tiny gold loop of the circlet, a sugar-plum had lodged—a pink hailstone from the shower of sweets. Tito had detected it first and had said it should always remain there. At certain moments—and this was one of them—Romola was carried, by a sudden wave of memory, back again into the time of perfect trust. She felt again the presence of the husband whose love made the world as fresh and wonderful to her as to a little child sitting in stillness among sunny flowers; she heard the gentle tones, saw the soft eyes without any lie in them, and breathed again that large freedom of the soul which comes from the faith that the being nearest to us is greater than ourselves. And in those brief moments, the tears always rose: the woman's lovingness felt something akin to what the bereaved mother feels when the tiny fingers seem to lie warm on her bosom, yet are marble to her lips as she bends over the silent bed.

But there was something else lying in the chest besides the wedding clothes: it was something dark and coarse, rolled up in a close bundle. She turned her eyes away from the white and gold to the dark bundle, and as her hands touched the serge, her tears began to be checked. That coarse roughness recalled her fully to the present, from which love and delight were gone. She unfastened the thick white cord and spread the bundle out on the table. It was the grey serge dress of a sister belonging to the third order of Saint Francis, living in the world but especially devoted to deeds of piety—a personage the Florentines were accustomed to call a Pinzochera. Romola was going to put on this dress as a disguise, and she determined to put it on at once, so that, if she needed sleep before the morning, she might wake up in perfect readiness to be gone.

She put off her black garment, and as she thrust her soft white arms into the harsh sleeves of the serge mantle and felt the hard girdle of rope hurt her fingers as she tied it, she courted those rude sensations. They were in keeping with her new scorn of that thing called pleasure which made men base—that dexterous contrivance for selfish ease, that shrinking from endurance and strain when others were bowing beneath burdens too heavy for them, which now made one image with her husband. Then she gathered her long hair together, drew it tight away from her face, bound it in a great hard knot at the back of her head, and taking a square piece of black silk, tied it in the fashion of a kerchief close across her head and under her chin; and over that she drew the cowl. She lifted the candle to the mirror. Surely her disguise would be complete to anyone who had not lived very near to her. To herself, she looked strangely like her brother Dino: the full oval of the cheek had only to be wasted; the eyes, already sad, had only to become a little sunken. Was she getting more like him in anything else? Only in this, that she understood now how men could be prompted to rush away forever from earthly delights, how they could be prompted to dwell on images of sorrow rather than of beauty and joy.

But she did not linger at the mirror; she set about collecting and packing all the relics of her father and mother that were too large to be carried in her small traveling wallet. They were all to be put in the chest along with her wedding clothes, and the chest was to be committed to her godfather when she was safely gone. First she laid in the portraits; then one by one every little thing that had a sacred memory clinging to it was put into her wallet or into the chest.

She paused. There was still something else to be stripped away from her, belonging to that past on which she was going to turn her back forever. She put her thumb and her forefinger to her betrothal ring, but they rested there, without drawing it off. Romola's mind had been rushing with an impetuous current toward this act, for which she was preparing: the act of quitting a husband who had disappointed all her trust, the act of breaking an outward tie that no longer represented the inward bond of love. But that force of outward symbols by which our active life is knit together so as to make an inexorable external identity for us, not to be shaken by our wavering consciousness, gave a strange effect to this simple movement toward taking off her ring—a movement which was but a small sequence of her energetic resolution. It brought a vague but arresting sense that she was somehow violently rending her life in two: a presentiment that the strong impulse which had seemed to exclude doubt and make her path clear might after all be blindness, and that there was something in human bonds which must prevent them from being broken with the breaking of illusions.

If that beloved Tito who had placed the betrothal ring on her finger was not in any valid sense the same Tito whom she had ceased to love, why should she return to him the sign of their union, and not rather retain it as a memorial? And this act, which came as a palpable demonstration of her own and his identity, had a power unexplained to herself of shaking Romola. It is the way with half the truth amidst which we live that it only haunts us and makes dull pulsations that are never born into sound. But there was a passionate voice speaking within her that presently nullified all such muffled murmurs.

"It cannot be! I cannot be subject to him. He is false. I shrink from him. I despise him!"

She snatched the ring from her finger and laid it on the table against the pen with which she meant to write. Again she felt that there could be no law for her but the law of her affections. That tenderness and keen fellow-feeling for the near and the loved, which are the main outgrowth of the affections, had made the religion of her life; they had made her patient in spite of natural impetuosity; they would have sufficed to make her heroic. But now all that strength was gone, or, rather, it was converted into the strength of repulsion. She had recoiled from Tito in proportion to the energy of that young belief and love which he had disappointed, of that lifelong devotion to her father against which he had committed an irredeemable offense. And it seemed as if all motive had slipped away from her, except the indignation and scorn that made her tear herself asunder from him.

She was not acting after any precedent, or obeying any adopted maxims. The grand severity of the stoical philosophy in which her father had taken care to instruct her was familiar enough to her ears and lips, and its lofty spirit had raised certain echoes within her; but she had never used it, never needed it as a rule of life. She had endured and forbore because she loved; maxims which told her to feel less, and not to cling close lest the onward course of great Nature should jar her, had been as powerless on her tenderness as they had been on her father's yearning for just fame. She had appropriated no theories; she had simply felt strong in the strength of affection, and life without that energy came to her as an entirely new problem.

She was going to solve the problem in a way that seemed to her very simple. Her mind had never yet

The first sound of the morning was a tap at the door, sharp and intrusive against the silence of the room. Romola woke to find Maso standing there, his face illuminated by the pale, hard light of dawn. He had come for the travelling-wallet. When she opened the door, the old man started, expecting the familiar, graceful silhouette crowned with the brightness of her hair. Instead, he saw only the heavy folds of a grey mantle and a pale face obscured by a dark cowl.

"It is well, Maso," Romola said, forcing her voice to remain steady and calm. "The wallet is ready. Go on quietly; I shall not be far behind. Once you pass the gates, you may walk slower, for I hope to join you before you reach Trespiano."

She closed the door behind him, locking the silence back into the house. Then, her hand went to the key she had taken from the casket the night before. It was the original key to the little painted tabernacle. Tito had failed to drown it in the Arno; instead, it had lodged in the corner of the embroidered *scarsella* he wore beneath his purple tunic. Years later, Romola had found it there, setting it aside without use, yet feeling a quiet satisfaction that it remained within reach.

The cabinet holding the tabernacle had been moved near a window, where the morning light now struck it, rendering the painted figures distinct enough for Romola to see them clearly—the triumphant Bacchus with his vine-clad spear embracing the crowned Ariadne; the Loves scattering roses; the wreathed vessels and the cunning-eyed dolphins amidst the rippling sea, all framed by a flowery border like a paradise bower. On this chill morning, however, the familiar images offered no comfort. They seemed a more pitiful mockery than ever, a lying screen rather than a tomb of sorrow. Foolish Ariadne, with her gaze of love, believing that bright face held the secret of her life!

"Ariadne is wonderfully transformed," Romola thought bitterly. "She would look strange among these vines and roses now."

She picked up the mirror and gazed at her reflection. The sight was startling in the harsh morning light, and she laid it down again, feeling a shrinking almost as intense as when she had turned away from the joyous painting. To recognize her own face, veiled in the cowl, brought back the dread of being drawn into the fellowship of wretched superstition, of joining the howling fanatics and weeping nuns whom she had despised since childhood. With trembling fingers, she thrust the key into the tabernacle, opened it hurriedly, and withdrew the crucifix without looking at it. She passed a cord through the small ring, hung the cross around her neck, and hid it deep within the bosom of her mantle. "For Dino's sake," she whispered to herself.

Still, there were matters to attend to. The letters for Maso to carry back to Bologna were brief. The first was addressed to Tito:

"Tito, my love for you is dead; and therefore, so far as I was yours, I too am dead. Do not attempt to enforce any laws to fetch me back; it would bring you no happiness. The Romola you married can never return. I need explain nothing further after the words I spoke to you during our last long conversation. If you believed them to be words of transient anger, you will now know they marked an irreversible change.

"I believe you will fulfill my wish that my bridal chest be sent to my godfather, who gave it to me. It contains my wedding clothes and the portraits and other relics of my father and mother."

She folded the ring inside this letter and wrote Tito's name on the outside. The second letter was to Bernardo del Nero:

"Dearest Godfather,—If I could have been of any good to your life by staying, I would not have gone so far away. But now I am gone. Do not ask the reason; and if you love my father, try to prevent anyone from seeking me. I could not bear my life in Florence. I cannot bear to tell anyone why. Help to cover my lot in silence. I have requested that my bridal chest be sent to you: when you open it, you will understand the reason. Please give all the things that belonged to my mother to my cousin Brigida, and ask her to forgive me for not saying words of parting to her.

"Farewell, my second father. The best thing I have in life remains the memory of your goodness and my gratitude.

"Romola."

Romola placed the letters and the crucifix within the bosom of her mantle. Everything was done. She was ready to depart.

The house was empty. She descended the stairs and stepped into the silent street almost as quietly as a grey phantom. Her heart hammered violently, yet she felt a strange enjoyment in the firm tread of her feet on the broad flags, in the swift movement that felt like a chained resolution finally set free. The anxiety to complete her act and the dread of any obstacle kept sorrow at bay. As she reached the Ponte Rubaconte, she felt less that Santa Croce was visible before her than that the yellow streak of morning light, parting the grey, was widening. Unless she hastened, she would soon encounter faces.

Her direct path led straight to the Borgo Pinti, then along the walls to the Porta San Gallo, the exit from the city, a route that took her past the Piazza di Santa Croce. Yet she walked steadily and rapidly through the square, refusing to look toward the church. The thought that eyes might turn upon her with curiosity or recognition, that indifferent minds might speculate on her private sorrows, made her shrink physically as from imagined torture. She felt degraded even by the act of her husband from which she suffered helplessly. Yet there was no sign that any eyes looked forth from the windows to notice this tall grey sister, with her firm step and the proud, hidden attitude of her cowl. Her road lay clear of the early traffic's stir. Reaching the Porta San Gallo, she slipped through easily while a dispute raged over the toll for panniers of eggs and market produce entering the gate.

Out! Once past the houses of the Borgo, she would be beyond Florence's last fringe. The sky would be broad above her, and she would enter a new life—one of loneliness and endurance, but of freedom. She had been strong enough to snap the bonds she had accepted in blind faith. Whatever befell her, she would no longer feel the breath of soft, hated lips warming her cheek, nor the stifling breath of an odious mind crushing her own. The bare wintry morning, the chill air, were welcome in their severity. The leafless trees and sombre hills were not haunted by the gods of beauty and joy, whose worship she had forever forsaken.

Presently, the light burst forth with sudden strength, casting long shadows across the road. It seemed the sun intended to chase away the greyness. Perhaps light is never felt more strongly as a divine presence stirring the inarticulate sensibilities of our deepest lives than in these moments when it instantly awakens the shadows. A certain awe, inevitable in this most momentous act of her life, became a conscious element in Romola's feeling as she found herself in the sudden presence of the impalpable golden glory and the long shadow of herself that could not be escaped.

Thus far, she had met only occasional countrymen with mules, and the many turns of the level road had prevented her from seeing that Maso was not far ahead. But when she passed Pietra and climbed onto rising ground, she lifted the hanging roof of her cowl and looked eagerly before her.

The cowl was dropped immediately. She had seen not Maso, but two monks approaching within a few yards. The edge of her cowl had acted as a penthouse over her brow, shutting out anything above eye level; for the last few moments, she had seen only the brightness of the path and her own shadow, tall and shrouded like a dread spectre.

She wished now that she had not looked up. Her disguise made her especially dislike encountering monks; they might expect pious passwords of which she knew nothing. She walked along with a careful appearance of unconsciousness until she saw the skirts of their black mantles pass her. The encounter made her heart beat unpleasantly. Romola harbored an uneasiness in her religious disguise, a shame at this studied concealment, made more distinct by her special effort to appear unaware under actual glances.

But the black skirts would vanish the faster, for they were going downhill. Seeing a great flat stone against a cypress that rose from a projecting green bank, she yielded to the desire the slight shock had given her to sit and rest.

She turned her back on Florence, intending not to look at it until the monks were quite out of sight. Raising the edge of her cowl again once seated, she discerned Maso and the mules at a distance where it was not hopeless for her to overtake them, for the old man would likely linger in expectation.

Meanwhile, she might pause a little. She was free and alone.

The Black Marks Become Magical.

The journey Tito Melema undertook to Rome, a move that cleared the path for Romola's own departure, had been decided upon with sudden urgency during a supper the previous evening. Tito had left for that meal buoyed by pleasant anticipations: delicate meats, choice wines, and a company of distinction awaited him. The venue was the Selva, or Orto de' Rucellai—the Rucellai Gardens—and the host, Bernardo Rucellai, epitomized the Florentine grandee. His very name carried a symbolic weight; derived from the *roccella*, a lichen growing on Greek isles and the Canaries that yields a rich purple dye under specific conditions, the surname reflected a lineage enriched by the importation of this secret, the *oricello*, from the Levant.

Bernardo stood out vividly against this purple heritage. He had married the sister of Lorenzo de' Medici, hosting a wedding of unparalleled splendor. Sent on embassies to France and Venice, elected Gonfaloniere, and a patron of the arts, he had constructed a magnificent palace and completed the black-and-white marble façade of Santa Maria Novella. He had cultivated a garden of rare trees, transforming it into classic ground for the Platonic Academy following Lorenzo's death, authored a learned treatise on ancient Rome, and possessed a pure Latinity. To summarize him was to write a laudatory epitaph so exhaustive that the Greek and Ausonian Muses might weep at the impossibility of nature combining such virtues within a single vessel.

Lorenzo Tornabuoni had conveyed Bernardo's invitation to Tito, with an emphasis suggesting political intent, though the public questions of the age were already consuming all attention. Tito, aware that Bernardo was one of the elect Twenty currently holding the reins of Florence, felt certain that the gathering served party purposes, enhanced by the flavors of stewed fish and aged Greek wine. This assurance lifted his spirits as he approached the Via della Scala. Without it, he might have feared the company would be as dull as the philosophical suppers he had endured in the gardens before, where he was often forced to accept and endure an exposition of the universe from its origins to its final ripeness.

It was a dark evening. Only when Tito crossed the intermittent light of a lamp suspended before an image of the Virgin did his tall, graceful figure, mantled and moving, become discernible. To any observer watching his passage from light to light, it would have appeared that he was constantly followed by a starkly different form: a thickset, elderly man in a serge tunic and felt hat. This conjunction might have seemed accidental amidst the street traffic, but when Tito halted at the gate of the Rucellai gardens, the figure behind him stopped as well. The *sportello*, the smaller door, stood ajar, held open by a servant distracted by another task. Tito turned in rapidly, giving his name, and passed between the evergreen bushes, which glowed like metal in the torchlight. The follower entered immediately after.

"Your name?" the servant asked.

"Baldassarre Calvo," came the immediate reply.

"You are not a guest; the guests have all passed."

"I belong to Tito Melema, who has just gone in. I am to wait in the gardens."

The servant hesitated. "I had orders to admit only guests. Are you a servant of Messer Tito?"

"No, friend, I am not a servant; I am a scholar."

There are those to whom one need only say, "I am a buffalo," in a tone of quiet confidence, and they will yield. The porter gave way instantly. Baldassarre entered, hearing the door close and chain behind him as he vanished among the shining bushes.

Those firm, ready answers signaled a profound transformation in Baldassarre since their last meeting, when the dagger had snapped in two. The change had manifested in a startling manner.

As the shadow of Tito passed before the hovel on his way home, Baldassarre sat in that peculiar state of after-tremor known to those prone to great emotional outbursts—a condition where physical paralysis is accompanied by an exceptional lucidity of thought, as if the dissipation of excited passion clears a fire-mist to reveal clarity beneath. He felt unable to rise; his limbs were benumbed, his hands shaking, his body cold. Yet, in this helplessness, he was surrounded not by the usual dimness and vanishing shadows, but by the crystal-clear images of the past. He was reliving a life that had seemed a long preparation for bitterness.

For several minutes, he was so absorbed by these visions that he failed to reflect on the fact that he was seeing them, noting the shift only when the sudden clearness traveled through the distance and rested upon the scene just concluded. He was fully present: he remembered Monna Lisa and Tessa. Ah! *He* was the mysterious husband; the one with another wife in the Via de' Bardi. It was time to retrieve the broken dagger and depart, leaving no trace. To conceal his feebleness was the only semblance of power remaining to him. He leaned to gather the fragments, then turned toward the book lying open beside him. It was a fine, large manuscript, an odd volume of Pausanias. Moonlight fell upon it, illuminating the large letters at the head of the page:

In days past, he had known Pausanias intimately; yet an hour or two prior, he had stared at that page in hopelessness, the letters appearing no more meaningful than black weather-marks on a wall. Now, however, they were the magical signs conjuring a world. The moonbeam striking the letters resurrected Messenia before him, its struggle against Spartan oppression.

He snatched up the book, though the light was too pale for further reading. It mattered not; he knew the chapter. He read inwardly. He visualized the stoning of the traitor Aristocrates—cast out by a whole people to lie unburied, with a pillar erected bearing verses declaring how Time had restored justice to the unjust. The words arose within him, stirring innumerable vibrations of memory. He forgot his age; he could almost have shouted. The light had returned, the mother of knowledge and joy! In that exultation, his limbs regained their strength. He sprang up with his broken dagger and his book, stepping out under the broad moonlight.

The air was nipping with frost, yet Baldassarre felt no chill, only the glow of conscious power. He paced the open spaces of the high ground, gazing down upon the domed and towered city sleeping darkly beneath its mountain guardians, upon the pale gleam of the river, and the valley vanishing toward snow-capped peaks. He felt himself master of them all.

That sense of mental empire available to all in moments of exceptional clarity was intensified for Baldassarre by the long days and nights when memory had been little more than the awareness of something lost. The city, once a weary labyrinth, was now material he could subdue to his purposes. His mind scanned its affairs with flashing conjecture; he was once again a man who knew cities, whose vision was instructed by vast experience, savoring the keen delight of holding all things within the grasp of language. Names! Images! His mind rushed through this wealth without pause, like an heir entering a great inheritance.

Yet, amidst this rushing eagerness, one End presided in Baldassarre's consciousness—a dark deity in the innermost cell, seemingly forgotten only while his hecatomb was being prepared. Once the first triumph of recovered certainty had run its course, his thoughts centered on Tito. That fair, slippery viper could not escape him now. Thanks to struggling justice, the heart that had never quivered with tenderness for another possessed sensitive, selfish fibers that could be pierced by the sharp point of anguish. The soul that bowed to no right now bowed to the great lord of mortals, Pain.

He could now penetrate every secret of Tito's life. He knew some already, and the failure of the broken dagger, which had seemed like frustration, was merely the beginning of achievement. That sudden rage had shaken away the obstruction stifling his soul. Twice before, when his memory had partially returned, it had been due to sudden excitation: once defending himself from an enraged dog, once scrambling up a rock to escape the waves.

Yes, but if this time, as then, the light were to die out and the dreary conscious blank return! This time the light was stronger and steadier, yet what security existed that before morning the dark fog would not envelop him again? Even the fear seemed like the onset of feebleness. He thought with alarm that he might sink faster from this excited vigil on the hill, expending his vital force. Seeking anxiously for a sheltered corner, he finally nestled against a heap of warm garden straw and fell asleep.

When he opened his eyes, it was daylight. The first moments were filled with strange bewilderment: he was a man with a double identity. To which life had he awakened? To the existence of dim-sighted sensibilities, like the sad heirship of fallen greatness, or to the life of recovered power? Surely the latter, for the events of the night returned to him: the recognition of the page in Pausanias, the crowding resurgence of facts and names, the sudden wide prospect that had given him such a moment as the Maenad's glorious awakening on the mountain top.

He took up the book again, reading and remembering simultaneously. He saw a name, and images of deeds rose with it; he saw a deed mentioned and linked it to a name. There were stories of inexpiable crimes, but also tales of guilt that seemed successful. There were sanctuaries for swift-footed miscreants; baseness had its armor, and the weapons of justice sometimes broke against it. So what then? If baseness triumphed everywhere else, if it could heap upon itself all the goods of the world and even hold the keys of hell, it would never triumph over the hatred it had itself awakened. It could devise no torture greater than the torture of submitting to its smile. Baldassarre felt the indestructible, independent force of a supreme emotion that knew no terror, asked for no motive, and was itself an ever-burning motive consuming all other desire. And now, in this morning light, when the assurance came that the fine fibers of association were still active and his recovered self had not departed, all his gladness was but the hope of vengeance.

From that time until the evening he entered the Rucellai gardens, he had been incessantly, yet cautiously, inquiring into Tito's position and circumstances. Hardly a day passed without him contriving to follow his movements. He wished to arouse no alarm in Tito; he sought a moment when the hated favorite of blind fortune was at the summit of confident ease, surrounded by chief men on whose favor he depended. It was not retributive payment or personal recognition that bent his whole soul; it was to find the sharpest edge of disgrace and shame by which a selfish smiler could be pierced, to send through his marrow the most sudden shock of dread. He was content to lie hard and live stintedly—he had spent the greater part of his remaining money on another poniard. His hunger and thirst were for nothing exquisite but an exquisite vengeance. He had avoided addressing anyone suspected of intimacy with Tito, lest an alarm in Tito's mind urge him to flight or some counteracting measure devised by hard-pressed ingenuity. For this reason, he had never entered Nello's shop, which he knew Tito frequented, and had turned aside to avoid meeting Piero di Cosimo.

The possibility of frustration added eagerness to his desire that the great opportunity he sought should not be deferred. His desire was eager on another ground as well; he trembled lest his memory fail again. Whether from the agitating presence of that fear or other causes, he had twice felt a sort of mental dizziness, where the inward sense or imagination seemed to lose the distinct forms of things. Once he had attempted to enter the Palazzo Vecchio and make his way into a council chamber where Tito was, but had failed. But now, on this evening, he felt his occasion had come.

A Supper in the Rucellai Gardens.

The heavy doors of the pavilion swung open, admitting the cool night air and the scent of jasmine to the warm interior. Tito's eyes, sharp and assessing, scanned the assembly instantly. His initial suspicion was confirmed: this was not merely a feast, but a political gathering. Yet, the nature of the politics was subtle, woven into the very fabric of the celebration. In Florence, it was widely believed that good wine and sumptuous food sharpened the mind for political discourse, that the "inspired ease" of the post-prandial hour revealed truths inaccessible to the sober, uninvited mind. The Rucellai, a family of immense wealth, maintained a table of such splendor that it seemed a testament to their power. Here, amidst the bust of Plato watching from a corner and the frescoes of the cardinal virtues adorning the walls, high philosophy was left to the shadows. Tonight, the agenda was simpler: the strengthening of party lines through fellowship and the shared pleasure of the senses.

Plato's bust, brought from Lorenzo's villa after his death, had long served as a silent sentinel over these gatherings. On the thirteenth of November, the anniversary of the philosopher's passing, it looked down upon a select circle of scholars. Among them were the ghosts of an era: Pico della Mirandola, once a Quixotic genius who had astonished Rome with heresy before retreating into a humble quest for inner perfection; Marsilio Ficino, the diligent feeder of Platonism whose mind had grown soft from such exclusive nourishment; Angelo Poliziano, the vibrant poet whose phrases still seemed to pulse with life; and the towering Leon Battista Alberti, a universal mind of practical and theoretical grandeur. These were the valiant workers whose names are often forgotten, yet whose labors form the unseen foundation of our inheritance.

Bernardo Rucellai, the host, stood in the prime of life, barely forty, possessing a haughty and cautious dignity. He was a man of pure Latinity, though, as Erasmus noted, one could not extract a single word of Latin from him by force. He received Tito with marked favor, seating him between Lorenzo Tornabuoni and Giannozzo Pucci, both accomplished young members of the Medicean faction.

As the brass bowl of scented water circulated, allowing the company to wash their hands, the atmosphere lightened. Rings flashed on white fingers under the wax candles, mingling with the fragrance of fresh French damask. The conversation drifted to the habits of posterity. Someone mused what Dante would think if he could see silver forks on the table; the consensus was that future generations would seem equally surprising to their ancestors. While silver forks dangled delicately over morsels of liver cooked to melt in the mouth, the guests admired the enamelled centers of the service and discussed the silver dish for confetti, a masterpiece by Antonio Pollajuolo, seduced by papal patronage from Florence to Rome.

"I recall," said Niccolò Ridolfi, his manner negligently commanding, "how our Antonio grew bitter about chiseling metal, declaring that 'the artist who puts his work into gold and silver puts his brains into the melting-pot.' He took to painting in a fury."

"And that was a true prophecy," Giannozzo Pucci observed. "If this war with Pisa continues, spreading to our other towns, it will not only be our silver dishes that vanish. I doubt Antonio's silver saints in San Giovanni will not soon be worshipped more devoutly as coin."

"The Frate prepares us for this already," Lorenzo Tornabuoni added dryly. "He tells the people God will not have silver crucifixes and starving stomachs; that the church is adorned best with the gems of holiness and the gold of brotherly love."

"A useful doctrine of war-finance," Bernardo Rucellai replied. "But politics come after the confetti, Lorenzo, when we have drunk enough wine to wash them down. They are too solid for roast and boiled meat."

"Our Luigi Pulci would say this boiled kid requires an impartial mind," Niccolò Ridolfi continued, recounting a story of Pulci's. "He claimed that opinion corrupts the saliva—that is why men took to pepper. Scepticism is the only philosophy that leaves the mouth clean. Yet, poor Lorenzo de' Medici disagreed, citing Matteo Franco, who wanted hotter sauce because he believed so strongly in his own verses. Pulci said his mind was like sharpest steel, cutting everything it touched, yet he was a gentle-hearted creature, temperate as a butterfly."

The light talk persisted through the roast and boiled meats, leading inevitably to the capon and game. The crowning glory was a peacock cooked according to Apicius, served with its feathers intact to resemble a living bird taking repose. It required the skill of a master carver to turn the classical bird on its back, exposing the plucked breast for the honorables, unless one possessed the independent mind to decline the expense and choose the vulgar digestibility of capon. Hardly anyone dared. Tito quoted Horace and scattered his slice in small particles; Bernardo Rucellai made a learned observation on the price of peacock eggs but did not eat; Niccolò Ridolfi held a mouthful while telling a tale of a man who boiled a wild goose in its feathers to pass it off as a pea-hen.

Very little peacock was consumed, but the satisfaction lay in the spectacle of such luxury, a caprice accessible only to the wealthiest. It would have been rash to criticize such venerable institutions when Fra Girolamo was preaching that the rich had no duty to be luxurious for the sake of the poor.

Outside, in the chill obscurity surrounding the warmth of the pavilion, a lonely figure walked in narrowing circles. Baldassarre paused among the trees, looking into the windows where the guests appeared as brilliant pictures against the gloom. He could hear the laughter, see Tito gesticulating with careless grace, and hear his voice mingling in the merry confusion. Baldassarre's mind was highly strung, preparing for the moment of his entrance. He derived a savage satisfaction from Tito's easy gaiety, viewing it as the unconscious victim preparing itself for more effective torture. But the men seated among the tapers and flashing cups knew nothing of the pale, fierce face watching them from without. Light can be a curtain as well as darkness.

As the conversation deepened, the sense of citizenship forced itself upon even the indifferent minds. The disturbing words of Fra Girolamo were uppermost in everyone's thoughts. Before the stewed fish was removed, the talk turned political, despite Rucellai's earlier prohibition. Gossip spread of the voting in the Palazzo, of Francesco Valori's domineering temper, and of Soderini's speeches, which seemed to share the same dough as the Frate's sermons.

"My opinion is," Niccolò Ridolfi stated, "that the Frate has a longer head for public matters than Soderini or any Piagnone. Soderini is his mouthpiece."

"No, Niccolò," Bernardo Rucellai corrected. "The Frate has an acute mind serving his own ends, but Pagolantonio Soderini, with his experience of the Venetian Council, owes little to a monk. Soderini loads the cannon; the Frate brings the powder and lights the match. He is master of the people, and the people are getting master of us."

Lorenzo Tornabuoni spoke up as the servants cleared the room. "Whether Soderini is indebted or not, *we* are indebted to the Frate for the general amnesty accompanying the Council scheme. We might have faced the fear of God and moral reform, but the proposition that our Medicean heads remain on our shoulders and our property is not confiscated has my warm approval. Only the Frate's predominance could have secured that."

A murmur of surprise rippled through the table, but Rucellai nodded, encouraging Tornabuoni to continue.

"I was favored with an interview in the Frate's own cell," Tornabuoni explained. "Even Francesco Valori rarely sees him in private. I see clearly that the only safe policy for us Mediceans is to throw our strength into the Frate's party. We are not strong enough to stand alone. If the Frate and the popular party were upset, the Arrabbiati—Nerli, Alberti, Pazzi—would be uppermost. Instead of amnesty, they would fly at our throats like mad dogs."

"There were strong interjections of assent," the narrative implies, as Tornabuoni paused. "A wise dissimulation is the only course for moderate men in times of violent party feeling. The Frate's theory of a popular government where every man strives for the general good is suitable for an island discovered by Columbus, but never for our quarrelsome Florence. A change must come, and with patience and caution, we can determine it in our favor. Meanwhile, we must keep the Frate's flag flying; any other flag raised now would be black for us."

"It is true," Niccolò Ridolfi declared curtly. "I am too old to change my feathers. There are men like our old Bernardo del Nero who would never borrow another's shield. But we can lie still like sleepy old dogs. Barking would be useless. As for the psalm-singing party, their day will not be long. After all the talk of scholars, there are but two sorts of government: one where men show their teeth, and one where men show their tongues and lick the feet of the strongest. Their Great Council will be voted tomorrow, and they will think they have found a new plan, but as sure as there is a human skin under every lucco in the Council, their new plan will end in snarling or licking. That is my view as a plain man. I shall be true to my old alliances; I have never seen a chalk-mark on political reasons to tell me which is true and which is false."

"If that is an appeal to me, Niccolò," Bernardo Rucellai replied with formal dignity, "I may say that while my wishes are partly determined by personal relations, I cannot enter into positive schemes with persons over whose actions I have no control. I might be content with a restoration of the old order, but with important modifications. The one point on which I concur with Lorenzo Tornabuoni is that the best policy is to throw the weight of our interest into the scale of the popular party. I condescend to no dissimulation; nor do I see the party or scheme that commands my full assent. In all alike there is crudity and confusion of ideas."

Niccolò Ridolfi shrugged and left the floor to others. As the wine circulated, the talk became more frank and lively, breaking into small knots. Lorenzo Tornabuoni and Giannozzo Pucci, foreseeing this shift, turned aside from the general conversation to engage Tito, who sat between them, gradually pushing their seats back and turning their attention fully to him.

"In truth, Melema," Tornabuoni said, crossing one hose-clad leg over the other, "I know of no man in Florence who can serve our party better than you. Most of our friends cannot hide their prejudices, or their ties are so notorious they invite suspicion. Giannozzo and I possess the power of concealment and finesse necessary for a rational man, without which one is at a disadvantage compared to a wild bull. But except yourself, I know of no one else on whom we could rely for the necessary discretion."

"Yes," Giannozzo Pucci added, placing his hand on Tito's shoulder. "You can help us better than if you were Ulysses himself, for Ulysses often made himself disagreeable. To manage men, one needs a sharp mind in a velvet sheath. There is no soul in Florence who could undertake a journey to Rome with the same safety as you. Your scholarship provides a pretext, and your talent is harder to match. Niccolò Machiavelli might have done for us if he had been on our side, but he is too much bitten with notions and lacks your power of fascination. He has lost a great chance; you have got it."

"You have only to play your game well, Melema," Tornabuoni said, lowering his voice significantly. "The future belongs to you. The Medici will keep a foot in Rome as well as Florence, and the time may not be far off when they can make a finer career for their adherents. Why shouldn't you take orders some day? There is a cardinal's hat at the end of that road, and you would not be the first Greek to wear it."

Tito laughed gaily. He measured Tornabuoni's exaggerated flattery but found it pleasant.

"My joints are not so stiff yet," he said, "that I cannot be induced to run without such a high prize."

"I was not joking," Tornabuoni replied with grave suavity. "We will talk of that another time. One object to bear in mind is that you must win the confidence of the men who hang about San Marco. Giannozzo and I shall do the groundwork, but you can carry it farther because you are less observed. You can gain a thorough knowledge of their doings and make a broader screen for your agency. Nothing can be done before you start for Rome, as the business between Piero de' Medici and the French nobles must be effected immediately. When you return, however, you could make yourself the pet votary of San Marco, though you are wise enough to know that effective dissimulation is never immoderate."

"If it were not that an adhesion to the popular side is necessary to your safety as an agent of our party, Tito mio," Giannozzo Pucci said, his manner more fraternal, "I could have wished your skill employed in another way. But now we must find someone to manage our sworn enemies, the Arrabbiati. We need to know their movements more than those of the Frate's party, who are strong enough to play above-board. It would have been difficult for you, given your known relations with the Medici and your wife's kinship with Bernardo del Nero. We need a man with no distinguished connections who has not yet taken a side."

Tito pushed his hair backward automatically, looking straight at Pucci with a scarcely perceptible smile.

"No need to look out

The stone beneath Romola's back offered a cool anchor against the heat of her flight. Here, beneath the swaying cypress, the world felt vast and unclaimed. The familiar grid of Florence's walls receded behind her, replaced by the widening silence of the Tuscan road. Tito rode toward the city, his path diverging sharply from hers; with every hour, the distance between them grew, a physical manifestation of the separation she had chosen. The morning air was still, heavy with the scent of dry earth, and the great dip of the roadside created a natural gulf, isolating her from the sombre, brooding mountains beyond. For the first time, Romola felt truly alone—not abandoned, but solitary in the presence of the earth and sky, unmediated by human law or expectation.

Then, a voice cut through the stillness, close and immediate.

"You are Romola de' Bardi, the wife of Tito Melema."

She knew that voice instantly. It had vibrated through her life more than once, carrying a weight she could not ignore. Because she recognized it, she did not turn. She remained seated, though her heart hammered against her ribs, a mixture of awe and fierce rebellion warring within her chest. It was one of the black-robed monks, a figure daring to intrude upon her sanctuary. Yet, as he spoke, she felt as though destiny itself—a sceptred deity made flesh—had reached out and seized her.

"You are fleeing from Florence in disguise," the voice continued, imperious and clear. "I have a command from God to stop you. You are not permitted to flee."

Anger, hot and sharp, rose in Romola's throat. She refused to turn, resenting the scrutiny of a gaze she deemed presumptuous. Sitting motionless, she challenged him.

"What right have you to speak to me, or to hinder me?"

"The right of a messenger," the monk replied. "You have donned religious garb, yet you wear it as a disguise. You sought to pass unseen, but you were discerned. It is declared to me that you seek to escape the lot God has laid upon you. You wish to hide your true name and your true place, to craft a new identity ruled only by your own will. I have a command to call you back. My daughter, you must return to your place."

With every sentence, Romola's resistance hardened. She feared that if she showed even a flicker of submission, she would lose her resolve entirely. Her voice sharpened with irritation.

"I will not return. I acknowledge no right of priests and monks to interfere with my actions. You have no power over me."

"I know," the monk said, his tone softening yet remaining firm. "I know you have been raised in scorn of obedience. But it is not the poor monk who claims authority over you; it is the Truth that commands you. You cannot escape it. Either you obey, and it shall lead you, or you disobey, and it shall hang upon you like a chain you will drag forever. But you will obey, my daughter. Your old servant returns with the mules; my companion goes to fetch him. You will go back to Florence."

Romola sprang to her feet, her eyes blazing with defiance. She faced the speaker directly. It was Fra Girolamo. She knew him well; their heights were nearly equal, their faces level. She had prepared words of rejection, but they died in her throat. Meeting Fra Girolamo's calm gaze, she felt a strange, unfamiliar impression wash over her. Her anger sank, ashamed and irrelevant.

There was no transcendent beauty in Savonarola's face, nor was it conventionally handsome. It was strong-featured, refined only by the rigors of mind and body. Yet, the impact of his glance was profound. It conveyed a deep, abiding interest in her, a care that existed apart from any personal desire. It was the first time Romola had encountered a look where simple human fellowship manifested as a binding force. Such a gaze was the essence of a spiritual guide, and suddenly, Romola found it impossible to question his right to address her. She stood silent, staring at him.

"You assert your freedom proudly, my daughter," Savonarola said. "But who is so base as the debtor who thinks himself free?"

A subtle pallor flashed across Romola's face. "And you are flying from your debts: the debt of a Florentine woman; the debt of a wife. You turn your back on the appointed lot to choose another. But can man or woman choose their duties? No more than they can choose their birthplace or their parents. My daughter, you are fleeing from the presence of God into the wilderness."

As the anger melted, it was replaced by a new presentiment. Perhaps this man, whom she began to view with a vague reverence, held a valid law she had missed. Yet, it was impossible; he could not know the depths of her turmoil. Still, she could not simply refuse guidance. Driven by a desperate need to be reverent even as she resisted, the title she had never used before slipped from her lips.

"My father, you cannot know the reasons which compel me to go. None can know them but myself. None can judge for me. I have been driven by great sorrow. I am resolved to go."

"I know enough, my daughter," Savonarola replied, his voice illuminating her situation. "My mind has been so far enlightened concerning you that I know enough. You are not happy in your married life; but I am not a confessor, and I seek nothing reserved for the seal of confession. I have a divine warrant to stop you, which does not depend on such knowledge. You were warned by a message from heaven, delivered in my presence—warned before marriage, when you might still have lawfully chosen freedom. But you chose the bond. In wilfully breaking it, I speak to you as a pagan if the holy mystery of matrimony is not sacred to you, you are breaking a pledge. Of what wrongs will you complain when you yourself commit one of the greatest wrongs a woman and citizen can commit—withdrawal in secrecy and disguise from a pledge given before God and your fellow-men? Of what wrongs will you complain when you break the simplest law at the foundation of trust between man and man: faithfulness to the spoken word? Is this the wisdom you gained by scorning the Church's mysteries? Not to see the bare duty of integrity, where the Church would teach you to see not only integrity, but religion?"

Blood rushed to Romola's face, and she shrank as if struck. "I would not have put on a disguise," she began, but her voice faltered. She could not continue; the suggestion in the friar's words—that her conduct mirrored Tito's—shook her to her core.

"And to break that pledge, you fly from Florence," Savonarola pressed. "Florence, where there are the only men and women in the world to whom you owe the debt of a fellow-citizen."

"I should never have quitted Florence," Romola whispered, trembling, "as long as there was any hope of fulfilling a duty to my father there."

"Do you own no tie but that of a child to her father in the flesh?" Savonarola asked. "Your life has been spent in blindness, my daughter. You have lived with those who sit on a hill aloof, looking down on the life of their fellow-men. I know their vain discourse, filled with fancied wisdom about the past while scorning God's work in the present. Doubtless you were taught that pagan women felt what it was to live for the Republic, yet you never felt that you, a Florentine woman, should live for Florence. If your own people wear a yoke, will you slip from under it instead of struggling to lighten it? There is hunger and misery in our streets, yet you say, 'I care not; I have my own sorrows; I will go away.' The servants of God struggle for a law of justice, peace, and charity so that the hundred thousand citizens among whom you were born may be governed righteously. But you think no more of this than a bird spreading its wings to fly wherever it finds food. You have scorned the teaching of the Church, my daughter. As if you, a wilful wanderer following your blind choice, were not below the humblest Florentine woman who stretches her hands with her own people, craves a blessing for them, and feels a close sisterhood with the neighbor who kneels beside her, not of her own blood. She thinks of the mighty purpose God has for Florence and waits and endures because the promised work is great, and she feels herself little."

"I was not going away to ease and self-indulgence," Romola insisted, raising her head with a desperate need to vindicate herself. "I was going away to hardship. I expect no joy: it is gone from my life."

"You are seeking your own will, my daughter. You seek some good other than the law you are bound to obey. But how will you find good? It is not a thing of choice; it is a river flowing from the foot of the Invisible Throne, flowing by the path of obedience. I say again, man cannot choose his duties. You may choose to forsake your duties and avoid the sorrow they bring, but you will go forth anyway. What will you find, my daughter? Sorrow without duty—bitter herbs, and no bread with them."

"But if you knew," Romola pleaded, clasping her hands tightly, "if you knew what it was to me—how impossible it seemed to me to bear it."

"My daughter," Savonarola said, pointing to the cord around her neck, "you carry something within your mantle. Draw it forth and look at it."

Romola gave a slight start, but her impulse was to obey. A stronger will than her own grappled with her self-doubt. She drew forth the crucifix. Still pointing toward it, he spoke.

"There, my daughter, is the image of a Supreme Offering, made by Supreme Love because the need of man was great."

He paused. Romola held the crucifix, trembling. A sudden realization struck her of the vast distance between her present self and the girl who had first taken this object from the friar's hands. How many secrets lay ahead, just as there had been then in her young blindness? This thought helped subdue her fears. At the sound of Fra Girolamo's voice again, Romola made a quick, involuntary movement, pressing the crucifix against her mantle and looking at him with more submission than before.

"Conform your life to that image, my daughter. Make your sorrow an offering. And when the fire of Divine charity burns within you, and you behold the need of your fellow-men by the light of that flame, you will not call your offering great. You have carried yourself proudly, as one who held herself not of common blood or common thoughts; but you have been as one unborn to the true life of man. What! You say your love for your father no longer tells you to stay in Florence? Then, since that tie is snapped, you are without a law, without religion: you are no better than a beast of the field when robbed of her young. If the yearning of fleshly love is gone, you are without love, without obligation. See, then, my daughter, how you are below the life of the believer who worships that image of the Supreme Offering, who feels the glow of a common life with the lost multitude for whom that offering was made, and beholds the history of the world as the history of a great redemption in which he is a fellow-worker in his own place and among his own people! If you held that faith, my beloved daughter, you would not be a wanderer flying from suffering, blindly seeking the good of a freedom which is lawlessness. You would feel that Florence was the home of your soul as well as your birthplace, because you would see the work given you to do there. If you forsake your place, who will fill it? You ought to be in your place now, helping in the great work by which God will purify Florence and raise it to be the guide of the nations. What! The earth is full of iniquity—full of groans—the light still struggles with mighty darkness—and you say, 'I cannot bear my bonds; I will burst them asunder; I will go where no man claims me'? My daughter, every bond of your life is a debt: the right lies in the payment of that debt; it can lie nowhere else. In vain will you wander over the earth; you will be wandering forever away from the right."

Romola struggled internally against immense forces: the overwhelming personal influence of Savonarola, born of the energy of his emotions and beliefs, and her own consciousness that his words implied a higher law than any she had yet obeyed. Yet, the resisting thoughts were not yet overborne.

"How, then, could Dino be right? He broke ties. He forsook his place."

"That was a special vocation," Savonarola answered. "He was constrained to depart, else he could not have attained the higher life. It would have been stifled within him."

"And I too," Romola said, raising her hands to her brow, her voice anguished as if dragged to torture. "Father, you may be wrong."

"Ask your conscience, my daughter. You have no vocation such as your brother had. You are a wife. You seek to break your ties in self-will and anger, not because the higher life calls upon you to renounce them. The higher life begins for us, my daughter, when we renounce our own will to bow before a Divine law. That seems hard to you. It is the portal of wisdom, freedom, and blessedness. And the symbol of it hangs before you. That wisdom is the religion of the Cross. And you stand aloof from it; you are a pagan. You have been taught to say, 'I am as the wise men who lived before the time when the Jew of Nazareth was crucified.' And that is your wisdom! To be as the dead whose eyes are closed and whose ears are deaf to the work of God done since their time. What has your dead wisdom done for you, my daughter? It has left you without a heart for the neighbors among whom you

"Rise, my daughter," Fra Girolamo finally commanded, his voice cutting through the heavy silence. "Your servant waits nearby with the mules. It is time for me to press on toward Florence."

Romola rose from her knees. That posture of stillness had become a sacred ritual for her, cementing the state of yearning passivity she had only just entered. With a single act of renouncing her plan to flee her husband, her will felt shattered, bruised beyond repair, leaving her desperate for direction even in the smallest matters. She lifted the edge of her cowl and saw Maso and the second Dominican standing with their backs turned on the hill's edge, some ten yards away. Yet, she did not look at them. Her gaze remained fixed on Savonarola, silent and pleading, as if the command to recall Maso must issue from his lips alone, not hers.

"I will go and fetch them," he said, answering her unspoken appeal. "And I commend you, my daughter, to the Brother who accompanies me. You seek guidance, seeking that wisdom which has hitherto appeared as folly to you. A primary gateway to this wisdom is the sacrament of confession. You require a confessor, my daughter, and I wish to place you under the care of Fra Salvestro, one of the brethren of San Marco, in whom I place my highest confidence."

"I would prefer no guidance but yours, Father," Romola replied, her voice trembling with anxiety.

"My daughter, I do not act as your confessor. My vocation withdraws me from offices that would force frequent contact with the laity and interfere with my specific duties."

"Then shall I never be able to speak to you in private? If I waver, if—" Romola broke off, seized by a sudden alarm. She feared that the fragile strength of her renunciation would evaporate the moment Savonarola's immediate personal influence faded.

"My daughter, if your soul requires the private word from my lips, you shall let me know through Fra Salvestro, and I will meet you in the sacristy or the choir of San Marco. I will not cease to watch over you. I shall instruct my brother regarding you, so that he may guide you into the path of labor for the suffering and the hungry to which you are called as a daughter of Florence in these times of hard need. I desire to behold you among the feebler and more ignorant sisters as the apple-tree among the trees of the forest, so that your fairness and all your natural gifts serve merely as a lamp through which the Divine light shines more purely. I must now go and call your servant."

Once Maso had been sent ahead, Fra Salvestro stepped forward, and Savonarola led Romola toward him. She had already felt an inward shrinking from a new guide who was a total stranger; yet to resist Savonarola's counsel would have been to assume an attitude of independence at a moment when all her strength must be drawn from the renunciation of that very independence. The entire bent of her mind was now toward doing what was painful rather than what was easy. She bowed reverently to Fra Salvestro before looking directly at him, but when she raised her head and saw him fully, her reluctance curdled into a palpitating doubt.

There are men whose presence naturally infuses trust and reverence; there are others to whom we must carry our trust and reverence ready-made. This distinction struck Romola as Savonarola receded from her sight and Fra Salvestro Maruffi stood in his place. It was not that Fra Salvestro possessed anything manifestly repulsive in his face or manner—no air of hypocrisy, no tinge of coarseness. His face was actually handsomer than Fra Girolamo's, his stature slightly taller. He was the long-accepted confessor of many among Florence's chief personages, possessing vast experience as a spiritual director. Yet, his face bore the vacillating expression of a mind unable to concentrate itself strongly within the channel of one great emotion or belief—an expression fatal to influencing an ardent nature like Romola's. Such a countenance is not the stamp of insincerity; it marks simply a shallow soul, one that may sincerely strive to fill a high vocation, sincerely composing its features to utter sublime formulas, only to find the muscles twitch or relax in spite of belief, as prose insists on intruding where poetry should reign. Fra Salvestro had a peculiar liability to visions, seemingly dependent on a constitution prone to somnambulism. Savonarola believed in the supernatural character of these visions, while Fra Salvestro himself had originally resisted such an interpretation, even rebuking Savonarola for his prophetic preaching: another proof, if one were needed, that the relative greatness of men cannot be gauged by their tendency to disbelieve the superstitions of their age. Between the two, there could be no question of which was the great man and which the small.

The difference between them was measured precisely by the shift in Romola's feelings as Fra Salvestro began to address her with words of exhortation and encouragement. After her initial angry resistance to Savonarola had passed, she had lost all memory of the old dread lest any influence drag her into the circle of fanaticism and sour monkish piety. But now, once again, the chill breath of that dread stole over her. It could have no decisive effect against the impetus her mind had just received; it was merely like the closing of grey clouds over a sunrise, rendering her returning path monotonous and sombre.

Perhaps of all sombre paths, the one we tread upon after returning with strong resolution is the one that most severely tests the fervor of renunciation. As they re-entered the city gates, light snowflakes fell around them. As the grey sister walked hastily homeward from the Piazza di San Marco, crossing the bridge again and turning into the large door of the Via de' Bardi, her footsteps were marked darkly on the thin carpet of snow, and her cowl fell laden and damp about her face.

She ascended to her room, threw off her serge habit, destroyed the parting letters, replaced all her precious trifles, unbound her hair, and donned her usual black dress. Instead of undertaking a long, exciting journey, she was to sit down in her usual place. The snow beat against the windows, and she was alone.

She felt the dreariness, yet her courage remained high, akin to that of a seeker who has discovered new signs of gold. She was about to thread life by a fresh clue. She had thrown all the energy of her will into renunciation. The empty tabernacle remained locked, and she placed Dino's crucifix outside it.

Nothing broke the outward monotony of her solitary home until night came like a white ghost at the windows. Yet, for Romola, this Christmas Eve of 1494 proved to be the most memorable of her life.

October 30, 1496. The morning air was crisp with the promise of autumn, yet the Florentines paid it little heed. Their minds were fixed not on the gentle land breeze, but on the violent gales tearing across the Ligurian Sea. These storms had scattered the fleet from Marseilles, ships laden with grain and soldiers, leaving Florence exposed to a dual terror: the gnawing hunger of Pale Famine and the looming threat of invasion.

Across the peninsula, the political landscape was a theater of shifting alliances and predatory ambition. The French King, hailed as a new Charlemagne, had swept through Italy with terrifying ease, conquering Naples before retreating, reportedly shattered by the loss of an infant son. In response, a Holy League had coalesced under the papal banner of Pope Borgia, ostensibly to expel the "barbarians" from Naples. Yet, beneath the pious rhetoric lay a grim reality: a pact among wolves to drive out rival wolves, only to devour the carcass of Florence itself. While Pisa, Venice, Milan, and the German Emperor Maximilian united against the French, Florence stood defiant, clinging to her foreign alliance at the peril of her existence. If the vital port of Leghorn fell, the city, hemmed in by papal hostility and regional jealousy, would be strangled.

The Signoria, guided by the fervent disciples of Savonarola, responded with a mixture of vigor and compassion. They raised funds and levied new troops, yet they refused the traditional cruelty of shutting out the starving masses. Instead, they opened their gates to the destitute, allowing the hungry *contadini* and alien mendicants to flock in like birds fleeing a blizzard. This magnanimity drew sharp criticism from the disaffected, who argued that Florence should join the League to secure peace rather than invite pestilence. Compounding the crisis, Fra Girolamo had been silenced by a papal mandate for over a month. Only when the news of the lost grain ships reached them did the Signoria defy Rome, summoning Savonarola back to the Duomo. Two days prior, he had preached a sermon of such audacious faith that he wagered his own habit on the city's survival, urging the people to wait steadfastly for divine intervention.

Yet, as the sun rose on the thirtieth, no miracle had yet arrived. Desperation hung heavy in the air, accompanied by the specter of pestilence. Hospitals overflowed, and private courtyards served as makeshift infirmaries, yet unsheltered want persisted. Early that morning, the silent procession of death continued; the confraternities bore away the bodies that had collapsed along the roadsides. Amidst this grim tableau moved Romola de' Bardi. Dressed in the austere simplicity of black serge, her head veiled to conceal her hair save for the gleaming bands of gold framing her brow, she walked from the Ponte Vecchio toward the Porta Santa Maria.

Her path was blocked by a bier carried by the brothers of San Jacopo del Popolo, searching for the unburied dead. At the head of the litter, the brethren paused to inspect a form, while a cluster of idle laborers, their faces hollowed by starvation, gathered around.

"He's dead," one declared. "Messere Domeneddio has taken him."

"It would be a mercy for us all to stretch out our legs and walk ahead with our heads," another muttered. "Standing upright against hunger is a burden no man should bear."

"He's an old man. Death has struck a poor bargain; life has won."

"And not a Florentine, ten to one!" cried a voice. "A beggar turned out of Siena! May San Giovanni protect us. They send us armies of starving men to fight us."

"No, no," corrected a brother lifting the bier. "This man is a prisoner from the Stinche. I know the grey patch where the prison badge was sewn."

"Quiet! Help him up. Perhaps he's merely unconscious from lack of food," a brother suggested.

Romola stepped forward, loosening the small flask at her belt. With practiced ease, she used a small ivory implement to pour a few drops of wine into the prostrate man's mouth. The liquid acted as a stimulant; the head twitched, and the old man's eyes fluttered open, meeting hers with a vague, returning consciousness.

In that instant, a shock of absolute recognition struck Romola. The wild, dark eyes, the sallow, deep-lined face, and the long white beard were unmistakable. This was Baldassarre, the escaped prisoner she had glimpsed in the Duomo the day Tito first donned armor—a man whose mere presence had terrified Tito in the sketches of Piero's studio. A cold tremor seized her. Was this the bitter secret she feared? An impulse to flee surged within her, followed immediately by a stronger, imperious need to stay beside the old man, whom her intuition knew her husband had wronged. Her hands trembled, yet the muscle memory of her charitable work guided them; her right hand remained poised to offer more wine, while her left supported his neck.

Baldassarre looked up at her for the first time. The seclusion of his imprisonment and her recent flight had kept them apart, erasing the vivid descriptions of the fair, golden-haired woman he had heard. Now, seeing her, those images dissolved like mist.

"Shall we carry him to the steps of San Stefano?" Romola asked gently. "We shall clear the street, and you may proceed with your bier."

They moved only thirty yards before reaching the church steps. By then, Baldassarre managed to sit up, propping himself against the doorway. The brethren departed, but the crowd of spectators swelled. The atmosphere shifted; knowing the man was alive, the crowd's tone grew less sympathetic, though Romola's presence imposed a hush.

"They fed him daily in the Stinche," someone remarked. "That's why he's so weak without it."

"Gnaffè!" scoffed another. "The Magnificent Eight released these thieves to make room for honest folk. But if every criminal is revived with wine and bread, the Ciompi might as well drink from the Arno while the waters are high."

Romola sat beside Baldassarre, offering him a piece of soft bread from her basket. "Can you eat a little? I must go to the hospital, but I will return if you wait. I will take you to shelter. Do you understand?"

He stared dreamily, repeating the words "come back." His mind was clouded by exhaustion, but she hoped he grasped her intent.

"Do you keep your bread for those who cannot swallow?" a rough voice in a red night-cap interrupted, elbowing his way into the tight circle.

"If anyone isn't hungry," another man replied, "let them mind their own business. He is better off than those with empty stomachs and no breakfast."

"Yes, if a man wishes to die, let him be encouraged. Dead men require no trencher."

"Oh, you misunderstand the Frate's charity," interjected a young man in fine cloth, his face untouched by want. "The Frate preaches to the birds like Saint Anthony, telling hawks they must feed sparrows. Every good citizen is bound to feed six starving beggars from Arezzo or Bologna. Madonna, you are a pious Piagnone; you won't waste your bread on honest citizens who have the Frate's prophecies to digest."

"Come, Madonna," urged the man in the red cap. "The old thief won't eat. Try us. We fast so much we are half-saints."

The circle tightened, the gaunt, starving men crowding Romola until there was no space to breathe. She held out a small horn-cup, moistening a piece of bread with wine, having ignored their taunts until now. Rising, she looked around, her hazel eyes burning with a direct, unyielding gaze. Instinctively, the men nearest her recoiled, as if their proximity were an offense.

"Hunger is hard to bear," Romola said, her voice steady despite her pale, pinched face. "You have the power to take this bread if you wish. It was saved for sick women and children. You are strong men; but if you choose not to suffer because of your strength, you have the power to take everything from the weak. You can take the bread from this basket, but I will watch by this old man. I will resist your taking the bread from *him*."

Silence fell upon the group. The man in the red cap looked foolish, backing away and shoving his neighbor with a gesture of moral condemnation. The retreat was general; everyone pretended to be pushed aside against their will, and the young man in fine cloth vanished.

Just then, the armed servitors of the Signoria, patrolling the route for the approaching procession, arrived to disperse the obstruction. The man known as Cecco retreated from the threat of a mace, turning to Romola with a respectful nod.

"Madonna, if you must go on your errands, I will take care of the old man."

Cecco was a wild figure: a ragged tunic matted with dust and wool, bare bony arms, a square jaw shaded by a bristly beard, and a narrow red rag tied over his ears. Romola hesitated, her doubt evident.

"Don't distrust me, Madonna," Cecco said, reading her expression perfectly. "I am not as beautiful as you, but I have an old mother who eats my porridge. There is a heart inside me, and I have bought candles for the Most Holy Virgin before. Besides, see there—the old fellow is eating his sop. He is hale enough; he will be on his feet as well as the best of us soon."

"Thank you for your offer, friend," Romola said, her doubt melting into penitence. Leaning toward Baldassarre, she whispered, "Wait for me until I return."

He assented with a slight movement of his head and hand. Romola turned and walked on toward the hospital of San Matteo in the Piazza di San Marco, leaving the old man in the care of the rough but honest Ciompo.

Returning from the hospital, an hour later, Romola chose a path that widened toward the river, reaching the banks far from the bustle of the Ponte Vecchio. Her destination was clear: she intended to hasten to San Stefano to find Baldassarre. Yet, a dread held her back; she feared the knowledge he might bring, yet felt that to leave him behind would be to sever a vital claim upon her soul.

As she neared the junction where the Por' Santa Maria lay to her right and the Ponte Vecchio to her left, she stumbled into a throng that suddenly sank to their knees. Without hesitation, Romola joined them. The Great Cross of the Duomo was passing, leading a solemn procession. Being late, she was forced to wait until the sacred burden had cleared the intersection.

When the Cross vanished and she rose, the sudden stillness and the weight of standing made her fatigue acute. Beside her, a shopkeeper spoke kindly, "Madonna Romola, you will tire standing here. Gian Fantoni would be glad to offer you a seat in his house; his door is right there. Let me open it. He loves God and the Frate as we do. His home is yours."

Romola, accustomed to such fraternal greetings from citizens whose faces she knew from the Duomo, felt a shift in her understanding of home. It was no longer the lonely chamber in the Via de' Bardi, but the very circuit of Florence itself, where every street corner seemed to offer a look of welcome. Gladly, she accepted the invitation, passing through the open door to be led by the hose-vendor to an upstairs window. There, a stout woman, dressed in the plain garb of the Piagnoni, made reverent space for her among bright draperies. From this vantage point, Romola watched the procession pour slowly between the houses on the bridge, while the river and the Lung' Arno stretched out toward the Santa Trinita.

The procession moved in sadness and silence. No wailing chant broke the air; only the tramp of feet and the faint sweep of woolen robes. First came a long train of Florentine youth, their faces fresh and beardless, bearing high the white image of the youthful Jesus, crowned with golden glory, standing beside the tall cross where thorns and nails awaited.

Following them were the Companies of Discipline, bound by secret vows of self-chastisement and piety. Their garments concealed all but their eyes, transforming sons, husbands, and fathers into anonymous symbols of a common vow. Each company bore its color and badge, yet all wore a shroud-like garb that expressed only fellowship.

In contrast, the multitude of monks appeared as distinct individuals despite their shared tonsure and frocks. First came a white stream of reformed Benedictines, followed by the vast host of the Frati Minori, or Franciscans, clad in grey with knotted cords and wooden sandals—perhaps the most numerous order in Florence, zealous in their love for mankind and their hatred of the Dominicans. After the grey came the black of the Augustinians of San Spirito, men who had inherited Boccaccio's library and formed Florence's most learned company. Then the white-over-dark of the Carmelites, and finally the unmixed black of the Servites, founded by seven merchants who renounced their gains to adore the Divine Mother.

The hearts of the onlookers quickened as a stream of black and white emerged from the bridge—black mantles over white scapularies. The Dominicans were coming. Those from Fiesole led the way, their mantles coarse and often threadbare, a testament to the Prior of San Marco's strict reduction of poverty and discipline. Yet, in that long line, one mantle stood out, slightly less worn than the rest, topped by a tonsured head recognizable to those who had seen it on bronze medals, guarded by armed men, or transfigured by the inward flame of the orator.

As Savonarola's approach became certain, no one dared break the stillness with sound, though a mingled hiss of curses and murmurs of blessing drifted through the air. Perhaps it was the sense that the hissing prevailed that caused two or three disciples in the foreground to fall to their knees as if something divine passed. This silent homage spread like a shockwave along the streets, bending the most stubborn heads, while hatred gathered an intense expression elsewhere. As Savonarola ascended the Por' Santa Maria, Romola saw someone at an upper window spit upon him.

Monks returned—the Frati Umiliati from Ognissanti, heirs to a glorious wool-trading tradition, followed by Vallombrosan and other Benedictines, their varied forms marking a change of spirit through a change of garb. Finally, the shaven crowns ended, giving way to the train of untonsured secular priests.

Then came the twenty-one incorporated Arts of Florence, arrayed in long lines with banners declaring their distinct functions, from bakers to judges. After them marched the secondary officers of State, ascending to the greater, until the line of secularities was broken by the Canons of the Duomo. They carried a sacred relic: the head of San Zenobio, immortal bishop of Florence, enclosed in silver, whose virtues were believed to have saved the city a millennium prior.

This was the nucleus of the procession. Behind the relic came the archbishop in a gorgeous cope, with a canopy held high above him. Following him was the mysterious, hidden Image. First veiled by rich brocade curtains enclosing an outer painted tabernacle, and within that, by an ancient shrine never opened in living memory, lay the image of the Pitying Mother, found ages ago in the soil of L'Impruneta, uttering a cry as the spade struck it. Usually, this unseen Image was preceded by rich gifts, lists of precious offerings, veils, and mantles woven by emulous communities. The richest, it was said, had been crafted by a poor abbess and her nuns, who wove a mantle of gold brocade with their prayers, embroidered it with devotion, and saw their work presented to the Blessed Virgin by two youths who spread white wings and vanished into the blue.

But today, no gifts were carried before the tabernacle; no donations were offered except to the poor. This was the counsel of Fra Girolamo, whose preaching insisted not on gifts to invisible powers, but on aid to visible need. Altars had been raised at various points for the oblations of the needy. Not even a torch was carried. Surely the hidden Mother cared less for torches and brocade than for the wail of the hungry. Florence was in extremity; she had done her utmost and could only wait for a divine intervention beyond her own power.

The Frate in the torn mantle had promised help would come, and many faint-hearted clung to his word rather than the virtues of the unseen Image. Yet, some fierce-hearted souls rejoiced secretly that the Frate's promise might prove false.

Slowly the tabernacle moved forward, knees bent in profound stillness. The train of priests and chaplains from L'Impruneta stirred no passion. The procession was about to close with the Priors and the Gonfaloniere; the long train of companies and symbols, with their silent music that stirred the mind like a chorus, was passing out of sight. A faint yearning hope struggled against the accustomed despondency.

Romola, whose heart had swelled with foreboding and an enthusiasm of fellowship made habitual by the last two years, gave a deep sigh as if releasing a long mental tension. She remained on her knees, overcome by languor. Suddenly, something bright-colored flashed from between the houses onto the distant bridge. Romola started up, stretching her arms and leaning from the window. The black drapery fell from her head, and the golden gleam of her hair and the flush in her face seemed the effect of a single illumination.

A shout arose instantly. The last troops of the procession paused, all faces turning toward the distant bridge. But the bridge was already passed. A horseman pressed at full gallop along the Arno; the sides of his bay horse, streaked with foam, looked white from swiftness. His cap flew loose from his red *becchetto*, and he waved an olive-branch in his hand. It was a messenger—a messenger of good tidings! The blessed olive-branch spoke afar off.

But the impatient people could not wait. They rushed to meet the oncomer, seizing the horse's reins, pushing and trampling. Now Romola saw that the horseman was her husband, Tito, sent to Pisa a few days prior on a private embassy. The recognition brought no new flash of joy to her eyes. She had checked her first impulsive attitude of expectation; her governing anxiety remained fixed on what news of relief had come for Florence.

"Good news!"
"Best news!"
"News to be paid with hose!" (*novelle da calze*)

These were the vague answers Tito met with as the crowd importuned him, until he pushed his horse to the meeting of the ways where the Gonfaloniere and the Priors awaited. There he paused, bowed low, and declared, "Magnificent Signori! I have to deliver to you the joyful news that the galleys from France, laden with corn and men, have arrived safely in the port of Leghorn, by favor of a strong wind which kept the enemy's fleet at a distance."

The words left Tito's lips and seemed to vibrate up the streets. A great shout rang through the air, rushing along the river, then another, and another, spreading along the line of the procession toward the Duomo. Fainter answering shouts followed, like the intermediate splash of distant waves in a great lake obeying one impulse.

For some minutes, no one attempted to speak further. The Signoria themselves lifted their caps, standing bare-headed in the presence of a rescue that had come from outside the limits of their own power—from that region of trust and resignation called divine.

Finally, as the signal was given to move forward, Tito said with a smile, "I ought to say that any hose to be bestowed by the Magnificent Signoria in reward of these tidings are due, not to me, but to another man who rode hard to bring them. He would have been here in my place if his horse had not broken down just before he reached Signa. Meo di Sasso will doubtless be here in an hour or two, and may all the more justly claim the glory of the messenger, because he has had the chief labor and has lost the chief delight."

It was a graceful way of stating a necessity. After a brief reply from the *Proposto*, the dignified extremity of the procession passed on, and Tito turned his horse's head to follow in its train. The great bell of the Palazzo Vecchio began to swing, giving a louder voice to the people's joy. At that moment, when Tito's attention was no longer imperatively directed, it might have been expected that he would look round and recognize Romola. Yet he appeared engaged with his cap, which, as the eager people led his horse, he seized and placed on his head, his right hand still encumbered by the olive-branch. He possessed a becoming air of lassitude after his exertions.

Romola, instead of making any effort to be recognized by him, threw her black drapery over her head again and remained perfectly quiet. Yet she felt almost sure that Tito had seen her; he had the power of seeing everything without seeming to see it.

As the throng surged past, Romola slipped away from the Piazza and hurried down to the street, her heart beating a frantic rhythm against her ribs. She sought the sanctuary of San Stefano, but found it empty of the faithful; instead, she discovered Baldassarre standing solitary against the church door. He held his horn-cup loosely, his posture rigid, waiting.

There was a terrifying transformation in him. The vacant, dreamy haze that had clouded his eyes moments ago had evaporated, replaced by a ferocity that seemed to ignite the very air around him. It was the gaze of a caged beast sensing freedom, or perhaps prey, just beyond the bars of its confinement.

Romola flinched as his eyes locked onto hers, but her mind raced instantly to a single possibility: he had seen Tito. A fragile thread of hope began to weave through her anxiety. If this man was the criminal, then her husband was innocent. If she could force a confrontation, if she could make him speak to this stranger, she might finally find peace.

"If you will come with me," she said, her voice steady despite the tremor in her hands, "I can offer you shelter and food until you are strong again. Will you come?"

"Yes," Baldassarre replied, his voice low and grinding. "I shall be glad to get my strength. I want to get my strength," he muttered, the words sounding less like a conversation and more like a prayer to himself.

"Come!" she urged, guiding him away from the public square and toward the quieter path along the Arno, leading to the Ponte Rubaconte.

"I think you are not a Florentine," she ventured as they crossed the bridge, the river flowing dark beneath their feet.

He turned his head slowly, his expression guarded. The fog of confusion that had once shrouded him was now thickened by physical weakness, yet a new vigilance had taken its place. He looked at her, and in her gentle, earnest eyes, he found a compulsion he could not resist.

"No," he said, his caution sharpening. "I am no Florentine; I am a lonely man."

She noted his reticence, fearing that further questioning would drive him away. Yet, as they walked in silence, her mind churned, extinguishing the faint hope that had lingered regarding Tito. If this old man harbored malice, what cause for dread and secrecy existed? Why the fear?

They reached the entrance to the Via de' Bardi. Suddenly, Baldassarre stopped, a violent shock passing through him as if struck by lightning. He turned to her, his eyes wide with a sudden, terrible realization.

"Ah!" he breathed, cutting her off before she could speak. "You are his wife."

"Whose wife?" Romola asked, the question slipping out before she could check it.

The name died in his throat. The image of Tito pressed against him with such force that it expelled any ability to form words. He said nothing, staring at her with a fixed, haunting intensity.

Romola opened the courtyard door. Inside, the space was strewn with straw, serving as a bed for four or five sick figures. Tiny, pale children crawled among them, biting at dry straws and letting out weak, gurgling sounds.

"If you will come in," she said, her voice trembling, "I will find you a comfortable place and bring you more food."

"No," Baldassarre refused, though he remained rooted to the spot, paralyzed by the weight of impressions his confused mind could not process.

"Can I do nothing for you?" she pleaded. "Let me give you money so you may buy food. It will be more plentiful soon."

She reached into her *scarsella*, pulling out several *grossi*. She deliberately offered more than she would to any other beggar. He stared at the coins for a long moment, then nodded.

"Yes, I will take them."

She poured the coins into his palm; he clutched them tightly, as if afraid they might vanish.

"Tell me," she begged, "what shall you—"

But Baldassarre turned away, resuming his walk toward the bridge. He did not stop there. Instead, he marched straight up the Via del Fosso to the shop of Niccolò Caparra, entering without hesitation. Niccolò was absent, attending a procession with the city's armorers, leaving only an apprentice behind. The shop was lined with weapons, and Baldassarre's eyes, hungry for something far more potent than bread, found exactly what he sought.

The apprentice, less scrupulous and observant than the master, sold a sharp hunting-knife for three *grossi* without a second thought. It was a small, deadly blade that Baldassarre easily concealed within the folds of his tunic. He walked on, feeling a surge of renewed power. That sharp edge could lend lethality to the thrust of an aged arm. Perhaps the armor he feared was not always present; perhaps, in those long months of imprisonment, baseness had grown complacent and forgetful.

The knife had been purchased with the traitor's own money. That was justice. Before accepting the coin, he had known exactly what he would do with it: buy a weapon. And if possible, food. Food to nourish the arm that would wield the steel, food to sustain the body that served as the temple of vengeance. Once he had eaten, he would think, and act. First, he would find a place to hide, lest Tito drag him away again.

With this resolve hardening his resolve, Baldassarre turned into the narrowest alleys, bought meat and bread, and sat beneath a loggia to eat. The bells of the city rang out in peals of joyous celebration, vibrating through the air. To him, they were not a song of salvation, but merely the noise of a strong world arrayed against him.

Romola watched him disappear around the corner into the Piazza de' Mozzi. She felt a strange mixture of relief and self-reproach. Relief that he was gone, yet regret that she had not pressed harder to uncover the truth, to determine if his suffering was guiltless misery she could alleviate. Yet, what could she do if the truth was a burden of pain concerning her husband? Was a wife not permitted to desire ignorance of her spouse's crimes, especially when she alone bore the duty of warning others against him? The thought tangled too many fibers of her heart to be untangled now in her exhaustion.

It was time to rejoice, for help had arrived for Florence. She turned back into the courtyard to share the good news with her patients lying on their straw beds.

Closing the door to muffle the ringing bells, she threw back the black drapery covering her head so the women might see her clearly. Standing amidst them, she announced that corn was coming and that the bells rang for gladness. The sick propped themselves up to listen; the children, impatient to be near her face, trotted and crawled toward her, tugging at her black skirts. Weary as she was, she yielded to them, sitting down on the straw. The pale faces peered into her basket, pulling at her hair, while the feeble voices around her chanted, "The Holy Virgin be praised!"

"It was the procession!"
"The Mother of God has had pity on us!"

Finally, Romola rose from the heap of straw, too drained to offer a smile. Turning up the stone steps, she said, "I will come by-and-by to bring you your dinner."

"Bless you, madonna! Bless you!" the faint chorus replied, echoing the tone they had used moments before to praise the unseen Madonna.

Romola cherished that music deeply. Unlike other women who found comfort in the simple acts of tending the sick and clothing the ragged, her early training had kept her aloof from such domestic labors. Without the inspiration of her deepest feelings, they would have been irksome to her. But they had become the one unshaken resting place of her mind, the narrow pathway where light fell clear.

The widening gulf between herself and Tito, which only deepened with her attempts to bridge it through submission, brought a gnawing doubt. Could the bond she had labored to uphold be false? Had she been misled by her confessor, Fra Salvestro, or by the disciples of Savonarola, whose narrowness she now felt with a sickening clarity? When she felt an impetuous reaction rising against their superstition, she found herself recovering a firm footing in her works of womanly sympathy.

Whatever doubts plagued her, the help she gave to her fellow citizens made her certain that Fra Girolamo had been right to call her back. According to his unforgettable words, her place had not been empty; it had been filled with her love and her labor. Florence needed her. The more her own sorrow pressed upon her, the greater her gladness in the memories of the past two years, the hours in which she had lightened the burden of life for others. All that ardor of her nature, which could no longer spend itself solely on the tenderness for father and husband, had transformed into an enthusiasm of sympathy with the general life. She had ceased to think of her own happiness; the sole end of her existence seemed to be the diminishing of sorrow.

Her enthusiasm was continually stoked by the influence of Savonarola. Though she recoiled in disgust from the wearisome visions and allegories when repeated by others, her affinity for his passionate sympathy and the splendor of his aims remained undiminished. His burning indignation against the abuses and oppressions of the Church and the State kindled a fire within her. His special care for the liberty and purity of the Florentine government, constantly linked to the wider goal of universal regeneration, created in her a new consciousness of the great drama of human existence in which her life was a part. Through her daily contact with the less fortunate, this consciousness grew from a vague sentiment into a definite motive of self-denying practice.

She thought little of dogmas and shrank from reflecting closely on the Friar's prophecies of immediate scourge and regeneration. She had submitted her mind to his and entered into communion with the Church because, in doing so, she found an immediate satisfaction for moral needs that her previous culture and experience had left hungering. Fra Girolamo's voice had awakened in her a reason for living, apart from personal enjoyment or affection. Yet, it was a reason that seemed to require forces greater than she possessed within herself. Her submissive use of all Church offices was simply a watching and waiting, hoping that fresh strength might come.

The pressing problem for Romola was not to settle questions of controversy, but to keep alive that flame of unselfish emotion by which a life of sadness might still be a life of active love.

Her trust in Savonarola's nature as greater than her own formed a large part of the strength she had found. This trust was not lightly shaken. It was not the force of intellect that caused a repulsion from the aberrations of greatness, nor was it the force of vision that allowed the eye to explore the warts on a face bright with human expression; it was simply the negation of high sensibilities. Romola was so deeply moved by the grand energies of Savonarola's nature that she found herself listening patiently to all his dogmas and prophecies when delivered in the vehicle of his ardent faith and believing utterance.

No soul is desolate as long as there is a human being for whom it can feel trust and reverence. Romola's trust in Savonarola was something like a rope suspended securely by her path, making her step elastic while she grasped it; if it were suddenly removed, no firmness of the ground she trod could save her from staggering, or perhaps from falling.

At the Barber's Shop.

Following the unexpected arrival of the messenger bearing the olive branch—a favor of fortune Tito had not anticipated—he was immediately burdened with commissions of a far more deliberate nature. He paused before the Palazzo Vecchio, waiting for the return of the Ten, the body that managed external and war affairs, to deliver the results of his private mission to Pisa. This report was merely a preliminary step to an open embassy led by Bernardo Rucellai, aimed at securing a peaceful understanding with Emperor Maximilian and the League.

Tito's aptitude for diplomatic work had been thoroughly proven. As he presented the findings of his inquiries and interviews with fullness and precision, Bernardo del Nero, then a member of the Ten, could not suppress his admiration. Yet, he would have suppressed it if he could. His original dislike of Tito had resurfaced and intensified since the sale of the library. Romola had never spoken to her godfather regarding the circumstances of that sale. Bernardo interpreted her silence as a prohibition against raising the subject, yet he remained convinced that violating her father's wishes had caused her profound grief. His observant eyes detected further signs that her married life was unhappy.

"Ah," he murmured inwardly, "that is surely why she has taken to listening to Fra Girolamo and associating with the Piagnoni, something I never expected of her. Women, if they are unhappy and childless, must either descend into folly or embrace an overzealous religion that convinces them they bear the entire weight of heaven's work on their shoulders. As for my poor child Romola, as I have always said, the cramming of Latin and Greek has left her as much a woman as if she had spent her entire day pricking her fingers with a needle. And this husband of hers, who is employed everywhere because he is a tool with a smooth handle, I pray that Tornabuoni and the others may not find their fingers cut. Well, well, *solco torto, sacco dritto*—many a full sack comes from a crooked furrow; and he who will be captain of no honest men will have little hire to pay."

Holding this long-standing conviction that the moral character of political agents could not be sifted, the old Florentine refrained from interfering in Tito's disfavor. Aside from what must remain sacred and private for Romola's sake, Bernardo had no direct accusation against the useful Greek except that he was a Greek and that Bernardo disliked him. The duplicity of feigning attachment to the popular government while harboring Medicean sympathies was common to Tito and more than half the Medicean party; Tito merely executed it with greater skill. Consequently, Bernardo remained cold to Tito, who returned the coldness with scrupulous, distant respect. In Florence, it was still believed that any service rendered to Romola's husband constituted an acceptable homage to her godfather.

Having discharged his duties at the Old Palace, Tito felt the official work of the day was complete. Exhausted and sunburned from long riding, he did not return home. There were certain matters in his satchel and on his mind from which he wished to be freed, but these opportunities had to be seized so skillfully that they appeared accidental rather than sought. He strolled from the Palazzo toward the Piazza del Duomo. The procession had ended, yet the bells still rang, and the populace moved restlessly through the streets, craving a more definite outlet for their joy. If the Friar could have stood in the great square to preach to them, they might have been satisfied; but now, despite the new discipline declaring Christ the special King of the Florentines and demanding that all pleasures be Christian, a secret longing persisted among the youths shouting "Viva Gesu!" for a vigorous display of stone-throwing as a sign of thanks.

As Tito passed, he could not avoid recognition as the bearer of the olive branch. To rid himself of the inconvenient ovation, primarily in the form of eager questions, he told those who pressed upon him that Meo di Sasso, the true messenger from Leghorn, must now be entering and could certainly be met near the Porta San Frediano. He could reveal far more than he actually knew.

Freeing himself from importunity in this adroit manner, he made his way to the Piazza del Duomo, casting long, careless-looking eyes around the space while secretly searching for a presence that might provide one of his desired opportunities. The termination of the procession at the Duomo meant a probable concentration of loungers and talkers in the square and around Nello's shop. It was exactly as he expected. A group leaned against the rails near the north gates of the Baptistery, precisely where he sought to be. He affected indifference even more than before, seeming to recognize the tallest member of the group entirely by chance as he half-past him, turning his head to offer a slight greeting while tossing the end of his *becchetto* over his left shoulder.

Yet the tall, broad-shouldered figure greeted in that perfunctory manner possessed considerable claims. He wore a richly embroidered tunic with an abundance of linen, following the newest French fashion, and at his belt hung a sword and poniard of fine workmanship. His hat, adorned with a red plume, seemed a scornful protest against the gravity of Florentine costume, which had been exaggerated to the utmost under the influence of the Piagnoni. Certain indefinable indications of youth made the breadth of his face and the large diameter of his waist appear all the more emphatic stamps of coarseness, and his eyes held that rude, desecrating stare at all men and things which is as intolerable to a refined mind as a bad odor or a flaring light.

He and his companions, also young men dressed expensively and wearing arms, exchanged jokes with that sort of ostentatious laughter which implies a desire to prove that the laughter is not mortified, though some might suspect it. There were good reasons for such suspicion; for this broad-shouldered man with the red feather was Dolfo Spini, leader of the Compagnacci, or Evil Companions—that is to say, of all the dissolute young men belonging to the old aristocratic party, enemies of the Mediceans, enemies of the popular government, but still more bitter enemies of Savonarola. Dolfo Spini, heir of the great house with the loggia over the bridge of the Santa Trinita, had organized these young men into an armed band as sworn champions of extravagant suppers and all the pleasant sins of the flesh, standing against reforming pietists who threatened to make the world so chaste and temperate that there would soon be no reason for living except the extreme unpleasantness of the alternative. Up to that very morning, he had loudly declared that Florence was given over to famine and ruin entirely through its blind adherence to the advice of the Friar, and that there could be no salvation for Florence but in joining the League and driving the Friar out of the city—sending him to Rome, in fact, whither he ought to have gone long ago in obedience to the summons of the Pope. It was suspected, therefore, that Messer Dolfo Spini's heart was not aglow with pure joy at the unexpected succors which had arrived in apparent fulfillment of the Friar's predictions. The laughter, which rang out afresh as Tito joined the group at Nello's door, did not serve to dissipate the suspicion. Leaning against the door-post in the center of the group was a close-shaven, keen-eyed personage named Niccolò Machiavelli, who, young as he was, had penetrated all the small secrets of egoism.

"Messer Dolfo's head," he was saying, "is more of a pumpkin than I thought. I measure men's dulness by the devices they trust in for deceiving others. Your dullest animal of all is he who grins and says he doesn't mind just after he has had his shins kicked. If I were a trifle duller, now," he continued, smiling as the circle opened to admit Tito, "I should pretend to be fond of this Melema, who has got a secretaryship that would exactly suit me—as if Latin ill-paid could love better Latin that's better paid! Melema, you are a pestiferously clever fellow, very much in my way, and I'm sorry to hear you've had another piece of good-luck today."

"Questionable luck, Niccolò," said Tito, touching him on the shoulder in a friendly way; "I have got nothing by it yet but being laid hold of and breathed upon by wool-beaters, when I am as soiled and battered with riding as a *tabellario* (letter-carrier) from Bologna."

"Ah! you want a touch of my art, Messer Oratore," said Nello, who had come forward at the sound of Tito's voice; "your chin, I perceive, has yesterday's crop upon it. Come, come—consign yourself to the priest of all the Muses. Sandro, quick with the lather!"

"In truth, Nello, that is just what I most desire at this moment," said Tito, seating himself; "and that was why I turned my steps towards thy shop, instead of going home at once, when I had done my business at the Palazzo."

"Yes, indeed, it is not fitting that you should present yourself to Madonna Romola with a rusty chin and a tangled *zazzera*. Nothing that is not dainty ought to approach the Florentine lily; though I see her constantly going about like a sunbeam amongst the rags that line our corners—if indeed she is not more like a moonbeam now, for I thought yesterday, when I met her, that she looked as pale and worn as that fainting Madonna of Fra Giovanni's. You must see to it, my bel erudito: she keeps too many fasts and vigils in your absence."

Tito gave a melancholy shrug. "It is too true, Nello. She has been depriving herself of half her proper food *every* day during this famine. But what can I do? Her mind has been set all aflame. A husband's influence is powerless against the Friar's."

"As every other influence is likely to be, that of the Holy Father included," said Domenico Cennini, one of the group at the door, who had turned in with Tito. "I don't know whether you have gathered anything at Pisa about the way the wind sits at Rome, Melema?"

"Secrets of the council-chamber, Messer Domenico!" said Tito, smiling and opening his palms in a deprecatory manner. "An envoy must be as dumb as a father confessor."

"Certainly, certainly," said Cennini. "I ask for no breach of that rule. Well, my belief is, that if his Holiness were to drive Fra Girolamo to extremity, the Frate would move heaven and earth to get a General Council of the Church—ay, and would get it too; and I, for one, should not be sorry, though I'm no Piagnone."

"With leave of your greater experience, Messer Domenico," said Machiavelli, "I must differ from you—not in your wish to see a General Council which might reform the Church, but in your belief that the Frate will checkmate his Holiness. The Frate's game is an impossible one. If he had contented himself with preaching against the vices of Rome, and with prophesying that in some way, not mentioned, Italy would be scourged, depend upon it Pope Alexander would have allowed him to spend his breath in that way as long as he could find hearers. Such spiritual blasts as those knock no walls down. But the Frate wants to be something more than a spiritual trumpet: he wants to be a lever, and what is more, he *is* a lever. He wants to spread the doctrine of Christ by maintaining a popular government in Florence, and the Pope, as I know, on the best authority, has private views to the contrary."

"Then Florence will stand by the Frate," Cennini broke in, with some fervor. "I myself should prefer that he would let his prophesying alone, but if our freedom to choose our own government is to be attacked—I am an obedient son of the Church, but I would vote for resisting Pope Alexander the Sixth, as our forefathers resisted Pope Gregory the Eleventh."

"But pardon me, Messer Domenico," said Machiavelli, sticking his thumbs into his belt, and speaking with that cool enjoyment of exposition which surmounts every other force in discussion. "Have you correctly seized the Frate's position? How is it that he has become a lever, and made himself worth attacking by an acute man like his Holiness? Because he has got the ear of the people: because he gives them threats and promises, which they believe come straight from God, not only about hell, purgatory, and paradise, but about Pisa and our Great Council. But let events go against him, so as to shake the people's faith, and the cause of his power will be the cause of his fall. He is accumulating three sorts of hatred on his head—the hatred of average mankind against everyone who wants to lay on them a strict yoke of virtue; the hatred of the stronger powers in Italy who want to farm Florence for their own purposes; and the hatred of the people, to whom he has ventured to promise good in this world, instead of confining his promises to the next. If a prophet is to keep his power, he must be a prophet like Mahomet, with an army at his back, that when the people's faith is fainting it may be frightened into life again."

"Rather sum up the three sorts of hatred in one," said Francesco Cei, impetuously, "and say he has won the hatred of all men who have sense and honesty, by inventing hypocritical lies. His proper place is among the false prophets in the Inferno, who walk with their heads turned hind-foremost."

"You are too angry, my Francesco," said Machiavelli, smiling; "you poets are apt to cut the clouds in your wrath. I am no votary of the Frate's, and would not lay down my little finger for his veracity. But veracity is a plant of paradise, and the seeds have never flourished beyond the walls. You, yourself, my Francesco, tell poetical lies only

The evening air was thick with the promise of rain, heavy and threatening, as Romola returned from the hospital of San Matteo. Beside her walked Maso, holding a lantern that cast a wavering pool of light upon the cobblestones. Just as they emerged from the shadows of the street, her husband, Tito, stepped forth from the monastery of San Marco. He had barely spent the day with her, having retreated into the solitude of the Via de' Bardi moments after his arrival. Seeing her, he immediately dismissed Maso, his impatience with the servant's slow gait evident, and offered to escort Romola home himself.

This was a performance Tito reserved for occasions when his role demanded it; an official courtesy rather than a sign of intimacy. Between them, there existed no friction, no heated debate. They were two souls drifting in parallel currents, hopelessly alienated in their inner lives, rendering any true contest for agreement impossible. Instead, they navigated their shared existence with a careful, mechanical adherence to a pre-arranged script. If Tito desired a supper prepared in the old library, now transformed into a banquet hall, Romola complied without question, ensuring every detail was perfect. In return, Tito granted her absolute autonomy over her daily rhythms, accepting her assistance with his manuscripts and her supplies for charity, all while maintaining a rigid distance. He avoided her gaze, feigning ignorance of her presence within the house, and playfully attributed her withdrawal to a preference for solitude.

In the early days of her return, after she had abandoned her plan to flee, Romola had made timid attempts to restore a frank relationship. She believed that only through open dialogue regarding their differences could they find a moral understanding. Tito, however, required something far more elusive: a return to her effusive tenderness, a love that would erase the memory of their discord. He desired no explanation; he deemed it impossible. He wished for her affection, but she found tenderness impossible to fabricate. She could be submissive, gentle, and suppress any sign of repulsion, but she could not pretend. Helpless before the reality of their estrangement, she watched as her husband drifted further away.

This distance made her acutely sensitive to secrets he would never willingly share. Regarding his political maneuvers, Tito assured her that the Medici cause was lost and that he served the popular government with genuine conviction—a sentiment she shared warmly. Yet, subtle impressions, like faint odors, gnawed at her peace of mind concerning his dealings with San Marco. She was torn between the terror of discovering evidence that would confirm her deepest suspicions and the urgent impulse to watch, lest some harm befall the city that she might have prevented.

As they walked, Tito spoke of unfinished business. "The day is not yet done for me," he said, hurrying her toward their door. "I must fulfill another commission, perhaps taking an hour, before I can return to rest, which I sorely need." He then chatted lightly of his visit to Pisa, guiding her until they reached a quiet loggia where a lamp burned before a picture of the Virgin. Suddenly, the street, previously empty, filled with the sound of many approaching footsteps and confused voices.

"We shall not reach home dry unless we take shelter here," Tito said, pulling Romola hastily up the steps of the loggia with a start.

"Surely it is futile to wait for such a drizzle," Romola remarked, surprised.

"No," Tito replied, his eyes scanning the gloom with the hyper-vigilance of a mind accustomed to caution. "The rain is growing heavier. Wait a moment." He had spotted the leader of the approaching group: a red feather and a glittering sword-hilt marked him as Dolfo Spini, the captain of the Compagnacci. It was the last person Tito wished to encounter with Romola beside him. Earlier that day, he had met Spini, and now he faced a second, more critical interview. Tito had been entrusted with forged letters—carefully crafted documents bearing the signature and seal of the Cardinal of Naples, a powerful ally of Savonarola. These letters claimed the Cardinal, unwilling to enter Florence directly, intended to meet the Frate at San Casciano the following morning, disguised as a simple priest. The plot was clear: Spini was to ambush the Frate on the lonely road, seize him, and hand him over to Milanese horsemen waiting near San Casciano to be taken into Roman territory.

Tito had already spoken with Savonarola, presenting the letters with consummate art. He had led the Frate to believe they referred to a rendezvous outside the gates, urging him to request an armed guard from the Signoria, offering his own services to carry the request privately. Savonarola had refused, stating that an armed guard contradicted the privacy required for such a meeting. His flashing eyes revealed his intent to accept the risk. Tito cared little for the outcome; his acute mind saw that regardless of whether the trap succeeded or failed, he would emerge richer and more powerful. If Savonarola fell, Tito gained papal favor and diamonds; if he survived, Tito's agency strengthened his position with both the Frate and Spini.

However, Spini was an unpredictable variable. Cunning enough to devise plots, he lacked the self-command to keep them secret. He often drank heavily, and despite their agreement to maintain a cool demeanor in public, there was always the danger that a drunken Spini might blur the lines of their partnership with sudden, affectionate familiarity. Tito's greatest fear was that Spini had already seen him. In the shadow of the loggia, Tito had been illuminated for an instant by the lamp's rays, marking him as clearly as Spini himself. Romola, cloaked in black, had gone unnoticed, standing behind her husband's shoulder.

"Ha! My carrier-pigeon!" Spini's harsh voice grated out, though he meant it as a whisper, his hand clamping onto Tito's shoulder. "Why did you run to hide? You didn't know it was comrades coming. It's good I caught you; it saves time. What of the chase tomorrow? Will the bald-headed game rise? Are the falcons ready?"

If Tito possessed a temper, rage would have flared against this bull-faced accomplice, unfit to lead or follow. His lips turned white, his excitement born of the desperate need to choose a safe path. To hush Spini would only deepen Romola's suspicion; she was a woman who, once alarmed, could not be silenced. To repel Spini angrily might provoke the wine-soaked Compagnaccio into savagery. Tito chose a third course, one that demonstrated Romola still held a terrifying power over him: the power of dread.

He pressed Romola's hand, feigning a signal to her, and spoke in a tone of jovial camaraderie. "Yes, my Dolfo, you may prepare in all security. But take no trumpets with you."

"Don't be afraid," Spini retorted, slightly piqued. "No need to play Ser Saccente with me. I know where the devil keeps his tail as well as you. What! He swallowed the bait whole? The prophetic nose didn't scent the hook?"

"The brute won't be satisfied until he has emptied the bag," Tito thought, but aloud he said, "Swallowed it as easily as you swallow a cup of Trebbiano. Ha! I see torches; there must be a dead body coming. The pestilence has been spreading, I hear."

"Santiddio! I hate the sight of those biers. Good-night," Spini muttered, hastening away.

The torches were indeed approaching, preceding a church dignitary returning home. Tito bowed with due reverence, but Romola saw none of the outward ceremony. If defeating this treachery—which she felt with the force of long prescience—required her to spring upon her husband and hurl them both down a precipice, she felt she could do it. Union with this man was intolerable. The self-discipline of two years evaporated; she felt only the chasm between them.

Darkness fell again, leaving them to see only each other's faces dimly.

"Tell me the truth, Tito—this time tell me the truth," Romola whispered, her voice trembling. "It will be safer for you."

"Why should I desire to tell you anything else, my angry saint?" Tito replied with a touch of contempt, venting his annoyance. "Since the truth is precisely what you have most reason to rejoice in: that my knowledge of Spini's plot enables me to secure the Frate from falling victim to it."

"What is the plot?"

"That I decline to tell," Tito said. "It is enough that the Frate's safety will be secured."

"It is a plot to draw him outside the gates so Spini may murder him."

"There has been no intention of murder," Tito corrected smoothly. "It is simply a plot to compel him to obey the Pope's summons to Rome. But since I serve the popular government and believe the Frate's presence here is vital to its maintenance, I choose to prevent his departure. You may go to sleep with an easy mind tonight."

For a moment, Romola was silent. Then, in a voice of anguish, she said, "Tito, it is of no use: I have no belief in you."

She could just discern his shrug, the spreading of his palms in silent dismissal. A cold dislike, the anger of unimpassioned beings, hardened within him.

"If the Frate leaves the city—if any harm comes to him," Romola said, her tone shifting to one of indignant resolve, "I will declare what I have heard to the Signoria, and you will be disgraced. What if I am your wife?" she continued, impetuous. "I will be disgraced with you. If we are united, I am that part of you that will save you from crime. Others shall not be betrayed."

"I am quite aware of what you would likely do, *anima mia*," Tito said in his coolest, liquid tones. "Therefore, if you possess a small amount of reasoning, consider that if you believe me in nothing else, you may believe me when I say I will take care of myself, and not put it in your power to ruin me."

"Then you assure me that the Frate is warned—he will not go beyond the gates?"

"He shall not go beyond the gates."

A moment of pause followed, but distrust remained unexpelled.

"I will go back to San Marco now and find out," Romola said, making a move forward.

"You shall not!" Tito whispered bitterly, seizing her wrists with all his masculine strength. "I am master of you. You shall not set yourself in opposition to me."

Passersby were approaching; Tito had heard them, which was why he spoke in a whisper. Romola, too conscious of being mastered to struggle, and aware that witnesses were near, yielded instantly to his movement to lead her from the loggia.

They walked on in silence under the small, drizzling rain. The initial rush of indignation and alarm in Romola began to give way to more complex feelings, rendering speech and action difficult. In that simpler state of vehemence, open opposition to a husband whose soul she felt revolting against had seemed the easiest course. But now, habits of self-questioning, memories of subdued impulses, and the proud reserve left by her discipline began to emerge from the flood of passion. The grasp of her wrists, asserting her husband's physical dominance, did not arouse a new fierceness in her. Instead, it gave her a momentary shuddering horror at this form of contest. It was the first time they had been in declared hostility since her flight and return, and the check given to her ardent resolution then retained the power to arrest her now.

In this altered state, her mind dwelt on probabilities that would save her from a desperate course. Tito would not risk betrayal by her; whatever his original intention, he must now be determined by the fact that she knew of the plot. She was not bound to do anything else than hang over him with the certainty that if he deceived her, her lips would not be closed. And then, it was possible—yes, she must cling to that possibility until disproved—that Tito had never meant to aid in the betrayal of the Frate.

Tito, meanwhile, was busy with his own thoughts, remaining silent until they were near home. Then he said, "Well, Romola, have you now had time to recover calmness? If so, you can supply your want of belief in me by a little rational inference: you can see, I presume, that if I had any intention of furthering Spini's plot, I should now be aware that the possession of a fair Piagnone for my wife, who knows the secret of the plot, would be a serious obstacle in my way."

Tito assumed the tone most comfortable to him, guessing that persuasive deprecation would fall on deaf ears in her current mood.

"Yes, Tito," she said in a low voice, "I think you believe that I would guard the Republic from further treachery. You are right to believe it: if the Frate is betrayed, I will denounce you." She paused, then added with an effort, "But it was not so. I have perhaps spoken too hastily—you never meant it. Only, why will you seem to be that man's comrade?"

"Such relations are inevitable to practical men, my Romola," Tito said, gratified by discerning the struggle within her. "You fair creatures live in the clouds. Pray go to rest with an easy heart," he added, opening the door for her.

Tito's intricate schemes had been thwarted not by grand designs, but by the petty, unpredictable accidents that no mastermind can foresee. It was rare for him to stroll with Romola in the evening, yet fate had conspired to place them together precisely when her presence was a liability. Life proved to be a labyrinthine game where calculated moves were constantly undone by chance, as fragile as falling dandelion seeds.

Tito did not resent the collapse of Spini's plot; rather, he grappled with the delicate art of deception required to navigate his warnings. To alert Savonarola without arousing suspicion among the populace was one challenge; to manage Dolfo Spini without triggering the fury of a cornered beast was another. If he rushed to the monastery to warn the friar immediately after delivering the forged letters, the proximity of the acts would invite dangerous speculation. Conversely, warning Spini instantly would require confessing the truth—that Savonarola had altered his course—and Tito knew Spini well enough to understand that such honesty would only confirm Tito's treachery, painting him as a man who had "turned round" and betrayed his allies. Yet, delaying the warning to Savonarola until morning risked losing the window to stop Spini's enraged band of Compagnacci from returning in defeat. Weighing these dangers, Tito chose the lesser evil: he would soothe Spini with lies, attributing the failure solely to the friar's caution, while accepting the risk of missing the critical moment to save Savonarola.

Annoyed and irritable, Tito found himself unable to maintain his usual composure. Determined to avoid further confrontation with Romola, he abandoned his home that night and vanished into the city's shadows.

Inside, Romola remained awake, her clothes untouched, as the rain intensified outside. She found solace in the storm, viewing the tempestuous heavens as a divine barrier against human malice, forcing men to stand still. Yet, her own mind was a battleground. Doubt gnawed at her regarding Tito's fidelity, compounded by a terrifying uncertainty about her own actions. What falsehoods might he have whispered to her? What hidden agendas might she remain ignorant of? Every person who trusted Tito now stood in peril, and her attempts to convince herself otherwise felt futile. Was she not acting out of pride when she hesitated to warn others against him? "If my husband is a criminal, my place is beside him in prison"—this thought offered a grim comfort, yet it left a burning question unanswered: Could a wife allow her spouse to commit atrocities when she possessed the power to intervene? Prayer felt impossible; her mind, agitated by frantic speculation, refused the stillness required for faith.

As the night wore on, the storm's violence waned, the clouds dispersed, and a clear morning broke over Florence. Paradoxically, the clarity only deepened her torment. Wrapping her mantle tightly, she rushed to the loggia, scanning the vast landscape as if some external sign could dictate her next move, though she saw only rooftops concealing the streets where Savonarola might walk toward ruin.

Could she summon her godfather to block the gates without revealing specific details? It seemed too late. Distress tightened her chest; she realized she had gleaned no crucial information from Tito, and the hour had long passed seven. There was no alternative but to proceed to San Marco.

She descended the stairs with urgency, ignoring the sick who awaited her care, and hurried along the Via de' Bardi toward the Ponte Vecchio. She chose the path through the city's heart, the most direct route, hoping that in the great Piazza she might intercept her husband. Perhaps, by some miracle, he could reassure her of the friar's safety, rendering her journey to San Marco unnecessary. Upon reaching the courtyard of the Palazzo Vecchio, she peered eagerly into the pillared space and scanned the square, but the figure she had once loved and now feared was absent. Undeterred, she pressed on toward the Piazza del Duomo.

The square buzzed with life: worshippers ascending the marble steps, men pausing for conversation, vendors laden with goods. Amidst this throng, Romola spotted her husband. He had diverted from San Marco to Nello's shop and now leaned casually against the doorpost. As she drew near, she observed him with a relaxed demeanor, holding his cap, shaking back his freshly combed hair. The stark contrast between his effortless ease and the agony he had inflicted upon her convulsed her with indignation; the vision of his cold hardness intensified her dread. She recognized Cronaca and two other regulars of San Marco standing nearby. A sudden resolve flashed through her mind: "I will force him to speak before these witnesses."

Her light step carried her swiftly toward him before he could retreat, just as Cronaca announced, "Here comes Madonna Romola."

A jolt ran through Tito as he faced his wife. She appeared haggard from sleepless vigilance, yet her eyes burned with a intensity that went beyond mere worry.

"Has the Frate passed beyond the gates?" she demanded.

"No," Tito replied, feeling utterly powerless before her gaze, straining every ounce of his self-control to mask his fear with feigned surprise.

"And are you certain he is not departing?" she pressed.

"I am certain he is not going."

"That is sufficient," Romola declared, turning up the steps to seek refuge within the Duomo, needing the sanctuary of the church to steady her trembling hands.

Tito watched her retreat, a sensation of hatred rising within him that bordered on the abyss. Among the crowd gathered in the square were not only devoted followers of the friar but also Ser Ceccone, the notary. Like Tito, Ceccone was secretly an agent of the Mediceans.

Ser Francesco di Ser Barone, known infamously as Ser Ceccone, was neither learned nor handsome, nor successful, and possessed no generosity. He was a traitor devoid of charm, a fact that ensured he held no affection for Tito Melema.

The afternoon sun had begun to wane, casting long, grey shadows across the floor when Tito returned to his home. In the narrow chamber opposite the cabinet, Romola sat over her documents, her hand pausing mid-copy as the light failed. Her husband entered not with the casual ease of a spouse, but with a singular, heavy purpose. He did not remove his cap or mantle; instead, he leaned an elbow upon the cabinet and stood before her, a dark silhouette against the dimming room.

Romola felt the sudden, sharp recoil of her own conscience. Throughout the day, the news of the Friar's safety had settled in her mind, washing away the immediate sting of her public confrontation. She realized now how foolish her impetuousness had been. The duplicity inherent in Florentine politics, a truth even her godfather had whispered, could easily explain Tito's connection to Spini without implying any treason on his part. She had acted in anger, driven by a distrust that she now saw as a mistake born of isolation. For hours, she had rehearsed a confession, hoping to break the two-year silence that had locked them together like a banquet hall where death had once shattered the feast. She had fled, and she had returned, yet neither had ever truly acknowledged the past that lay between them.

She looked up at him, her gaze softened by self-reproach, but the subtle shift in his demeanor halted her words. A crisis had arrived, invisible until now, altering the landscape of their marriage. Beneath his usual blandness and beseeching manner, Tito's determination to master his wife had surfaced, hardening his features as if a hidden muscle were strangling a dangerous, feeble thing within him.

"Romola," he began, his voice a cool, liquid tone that sent a shiver through her, "it is time that we should understand each other."

"That is what I most desire, Tito," she replied faintly. Her pale face, stripped of its anger and filled only with the timidity of doubt, seemed to highlight the predominance of his dark strength.

"You took a step this morning," Tito continued, "which you must now perceive to be useless—a step that exposed you to remark and may involve me in serious practical difficulties."

"I acknowledge that I was too hasty," Romola said, her voice finding a firmer register. She hoped this admission of regret would soften his gaze, preparing the ground for the words she truly needed to speak.

"I wish you to understand once and for all," Tito said, his voice unchanging, "that such collisions are incompatible with our position as husband and wife. Reflect on the manner in which you were led to that step, lest it be repeated."

"That depends chiefly on you, Tito," Romola retorted, a spark of resentment igniting her cheeks. It was not what she had intended to say, for the path of mutual speech was narrow and obscured.

"You would say, I suppose," Tito answered, "that nothing in the future should excite your unreasonable suspicions. You were frank enough last night to declare you hold no belief in me. I am not surprised by the exaggerated conclusions you draw from slight premises, but I wish to point out the fruit of making such conclusions a basis for interfering in affairs of which you are ignorant. Are you paying attention?"

He waited for a response.

"Yes," Romola flushed, unable to suppress her resentment at his superior coldness.

"Well, then," Tito pressed, "it may not be long before another chance word or incident sets your imagination to devising crimes against me. You might rush to the Palazzo Vecchio to alarm the Signoria and set the city ablaze. Shall I tell you the result? Not merely the disgrace of your husband, to which you look forward with such courage, but the arrest and ruin of many chief men in Florence, including Messer Bernardo del Nero."

Tito had made his move, decisive and absolute. The flush drained from Romola's face, leaving her lips pale—a rare sight, for she was little given to fear. Tito perceived his success.

"You might flatter yourself," he went on, "that you are performing a heroic deed of deliverance. You might as well try to turn locks with fine words as apply such notions to the politics of Florence. The question is no longer whether you can believe in me, but whether, now that you have been warned, you will dare to rush, like a blind man with a torch, into intricate affairs you know nothing of."

Romola felt her mind gripped in a vice by Tito's intellect. The possibilities he outlined rose before her with terrible clarity.

"I am too rash," she admitted. "I will try not to be rash."

"Remember," Tito insisted, his tone unsparing, "that your act of distrust this morning might have had far more fatal effects than the sacrifice of your husband, a fate you have learned to contemplate without flinching."

"Tito, it is not so!" Romola burst forth, rising and moving closer to him with a desperate resolve to speak the truth. "It is false that I would willingly sacrifice you. It has been the greatest effort of my life to cling to you. I went away in my anger two years ago, and I returned because I was bound to you more than to anything on earth. But it is useless. You shut me out from your mind. You pretend to think of me as too unreasonable to share in your affairs. You will be open with me about nothing."

She looked like a good angel pleading with a sinner, bending her face toward him with dilated eyes and laying her hand upon his arm. Yet, Romola's touch and glance stirred no fiber of tenderness in her husband. The good-humoured, tolerant Tito, capable of little hatred or impatience, felt himself growing strangely hard toward this wife who had once been his strongest influence. With all his softness of disposition, he possessed a masculine effectiveness of intellect and purpose, an energy sharp as an edge, working its way without great momentum. Romola possessed her own energy, one that thwarted his, and no man, unless exceptionally weak, endures being thwarted by his wife. Marriage must be either a relation of sympathy or of conquest.

No emotion crossed Tito's face as he heard Romola speak of having left him. His lips merely hardened slightly as he smiled faintly.

"My Romola, when certain conditions are ascertained, we must make up our minds to them. No amount of wishing will fill the Arno, as your people say, nor turn a plum into an orange. I have not observed that prayers have much efficacy in that regard. You are constituted to have strong impressions inaccessible to reason; I cannot share those impressions, and you have withdrawn all trust from me in consequence. You have changed toward me; therefore, I have changed toward you. It is useless to look backward. We must simply adapt ourselves to altered conditions."

"Tito, it would not be useless for us to speak openly," Romola said, her voice trembling with the exasperation of striking against an insurmountable, lifeless resistance. "It was the sense of deception in you that changed me, and that has kept us apart. And it is not true that I changed first. You changed toward me the night you first wore that chain-armour. You had some secret from me—it was about that old man—and I saw him again yesterday. Tito," she continued in a tone of agonized entreaty, "if you would once tell me everything, let it be what it may—I would not mind pain—that there might be no wall between us! Is it not possible that we could begin a new life?"

For the first time, a flash of emotion crossed Tito's face. He stood perfectly still, the flash seeming to whiten him. He ignored Romola's appeal. After a moment's pause, he said quietly, "Your impetuosity about trifles, Romola, has a freezing influence that would cool the baths of Nero."

At these cutting words, Romola shrank back, drawing herself up into her usual self-sustained posture. Tito continued, "If by 'that old man' you mean the mad Jacopo di Nola who attempted my life and made a strange accusation against me, of which I told you nothing because it would have alarmed you to no purpose, he, poor wretch, has died in prison. I saw his name in the list of the dead."

"I know nothing about his accusation," Romola said. "But I know he is the man I saw with a rope around his neck in the Duomo—the man whose portrait Piero di Cosimo painted, grasping your arm as he saw him grasp it the day the French entered, the day you first wore the armour."

"And where is he now, pray?" Tito asked, still pale but governing himself.

"He was lying lifeless in the street from starvation," Romola replied. "I revived him with bread and wine. I brought him to our door, but he refused to come in. Then I gave him some money, and he went away without telling me anything. But he had found out that I was your wife. Who is he?"

"A man, half mad, half imbecile, who was once my father's servant in Greece, and who bears a rancorous hatred toward me because I dismissed him for theft. Now you have the whole mystery, and the further satisfaction of knowing that I am again in danger of assassination. The fact of my wearing the armour, about which you seem to have thought so much, must have led you to infer that I was in danger from this man. Was that the reason you chose to cultivate his acquaintance and invite him into the house?"

Romola fell silent. To speak now would be like rushing with a bare breast against a shield.

Tito moved from his leaning posture, slowly removing his cap and mantle, and pushing back his hair. He was collecting himself for final words. Romola stood upright, looking at him as one might regard an oncoming deadly force, to be met only by silent endurance.

"We need not refer to these matters again, Romola," he said, in precisely the same tone as at the beginning. "It is enough if you will remember that the next time your generous ardour leads you to interfere in political affairs, you are likely, not to save anyone from danger, but to be raising scaffolds and setting houses on fire. You are not yet a sufficiently ardent Piagnone to believe that Messer Bernardo del Nero is the prince of darkness, and Messer Francesco Valori the archangel Michael. I think I need demand no promise from you?"

"I have understood you too well, Tito."

"It is enough," he said, and left the room.

Romola turned with despair written across her face and sank into her seat. "O God, I have tried—I cannot help it. We shall always be divided." These words passed silently through her mind. "Unless," she said aloud, as if a sudden vision had startled her into speech—"unless misery should come and join us!"

Tito, too, carried a new thought in his mind after closing the door behind him. Alongside his project of leaving Florence as soon as his life there became a sufficient stepping-stone to a new existence, perhaps in Rome or Milan, there arose for the first time a desire to be free from Romola, to leave her behind. She had ceased to belong to the desirable furniture of his life; there was no possibility of an easy relation between them without genuineness on his part. Genuineness implied a confession of the past, and confession involved a change of purpose. But Tito had as little bent that way as a leopard has to lap milk when its teeth are grown. From all relations that were not easy and agreeable, Tito shrank; why should he cling to them?

Moreover, Romola had made his relations difficult with others besides herself. He had had a troublesome interview with Dolfo Spini, who had returned in a rage after an ineffectual soak in the rain and a long wait in ambush. That scene between Romola and himself at Nello's door, once reported to Spini's ear, might be a seed of something more unmanageable than mere suspicion. But now, at least, he believed he had mastered Romola through a terror that appealed to the strongest forces of her nature. He had alarmed her affection and conscience with the shadowy image of consequences; he had arrested her intellect by hanging before it the idea of a hopeless complexity in affairs that defied moral judgment.

Yet Tito was not at ease. The world was not yet quite cushioned with velvet, and even if it had been, he could not have abandoned himself to that softness with thorough enjoyment. For before he went out again that evening, he put on his coat of chain-armour.

The winter days drifted past Romola with the silent, uniform tread of white ships passing a lone watcher on the shore. Each vessel carried a hidden cargo of impending change, though none announced its arrival. Tito's whispered warnings had woven a thread of dread into her curiosity regarding public affairs, leading her to prefer ignorance to knowledge. The threatening German Emperor had vanished, and Florence's precarious position seemed momentarily eased; yet the underlying distress remained so profound that Romola's active duties showed little diminution. In these relentless tasks, her mind found its only sanctuary from the gnawing doubts that plagued her.

She dared not allow herself the joy that the relief arrived in extremity, seemingly validating the Frate's party, had brought to Francesco Valori. The hot-tempered chieftain of the Piagnoni had been elected Gonfaloniere at the start of the year, eager to imprint his liberal will upon the city during his brief two-month tenure. On the surface, this appeared as a triumph for the faction most devoted to liberty and a shield for Savonarola. But Romola's spirit was now attuned to every shadow that suggested the present was merely an unconscious incubation of mixed germs, destined one day to bloom into tragedy. By Carnival time, shortly after mid-February, her foreboding crystallized into certainty: the Medici had ceased their passive stance and were actively maneuvering to secure the election of Bernardo del Nero as the new Gonfaloniere.

On the final day of the Carnival, between the tenth and eleventh hour, Romola walked toward the Corso degli Albizzi, fulfilling her promise to meet her cousin Brigida. They intended to depart from the Via de' Bardi in the early afternoon, securing their places at a window Tito had reserved in the Piazza della Signoria. A spectacle of unprecedented strangeness awaited them there, drawing the gaze of every Florentine eye. The Piagnoni were exercising their newfound authority over the manner of celebrating the festival. Despite the efforts of Dolfo Spini and his companions to revive the traditional masques and practical jokes—seasoned with the indecency of the past—such frivolities were deemed incompatible with a city that had declared Christ its King.

Romola set forth with a languid detachment, the mood of one entering a long day of sightseeing solely to gratify a child or a cherished friend. The day marked an epoch in the keeping of Carnival, yet this phase of reform failed to ignite her enthusiasm. She remained unaware that it was also an epoch in her own life, when another destiny would cease to be secretly entwined with hers and become visibly so.

Choosing to traverse the great Piazza alone, she sought a preliminary survey of the unparalleled sight. Entering from the south, she beheld a monstrous, multi-colored structure resembling a pyramid or a colossal fir-tree, sixty feet high. Its shelves widened toward the base until they spanned a circumference of eighty yards. The square teemed with life: slender youths in white garments, crowned with olive wreaths, moved to and fro around the base, carrying baskets brimming with bright objects. Maturer figures, clad in monastic robes or the loose tunics and dark-red caps of artists, assisted, examined, or retreated to vantage points to survey the wondrous whole. Among a considerable group standing on the marble steps of Orgagna's Loggia, Romola recognized Piero di Cosimo, who seemed to stand aloof in a posture of discontent and scorn.

Drawing nearer, she paused to inspect the multifarious objects ranged in gradation from the base to the summit. There were tapestries and brocades of immodest design, pictures and sculptures likely to incite vice. Boards and tables for every game lay alongside printing blocks, dice, and other apparatus for gambling. Worldly music-books and instruments of all varieties—lutes, drums, cymbals, trumpets—filled the air. Masks and costumes from old Carnival shows were displayed, alongside handsome copies of Ovid, Boccaccio, Petrarch, Pulci, and other works of vanity or impurity. Implements of feminine vanity abounded: rouge-pots, false hair, mirrors, perfumes, powders, and transparent veils designed to provoke inquisitive glances. At the very apex stood the unflattering effigy of a mythical Venetian merchant, rumored to have offered a heavy sum for this collection of marketable abominations. Soaring above him in surpassing ugliness was the symbolic figure of the old, debauched Carnival.

This was the preparation for a new kind of bonfire—the Burning of Vanities. Hidden within the pyramid's interior was a plentiful store of dry fuel and gunpowder. On the evening of this last festival day, the pile was to be ignited to the sound of trumpets, sending the ugly old Carnival tumbling into the flames amidst songs of reforming triumph.

Such a crowning act could hardly have been prepared without a peculiar organization initiated by Savonarola two years prior. The mass of Florentine boyhood and youth was no longer left to its own promptings toward street mischief and crude dissoluteness. Under the training of Fra Domenico, Savonarola's lieutenant, lads and striplings—the hope of Florence—were to speak only pure words, possess a zeal for the Unseen Good that would shame the lukewarmness of their elders, and know no pleasures save those of an angelic sort: singing divine praises and walking in white robes. It was for them that the ranges of seats had been raised high against the walls of the Duomo, where they had learned to hear Savonarola appeal to them as the future glory of a city specially appointed to execute God's work.

These fresh-cheeked troops were the chief agents in the regenerated merriment of the new Carnival, a sacred parody of the old. Had there been bonfires in times past? Now, there would be a bonfire to consume impurity from the earth. Had there been symbolic processions? Now, there were processions bearing white robes, red crosses, and olive wreaths—emblems of peace and innocent gladness—while banners and images proclaimed the triumphs of goodness. Had there been dancing in a ring under the open sky to the sound of choral voices chanting loose songs? Now, there was dancing of monks and laity in fraternal love and divine joy, accompanied by the music of hymns. The collections from street passengers would be greater than ever, not for gross suppers, but for the hungry and needy, alongside the gathering of the *Anathema*, the vanities destined for the great pyramidal bonfire.

Troops of young inquisitors went from house to house on this exciting business, demanding the surrender of the Anathema. Perhaps, after the more avowed vanities were yielded, the Madonna of the household still possessed little reddened balls brought from the Levant, intended to produce a sudden, ingenuous falsity upon a sallow cheek? If so, she was to bring them down and cast them into the basket of doom. Or perhaps she had ringlets and coils of "dead hair"? Then she was to bring them to the street door, not upon her head, but in her hands, publicly renouncing the Anathema that hid the respectable signs of age under a ghastly mockery of youth. In reward, she would hear fresh young voices pronounce a blessing upon her and her house.

The beardless inquisitors, organized into little regiments, undoubtedly took to their work with willingness. To coerce people by shame or spiritual pelting into parting with things they would otherwise cherish was a form of piety to which the boyish mind was readily converted. If some obstinately wicked men grew enraged and threatened the whip or the cudgel, this too added to the excitement. Savonarola himself evidently felt the difficulty weighing on all minds with noble yearnings toward great ends, yet possessing that imperfect perception of means which forces a resort to supernatural constraining influence as the only sure hope. The Florentine youth had harbored very evil habits and foul tongues; it seemed at first an unmixed blessing when they shouted "Viva Gesù!" But Savonarola was eventually forced to declare from the pulpit, "There is a little too much shouting of 'Viva Gesù!' This constant utterance of sacred words brings them into contempt. Let me have no more of that shouting till the next Festa."

Nevertheless, as the long stream of white-robed youthfulness, adorned with little red crosses and olive wreaths, had gone to the Duomo at dawn to receive communion from Savonarola's hands, it was a sight of beauty. Doubtless, many of those young souls were laying up memories of hope and awe that might save them from ever resting in a merely vulgar view of their work as men and citizens. There is no kind of conscious obedience that does not represent an advance on lawlessness, and these boys became the generation of men who fought greatly and endured greatly in the Republic's final struggle. Now, in the intermediate hours between early communion and dinner, they made their last perambulations to collect alms and vanities, which was why Romola saw the slim white figures moving to and fro about the base of the great pyramid.

"What think you of this folly, Madonna Romola?" a brusque voice asked close to her ear. "Your Piagnoni will make *l'inferno* a pleasant prospect to us if they are to carry things their own way on earth. It is enough to fetch a cudgel over the mountains to see painters, like Lorenzo di Credi and young Baccio there, helping to burn color out of life in this fashion."

"My good Piero," Romola replied, looking up and smiling at the grim man, "even you must be glad to see some of these things burnt. Look at those gewgaws, wigs, and rouge-pots. I have heard you talk as indignantly against them as Fra Girolamo himself."

"What then?" Piero turned on her sharply. "I never said a woman should make a black patch of herself against the background. Va! Madonna Antigone, it is a shame for a woman with your hair and shoulders to run into such nonsense—leave it to women who are not worth painting. What! The most holy Virgin herself has always been dressed well; that is the doctrine of the Church: talk of heresy, indeed! And I should like to know what the excellent Messer Bardo would have said to the burning of the divine poets by these Frati, who are no better an imitation of men than if they were onions with the bulbs uppermost. Look at that Petrarch sticking up beside a rouge-pot: do the idiots pretend that the heavenly Laura was a painted harridan? And Boccaccio, now: do you mean to say, Madonna Romola—you who are fit to be a model for a wise Saint Catherine of Egypt—that you have never read the stories of the immortal Messer Giovanni?"

"It is true I have read them, Piero," Romola said. "Some of them a great many times over, when I was a little girl. I used to get the book down when my father was asleep so that I could read to myself."

"Ebbene?" Piero asked in a fiercely challenging tone.

"There are some things in them I do not want ever to forget," Romola replied. "But you must confess, Piero, that a great many of those stories are only about low deceit for the lowest ends. Men do not want books to make them think lightly of vice, as if life were a vulgar joke. And I cannot blame Fra Girolamo for teaching that we owe our time to something better."

"Yes, yes, it is very well to say so now you've read them," Piero said bitterly, turning on his heel and walking away.

Romola, too, walked on, smiling at Piero's innuendo with a sort of tenderness toward the old painter's anger, knowing that her father would have felt something similar. For herself, she was conscious of no inward collision with the strict and sombre view of pleasure that tended to repress poetry in the attempt to repress vice. Sorrow and joy each possess their peculiar narrowness; and a religious enthusiasm like Savonarola's, which ultimately blesses mankind by giving the soul a strong propulsion toward sympathy with pain, indignation against wrong, and the subjugation of sensual desire, must always incur the reproach of a great negation. Romola's life had granted her an affinity for sadness that inevitably made her unjust toward merriment. That subtle result of culture we call Taste was subdued by the need for a deeper motive; just as the nicer demands of the palate are annihilated by urgent hunger. Moving habitually among scenes of suffering and carrying woman's heaviest disappointment in her heart, the severity that allied itself with self-renouncing beneficent strength found no dissonance within her.

Tessa Abroad and at Home.

Another figure, easily recognized by those who knew the city's shifting tides, approached the Piazza that morning. She wore not the somber black of mourning, but the vibrant red, green, and white of the carnival season. She came from a different direction now; Tessa no longer dwelt on the hill of San Giorgio. Following the turmoil with Baldassarre, Tito had deemed it prudent to relocate her, seeking a new sanctuary within a quiet, airy quarter. Her new home bordered the expansive gardens north of the Porta Santa Croce, a place of relative safety and seclusion.

Tessa had not ventured out for sightseeing without explicit permission. The evening before, Tito had accompanied her, and she had held back a plea swelling in her throat until she saw him in a state of radiant ease. With one arm around the sturdy Lillo and the other resting gently on her shoulder as she steadied the tiny Ninna on her legs, Tito appeared transformed. The weariness that had previously weighed upon his brow and lips had completely melted away. Tessa, quick to learn the subtle languages of her household, had mastered small stratagems to avoid vexing Naldo while securing her own desires. She could read little else, but she had learned to decipher the landscape of her husband's face with surprising accuracy.

Indeed, the charm of that bright, gentle-humored Tito who had awakened beneath the Loggia de' Cerchi five years prior—untainted by deceit—had never returned so fully as in the person of Naldo, seated in the straight-backed, carved armchair provided for his comfort. Tito himself was surprised by the growing sense of relief these moments brought him. No guile was required toward Tessa; she was too innocent and ignorant to suspect him of anything. The little voices calling him "Babbo" were sweet in his ears for the brief duration he heard them. When he considered leaving Florence, he never imagined leaving Tessa and the children behind. He was deeply fond of these round-cheeked, wide-eyed creatures who clung to him, knowing no evil. Wherever affection springs, it is like a green leaf or a blossom—pure and breathing purity, regardless of the soil in which it grows. Poor Romola, with all her self-sacrificing efforts, was inadvertently hardening Tito's nature, chilling it with a positive dislike that had once seemed impossible. Yet, Tessa kept the fountains of kindness flowing.

"Ninna is very good without me now," Tessa began, feeling her request rising high in her throat, and allowed Ninna to sit on the floor. "I can leave her with Monna Lisa anytime, and if she cries in the cradle, Lillo is as sensible as can be—he goes and thumps Monna Lisa."

Lillo, whose great dark eyes appeared even darker against his light-brown curls, jumped off Babbo's knee and immediately demonstrated his intelligence by thumping Monna Lisa, who shook her head slowly over her spinning at the far end of the room. "A wonderful boy!" Tito laughed. "Isn't he?" Tessa asked eagerly, moving slightly closer. "And might I go to see the Carnival tomorrow, just for an hour or two, mightn't I?"

"Oh, you wicked pigeon!" Tito said, pinching her cheek. "Those are your longings, are they? What have you to do with carnivals now that you are an old woman with two children?"

"But old women like to see things," Tessa replied, her lower lip trembling slightly. "Monna Lisa said she would like to go, only she is so deaf she cannot hear what is behind her, and she thinks we could not take care of both the children."

"No, indeed, Tessa," Tito said, his expression turning grave. "You must not think of taking the children into the crowded streets, or I shall be angry."

"But I have never been into the Piazza without leave," Tessa pleaded in a frightened tone, "since the Holy Saturday, and I think Nofri is dead, for you know the poor madre died; and I shall never forget the Carnival I saw once; it was so pretty—all roses and a king and queen under them—and singing. I liked it better than the San Giovanni."

"But there is nothing like that now, my Tessa. They are going to make a bonfire in the Piazza—that is all. But I cannot let you go out by yourself in the evening."

"Oh no, no! I do not want to go in the evening. I only want to see the procession by daylight. There *will* be a procession, is it not true?"

"Yes, after a sort," Tito said. "As lively as a flight of cranes. You must not expect roses and glittering kings and queens, my Tessa. However, I suppose any string of people to be called a procession will please your blue eyes. And there is a thing they have raised in the Piazza de' Signori for the bonfire. You may like to see that. But come home early, and look like a grave little old woman; and if you see any men with feathers and swords, keep out of their way: they are very fierce, and like to cut old women's heads off."

"Santa Madonna! where do they come from? Ah! you are laughing; it is not so bad. But I will keep away from them. Only," Tessa whispered, leaning her lips near Naldo's ear, "if I might take Lillo with me! He is very sensible."

"But who will thump Monna Lisa then, if she doesn't hear?" Tito said, finding it difficult not to laugh, though he maintained a serious demeanor. "No, Tessa, you could not take care of Lillo if you got into a crowd, and he is too heavy for you to carry."

"It is true," Tessa said, rather sadly, "and he likes to run away. I forgot that. Then I will go alone. But now look at Ninna—you have not looked at her enough."

Ninna was a blue-eyed thing at the tottering, tumbling age—a fair solid object that, like a loaded die, found its base with a constancy that warranted prediction. Tessa snatched her up, and when Babbo paid due attention to the recent teeth and other marvels, she whispered, "And shall I buy some confetti for the children?"

Tito drew some small coins from his scarsella and poured them into her palm.

"That will buy no end," Tessa said, delighted at this abundance. "I shall not mind going without Lillo so much, if I bring him something."

Thus, Tessa set out in the morning toward the great Piazza where the bonfire was to be. She did not consider the February breeze cold enough to demand more than her green woolen dress. A mantle would have been oppressive, for it would have hidden a new necklace and a new clasp, mounted with silver—the only ornamental presents Tito had ever made her. Tessa did not think of showing her figure, for no one had ever told her it was pretty; but she was quite sure her necklace and clasp were of the finest sort ever worn by the richest contadina. She arranged her white hood over her head so that the front of her necklace might be well displayed. These ornaments, she considered, must inspire respect for her as the wife of someone who could afford to buy them.

She tripped along cheerily in the February sunshine, thinking much of the purchases for the little ones to fill her small basket, and thinking not at all of anyone who might be observing her. Yet her descent from her upper storey into the street had been watched, and she was kept in sight by a person who had often waited in vain to see if it were Tessa who lived in that house to which he had more than once dogged Tito. Baldassarre was carrying a package of yarn; he was constantly employed in that way as a means of earning his scanty bread and keeping the sacred fire of vengeance alive. He had come out of his way this morning, as he had often done before, to pass by the house to which he had followed Tito in the evening. His long imprisonment had intensified his timid suspicion and his belief in some diabolic fortune favoring Tito, so much so that he had not dared to pursue him except under the cover of a crowd or darkness. He felt, with instinctive horror, that if Tito's eyes fell upon him, he would again be held up to obloquy, again be dragged away; his weapon would be taken, and he cast helpless into a prison cell. His fierce purpose had become as stealthy as a serpent's, depending for its prey on one dart of the fang. Justice was weak and unfriended; he could not hear again the voice that pealed the promise of vengeance in the Duomo. He had been there again and again, but that voice, too, had apparently been stifled by cunning, strong-armed wickedness. For a long while, Baldassarre's ruling thought was to ascertain whether Tito still wore the armor, for now at last his fainting hope would have been contented with a successful stab on this side the grave; but he would never risk his precious knife again. It was a weary time he had had to wait for the chance of answering this question by touching Tito's back in the press of the street. Since then, the knowledge that the sharp steel was useless, and that he had no hope but in some new device, had fallen with leaden weight on his enfeebled mind. A dim vision of winning one of those two wives to aid him came before him continually, and continually slid away. The wife who had lived on the hill was no longer there. If he could find her again, he might grasp some thread of a project and work his way to more clearness.

And this morning he had succeeded. He was quite certain now where this wife lived, and as he walked, bent a little under his burden of yarn, yet keeping the green and white figure in sight, his mind dwelt upon her and her circumstances as feeble eyes dwell on lines and colors, trying to interpret them into consistent significance.

Tessa had to pass through various long streets without seeing any other sign of the Carnival than unusual groups of country people in their best garments, and that disposition in everybody to chat and loiter which marks the early hours of a holiday before the spectacle begins. Presently, in her disappointed search for remarkable objects, her eyes fell on a man with a pedlar's basket before him, who seemed to be selling nothing but little red crosses to all the passengers. A little red cross would be pretty to hang up over her bed; it would also help to keep off harm, and would perhaps make Ninna stronger. Tessa went to the other side of the street to ask the pedlar the price of the crosses, fearing they would cost a little too much for her to spare from her purchase of sweets. The pedlar's back had been turned toward her hitherto, but when she came near him she recognized an old acquaintance of the Mercato, Bratti Ferravecchi. Accustomed to feel that she was to avoid old acquaintances, she turned away again and passed to the other side of the street. But Bratti's eye was too well practiced in looking out at the corner after possible customers for her movement to have escaped him, and she was presently arrested by a tap on the arm from one of the red crosses.

"Young woman," Bratti said as she unwillingly turned her head, "you come from some castello a good way off, it seems to me, else you'd never think of walking about, this blessed Carnival, without a red cross in your hand. Santa Madonna! Four white quattrini is a small price to pay for your soul—prices rise in purgatory, let me tell you."

"Oh, I should like one," Tessa said hastily, "but I couldn't spare four white quattrini."

Bratti had at first regarded Tessa too abstractedly as a mere customer to look at her with any scrutiny, but when she began to speak he exclaimed, "By the head of San Giovanni, it must be the little Tessa, and looking as fresh as a ripe apple! What! you've done none the worse, then, for running away from father Nofri? You were in the right of it, for he goes on crutches now, and a crabbed fellow with crutches is dangerous; he can reach across the house and beat a woman as he sits."

"I'm married," Tessa said rather demurely, remembering Naldo's command that she should behave with gravity; "and my husband takes great care of me."

"Ah, then, you've fallen on your feet! Nofri said you were good-for-nothing vermin; but what then? An ass may bray a good while before he shakes the stars down. I always said you did well to run away, and it isn't often Bratti's in the wrong. Well, and so you've got a husband and plenty of money? Then you'll never think much of giving four white quattrini for a red cross. I get no profit; but what with the famine and the new religion, all other merchandise is gone down. You live in the country where the chestnuts are plenty, eh? You've never wanted for polenta, I can see."

"No, I've never wanted anything," Tessa said, still on her guard.

"Then you can afford to buy a cross. I got a Padre to bless them, and you get blessing and all for four quattrini. It isn't for the profit; I hardly get a danaro by the whole lot. But then they're holy wares, and it's getting harder and harder work to see your way to Paradise: the very Carnival is like Holy Week, and the least you can do to keep the Devil from getting the upper hand is to buy a cross. God guard you! think what the Devil's tooth is! You've seen him biting the man in San Giovanni, I should hope?"

Tessa felt much teased and frightened. "Oh, Bratti," she said with a discomposed face, "I want to buy a great many confetti: I've got little Lillo and Ninna at home. And nice colored sweet things cost a great deal. And they will not like the cross so well, though I know it would be good to have it."

"Come, then," Bratti said, fond of laying up a store of merits by imagining possible extortions and

As Romola spoke of someone expecting her, she referred to her cousin Brigida, yet she could not have guessed how desperately that kindred spirit needed her presence. Walking back toward the Piazza together, they spotted a gathering of youths halting before Tessa. When Romola stepped closer, seeing the simple country girl's distress, she called out, "Wait a moment, cousin." But Monna Brigida, her composure fracturing, replied hastily, "No, I cannot go on. Come with me to Boni's shop; I shall return there."

The truth lay deeper than a mere desire to flee. Monna Brigida was torn between the vanity she wore on her person and a dawning terror that the Piagnoni were correct in their belief that rouge, false hair, and pearl embroidery corrupted the soul. The serious atmosphere of the sect hung over the city like a pervasive odor; nothing tasted or felt as it once had. Here stood her dear cousin Romola, youthful and beautiful, living a life that seemed to demand rigorous sacrifice from a woman. For a widow of fifty-five whose self-worth had long been anchored in her appearance and the admiration of others, maintaining buoyant spirits required immense imagination. Monna Brigida had begun to fight battles at her toilette. Was it truly worth the effort to apply rouge and braid her hair if her soul required such austerity to flourish? Yet, when she gazed into the hand-mirror, she saw a sallow face with sagging cheeks and crow's-feet that no coquettish lip-curl could hide. When she parted her grey hair to lie flat against her temples in the Piagnone style, her courage evaporated. Monna Berta, though only fifty-two, possessed a sharp wit that would surely laugh her to death, calling her an old hag. Every non-Piagnone woman would shrug at her sight, and every man would address her as if she were his grandmother. At fifty-five, she reasoned, she was not ancient—she merely needed a touch of makeup. Thus, the rouge, the braids, and the embroidered berretta remained, and Monna Brigida was content with her familiar reflection. However, today, while preparing for the Piagnone Carnival, the internal war between fear and longing proved too great. She turned back to seek refuge in the druggist's shop rather than face the collectors of the Anathema without Romola beside her. But her retreat was not swift enough. Even before she turned, the white-robed boys trailing behind the crowd that had wheeled toward Tessa had spotted her. Perhaps their eagerness to seize her was fueled by the fact that some of their number had already cornered another figure bearing the heavier burden of the Anathema. Several of these youths were at the tenderest age, undergoing peculiar training. Among them was a small boy of ten, an olive wreath resting above cherubic cheeks and wide brown eyes. His imagination was seized by a hovering awe of existence, sensing that great consequences hinged on every action, yet his longings ran toward mischief and mastery. He was the first to reach Monna Brigida, placing himself squarely in her path.

She felt a surge of anger and scanned for an open door, finding none. To attempt escape now would only worsen her plight. Yet, it was not the cherubic boy who first addressed her, but a youth of fifteen gripping the handle of a wide basket.

"Venerable mother!" he began, his voice ringing with conviction. "The blessed Jesus commands you to surrender the Anathema you carry upon you. That cap embroidered with pearls, those jewels fastening your false hair—give them up and sell them for the poor. Cast the hair itself away from you, for it is a lie fit only for the fire. Doubtless, beneath your silk mantle, you harbor other treasures."

"Yes, lady," chimed in the youth at the opposite handle, who had memorized many of Fra Girolamo's phrases. "They are too heavy for you. They weigh more than a millstone, dragging you toward perdition. Will you adorn yourself with the hunger of the poor and boast of carrying God's curse upon your head?"

"In truth, you are old, *buona madre*," the little boy added in a sweet soprano. "You look frightfully ugly with the red on your cheeks and that black, glistening hair, and those fine things. Only Satan could find pleasure in seeing you. Your Angel is sorrowful; He wishes you to rub away the red."

The small fellow snatched a soft silk scarf from the basket and held it out to Monna Brigida, urging her to use it as her guardian angel desired. Her anger and mortification were rapidly yielding to spiritual alarm. Monna Berta and the cloud of high-society witnesses were nowhere to be seen. Instead, she was surrounded by young monitors whose white robes, wreaths, red crosses, and terrifying candor possessed an awful, unusual power. Her Franciscan confessor, Fra Cristoforo, was absent to bolster her distrust of Dominican teachings, leaving her helplessly shaken by a vague sense that a supreme warning had arrived. With no other course seeming open to her, she accepted the offered scarf and rubbed her cheeks with trembling submission.

"It is well, madonna," said the second youth. "It is a holy beginning. Once you remove those vanities from your head, the dew of heavenly grace will descend upon it." As the infusion of mischief grew stronger, the boy placed his hand on one of the jeweled pins securing her braids to the berretta and drew it out. The heavy black plait fell forward, obscuring Monna Brigida's face and pulling the rest of her headgear down. This became a new reason for haste; she raised her hands quickly, undone the remaining fastenings, and flung her beloved crimson-velvet berretta, with its unsurpassed embroidery of seed-pearls, into the basket of doom. She stood revealed as an unrouged woman, her grey hair pushed back from a face where deep lines of age had triumphed over her former fullness.

Yet, the berretta was not permitted to rest in the basket. With impish zeal, the youngsters lifted it and held it up pitilessly, the false hair dangling limply.

"See, venerable mother," the taller youth declared, "what ugly lies you have delivered yourself from! Now you resemble the blessed Saint Anna, mother of the Holy Virgin."

Thoughts of entering a convent immediately, never again to show her face in the world, rushed through Monna Brigida's mind. There was nothing left for her but to tend to her soul.

Of course, spectators laughed; she did not need to look around to confirm it. Very well, perhaps it would be better to be forced to think more of Paradise. But at the realization that the dear, accustomed world was no longer within her choice, hard tears gathered in her elderly eyes, blurring her vision. She could barely discern a large, rough hand holding a red cross, suddenly thrust before her over the shoulders of the boys, accompanied by a strong, guttural voice.

"Only four quattrini, madonna, blessing and all! Buy it. You will find comfort in it now that your wig is gone. *Deh!* What are we sinners doing all our lives? Making soup in a basket and receiving only the scum for our stomachs. Better buy a blessing, madonna! Only four quattrini; the profit is not even the smell of a coin, and it goes to the poor."

Monna Brigida, her eyes dim with confusion, moved toward the further submission of reaching into her embroidered *scarsella*, currently hidden by her silk mantle, when the group surrounding her—which she had not yet considered escaping—parted before a figure as welcome as an angel releasing prison bolts.

"Romola, look at me!" Monna Brigida cried in a piteous tone, extending both hands.

The white troop was already moving away, with a slight awareness that their zeal regarding the headgear had been superabundant, affording them a dispensation from demanding further penitential offerings.

"Dear cousin, do not be distressed," Romola said, smitten with pity yet hardly able to suppress a smile at the sudden apparition of her kinswoman in a genuine, natural guise, so strangely contrasted with all her memories. She removed the black drapery from her own head and draped it over Monna Brigida's. "There," she continued soothingly, "no one will notice you now. We will turn down the Via del Palagio and go straight home."

They hurried away, Monna Brigida clutching Romola's hand tightly, as if seeking a stronger assurance that her cousin was truly there.

"Ah, my Romola, my dear child!" the short, stout woman cried, hurrying with frequent steps to keep pace with the majestic young figure beside her. "What an old scarecrow I am! I must be good—I mean to be good!"

"Yes, yes; buy a cross!" the guttural voice called out, as the rough hand was thrust once more before Monna Brigida. Bratti was not to be abashed by Romola's presence into renouncing a probable customer; he had quietly followed their retreat. "Only four quattrini, blessing and all—and if there were any profit, it would all go to the poor."

Monna Brigida would have been compelled to pause, even in a less submissive mood. She raised one hand deprecatingly to arrest Romola's remonstrance, while with the other she reached out a *grosso*, worth many white quattrini, saying in an entreating tone, "Take it, good man, and begone."

"You are in the right, madonna," Bratti said, snatching the coin quickly and thrusting the cross into her hand. "I will not offer you change, for I might as well rob you of a mass. What! We must all be scorched a little, but you will come off the easier; better fall from the window than the roof. A good Easter and a good year to you!"

"Well, Romola," Monna Brigida cried pathetically as Bratti left them, "if I am to be a Piagnone, it matters not how I look!"

"Dear cousin," Romola said, smiling at her affectionately, "you do not know how much better you look than you ever did before. I see now how good-natured your face is, like yourself. That red and finery seemed to thrust themselves forward and hide your expression. Ask our Piero or any other painter if he would not rather paint your portrait now than before. I think all lines of the human face possess something either touching or grand, unless they seem to spring from low passions. How fine old men are, like my godfather! Why should not old women look grand and simple?"

"Yes, when one reaches sixty, my Romola," Brigida replied, relapsing slightly. "But I am only fifty-five, and Monna Berta, and everyone else... but it is no use: I will be good, like you. Your mother, had she lived, would have been as old as I am; we were cousins together. One *must* either die or grow old. But it does not matter about being old, if one is a Piagnone."

To Romola, the chaotic whirlwind of the Carnival seemed to leave no lasting mark upon her life save a singular, heavy duty: the tender, exhausting care of her cousin Brigida, whose spirit wavered between resignation and the frailty of age. Yet, beneath this domestic burden, a Lenten season had begun, one that demanded of her a feverish intensity of mind and a relentless physical exertion.

Bernardo del Nero had been elected Gonfaloniere. Through immense effort, the Medicean faction had secured a victory that now cast a long shadow over Romola's soul. She felt a gnawing presentiment that this triumph was merely the prologue to a secret scheme, poised to either flourish into success or curdle into betrayal within the next two months of her godfather's authority. Each morning, as the pale dawn pierced her curtains, that dread returned, cold and insistent. It accompanied her as she navigated the crowded streets toward the early sermon in the Duomo, a chilling companion until she stepped inside the great cathedral. There, amidst the clash of voices and the fervor of the crowd, the fear dissolved, much as the terror of death vanishes in the heat of battle.

Within the Duomo, Romola felt herself swept into a struggle of passion that transcended the walls of Florence itself. Savonarola was preaching—the final series of Lenten sermons he would ever be permitted to deliver before the threat of exclamation loomed. He knew his end was near, yet he preached with a defiant confidence, holding up the rot of the Church in a mirror of unflinching truth. He spoke of renovation, of a coming revolt against corruption that would shake the very foundations of Christendom. His vision oscillated wildly: at times, he saw himself as the glorious voice of a new age, resurrecting the dead body of the Church; at others, he saw only the path to martyrdom, viewing this life as a mere vigil before the true dawn.

Such a crisis possessed a terrifying gravity for all but the dull-minded, even for Machiavelli, who viewed the Friar through a lens of cynical pragmatism. But for Romola, whose own ardour mirrored Savonarola's, the stakes felt personal. The crisis blended with her daily labours, demanding not just perseverance but a new, fierce courage. Famine still stalked Florence, and the long endurance of distress had hardened the hearts of the people; disease festered in the crowded quarters, and the Plague was whispered to be at the gates. As Romola walked, weary and heavy-hearted, among the sick, the hungry, and the murmuring masses, she found solace not in pity alone, but in the belief that she served a heroic struggle for sublime ends. Her pity was but the dew that prepares the soil for a future harvest, however unseen.

Yet, the mighty music that stirred her in the Duomo was not without dissonance. Since the early days of glowing hope, when the Frate had preached peace and the coming of the French deliverer, the atmosphere had shifted. Political intrigue proved too stubborn for oblivion; the dream of French salvation had crumbled as the King turned his back on his mission; and hostility, both petty and grand, now assailed the Prophet with renewed ferocity.

Consequently, the spirit of contention seeped into his sermons. Urged by popular demand, Savonarola began to rely increasingly on visions and private revelations, adopting a tone of defiant challenge against his objectors. Having once denounced the desire for miracles, he now claimed that Divine power would soon attest his truth through a sign. In the rapid, excited transitions of his speech, as the vision of triumph receded behind the reality of evil, his threats against vicious tyrants and corrupt priests gathered momentum, fueled by personal exasperation as much as indignant zeal.

In the career of a great orator yielding to the moment's inspiration, the hidden conflict of selfish and unselfish emotion is laid bare in letters of fire. While these tones of exasperation jarred Romola, they resonated with a thrilling bass note for another member of the congregation: Baldassarre. He had discovered the Frate was preaching again and attended whenever possible, drinking in the threats of a voice that seemed to champion justice. He watched Romola closely, waiting for the right moment to seek an interview with her, noting how she too sought the Frate's gaze. Twice she had caught sight of his dark, fixed stare in the nave. She wished to avoid it, yet she looked for it, like a superstitious peasant awaiting a portent. Any revelation concerning this old man was now a secondary fear; her anxiety was consumed by the pressing present.

The stirring Lent passed, and April, the final month of her godfather's supreme authority, drew to a close. Nothing had occurred to fulfill her presentiment. Rumors from Rome spoke of menacing activity by Piero de' Medici, but soon the feared Bernardo would depart from power.

It was on the twenty-seventh, as Romola walked out on her afternoon errands of mercy, that a messenger from Camilla Rucellai intercepted her. Camilla, one of Florence's chief feminine seers, demanded Romola's presence immediately on matters of the highest moment. Romola shrank with unconquerable repulsion from the shrill volubility of such "illuminated" women, and her recent knowledge that Camilla had announced revelations hostile to Bernardo del Nero made her instinctively recoil. She was tempted to refuse flatly, to close her ears to knowledge that would only weigh down her spirit. But habit had trained her to reject impulsive cowardice; reproving herself for letting presentiments dictate her actions, she complied and went straight to Camilla.

She found the nervous, grey-haired woman in a chamber arranged like a convent cell. Thin fingers clutched at Romola as she sat, and the eager, loud whisper caused a physical shrinking that made it difficult for her to remain seated.

Camilla had a vision to communicate—a revelation from Romola's Angel stating that Romola knew certain secrets concerning her godfather, Bernardo del Nero, which, if disclosed, could save the Republic. Camilla's voice rose in pitch as she narrated, ending with an exhortation to obey the Angel's command and separate herself from the enemy of God.

Romola's impetuosity was that of a massive nature; usually calm and self-controlled, she possessed a constitutional disgust for the shallow excitability of women like Camilla, whose faculties seemed wrought entirely into fantasy. Before the exhortation concluded, Romola sprang up, attempting to wrench her arm from Camilla's tightening grasp. It was useless. The prophetess held on like a crab, only incited to greater fervor by the resistance, and launched into a shrill declaration of corroborating visions. Christ himself had appeared, ordering her to send commands to citizens in office to throw Bernardo del Nero from the window of the Palazzo Vecchio. Even Fra Girolamo knew of it and had dared not deny its divine authority this time.

"And since then," Camilla cried in her excited treble, straining upward with wild eyes toward Romola's face, "the Blessed Infant has come to me and laid a wafer of sweetness on my tongue in token of his pleasure that I had done his will."

"Let me go!" Romola said, her voice deep with anger. "God grant you are mad! Else you are detestably wicked!"

The violence of her effort finally broke Camilla's hold. Romola wrenched free and rushed out of the room, not pausing until she had hurried far down the street, finding herself close to the church of the Badia. She slipped behind the curtain under the old stone arch, entering a sanctuary shut in from the noise and hurry of the street, where every object suggested the thought of eternal peace amidst turmoil.

She sank down on the step of the altar before Filippino Lippi's serene Virgin appearing to Saint Bernard, waiting for the inward tumult to subside. The thought that pressed most acutely was that Camilla could allege Savonarola's countenance of her wicked folly. Romola did not for a moment believe he had sanctioned the throwing of Bernardo from the window as a Divine suggestion; she felt certain there was falsehood or mistake in that allegation. Savonarola had become more severe in his views on resisting malcontents, yet strict law and order were fundamental to his political teaching. Still, since he knew the fatal effects of such visions, and since he distrusted spirit-seeing women, why did he not publicly denounce these pretended revelations that brought darkness instead of light?

The answer came with painful clarity: he was fettered inwardly by the consciousness that such revelations were not distinctly separable from his own visions; he was fettered outwardly by the foreseen consequence of raising a cry against himself, even among his own party, as one who would suppress all Divine inspiration of which he himself was not the sole vehicle.

Kneeling with her face buried on the altar-step, Romola endured one of those sickening moments when the enthusiasm that had made life worthy seemed inevitably bound up with vain dreams and wilful eye-shutting. Her mind rushed back with new attraction toward the strong worldly sense, the dignified prudence, and the untheoretic virtues of her godfather. He was to be treated as a sort of Agag because he believed a restricted form of government was better than the Great Council, and because he would not pretend to forget old ties to the banished family.

With this thought rose the presentiment of a plot to restore the Medici, and then again she felt the popular party was half-justified in its fierce suspicion. She felt that keeping the Government of Florence pure was a sacred cause; the Frate was right there, and had carried her understanding irrevocably with him. But at this moment, the assent of her understanding went alone; it was given unwillingly. Her heart recoiled from a right allied to so much narrowness, a right entailing a hard, systematic judgment of men that measured them by superficial symbols rather than the manhood within. Her affection and respect clung with new tenacity to her godfather, and with him to those memories of her father, which stood in opposition to the division of men into sheep and goats by the easy mark of some political or religious symbol.

After all has been said about the widening influence of ideas, it remains true that they would hardly be such strong agents unless taken in a solvent of feeling. The great world-struggle of developing thought is continually foreshadowed in the struggle of the affections, seeking a justification for love and hope.

If Romola's intellect had been less capable of discerning the complexities in human things, all the early loving associations of her life would have forbidden her to accept implicitly the denunciatory exclusiveness of Savonarola. She had simply felt that his mind suggested deeper and more efficacious truth than any other, and the large breathing-room she found in his grand view of human duties had made her patient toward that part of his teaching she could not absorb, so long as its practical effect collided with no strong force in her. But now a sudden insurrection of feeling had brought about that collision. Her indignation, once roused by Camilla's visions, could not pause there; it ran like an illuminating fire over all the kindred facts in Savonarola's teaching, and for the moment she felt what was true in the scornful sarcasms flung against him more keenly than she felt what was false.

But it was an illumination that made all life look ghastly to her. Where were the beings to whom she could cling, with whom she could work and endure, believing she was working for the right? On the side from which moral energy came lay a fanaticism from which she was shrinking with newly-startled repulsion; on the side to which she was drawn by affection and memory, there was the presentiment of secret plotting, which her judgment told her would not be unfairly called crime. And surmounting every other thought was the dread inspired by Tito's hints, lest that presentiment should be converted into knowledge, tearing her by irreconcilable claims.

Calmness would not come even on the altar-steps; it would not come from looking at the serene picture where the saint, writing in rocky solitude, was visited by faces with celestial peace. Romola was in the hard press of human difficulties, and that solitude was too far off. She rose from her knees to hasten to her sick people in the courtyard, hoping to revive that sense of worth in life which, at this moment, was unfed by any wider faith. But when she turned round, she found herself face to face with a man standing only two yards away. The man was Baldassarre.

"I desire to speak with you," Baldassarre said, his voice cutting through the silence as Romola regarded him with a look of quiet, suspended expectation. It was evident he had trailed her, waiting patiently for this moment. She was finally prepared to confront the secret that hung over him.

"Yes," she replied, offering a submission that mirrored the tone of one accepting a penance imposed from above. "Yet you wish to withdraw where no ear can catch our words?"

"Where *he* will not stumble upon us," Baldassarre corrected, glancing nervously over his shoulder. "Out—into the open air—far from the noise of the streets."

"I occasionally visit San Miniato at this hour," Romola said. "If you will, I shall go forthwith, and you may follow. The distance is considerable, yet it guarantees solitude."

He nodded, and Romola set out. To lesser minds, venturing to such a secluded spot with a man bearing the outward marks of the madness Tito had attributed to him might have seemed a perilous gamble. But Romola possessed no such personal terrors; rather, she welcomed the separation, viewing it as a necessary buffer before the next blow could fall upon her spirit. The afternoon had deepened, the sun dipping low in the western sky, when she halted on rough terrain beneath the shadow of towering cypress trunks, scanning for Baldassarre. He was not distant, yet when he joined her, he collapsed onto the edge of a stony bank. His thickset frame, once robust and formidable when he first appeared in the Duomo with the rope around his neck, now lacked its former vigor. The exertion of climbing the hill had left his eyes with a helpless, vacant vagueness.

"The ascent is steep," Romola said, her voice soft with compassion as she sat beside him. "And I fear you have been sapped by hunger?"

He turned his head, fixing his gaze upon her in silence. When the moment demanded speech, he seemed unable to seize the words required to convey his thought. She remained as still as possible, lest he interpret her stillness as impatience. In this light, he appeared no higher than a common, neglected old man. Yet Romola was accustomed to the proximity of such suffering souls and pondered their troubles deeply. Slowly, a definite expression returned to his eyes, and with abrupt emphasis, he spoke:

"Ah! You would have been my daughter!"

A swift flush colored Romola's cheeks and faded just as quickly, leaving her lips parted in a pale, marble-like horror. The revelation struck her mind with the force of a physical blow. She divined the truths lying behind that single word, and in that first instant, the impulsive belief born of her keen experience with Tito's nature could not be checked. Her sensitive reaction served as a stimulus to Baldassarre; for the first time, his words achieved their intended effect. He proceeded with growing eagerness and firmness, laying his hand upon her arm.

"You are of proud blood—is it not so? You attend the preacher; you despise baseness—the baseness that smiles and triumphs. You hate your husband?"

"Oh God! Were you truly his father?" Romola whispered, her voice low, entirely consumed by the ghosts of the past and unable to register Baldassarre's question. "Or was it as he claimed? Did you take him when he was small?"

"Ah, you believe me—you know the truth of what he is!" Baldassarre exclaimed, tightening his grip on her arm as if the contact alone restored him power. "Will you aid me?"

"Yes," Romola answered, failing to interpret his words as he intended. She placed her palm gently over the rough hand clutching her arm, and tears welled in her eyes as she looked at him. "Oh, it is pitiful! Tell me—you were a great scholar; you taught him. How is this?"

She broke off. Tito's accusation of this man's insanity flashed through her mind, and where were the signs of past refinement? Yet she maintained her self-command, refusing to withdraw her hand. She sat perfectly still, waiting to listen with renewed caution.

"It is gone!—it is all gone!" Baldassarre cried. "They would not believe me because he lied, claiming I was mad, and they had me dragged to prison. I am old; my mind will not return. And the world stands against me."

He paused, his eyes sinking as if submerged under a wave of despondency. Then he looked up again, his voice renewing its eagerness. "But *you* are not against me. He made you love him, and he has proven false to you; you hate him. Yes, he made *me* love him: he was beautiful and gentle, while I was a lonely man. I took him when they were beating him. He slept in my bosom when he was little, and I watched him grow, giving him all my knowledge, everything I meant to be his. I possessed much—money, books, gems. He had my gems—he sold them; and he left me in slavery. He never sought me, and when I returned poor and in misery, he denied me. He called me a madman."

"He told us his father was dead—drowned," Romola murmured faintly. "Surely he must have believed it then. Oh! He could not have been so base *then*!"

A vision rose in her mind of what Tito represented to her in those early days when she thought no more of wrong in him than a child thinks of poison in flowers. The yearning regret inherent in that memory brought a fleeting relief from the tension of horror. With one great sob, tears rushed forth.

"Ah, you are young, and tears flow easily," Baldassarre said, with a hint of impatience. "But tears serve no purpose; they extinguish the fire within, and it is the fire that acts. Tears will hinder us. Listen to me."

Romola turned toward him with a slight start. Once more, the possibility of his madness darted through her mind, checking the rush of belief. If, after all, this man were merely a mad assassin? Yet her deep conviction in his story remained, and it was more out of sympathy than fear that she avoided risking pain to him by showing doubt.

"Tell me," she said as gently as possible, "how did you lose your memory—your scholarship?"

"I fell ill. I cannot say how long—it was a blank. I remember nothing, only that eventually I was sitting in the sun among the stones, and everything else was darkness. And slowly, by degrees, I felt something besides that: a longing for something—I knew not what—that never came. And when I was on the ship upon the waters, I began to know what I longed for; it was for the Boy to return—to find all my thoughts again, for I was locked away outside them all. And I am outside now. I feel nothing but a wall and darkness."

Baldassarre had become dreamy again, sinking into silence with his head resting between his hands. Once more, Romola's belief in him submerged all cautioning doubts. The pity with which she dwelt on his words seemed like the revival of an old pang. Had she not daily witnessed how her own father missed Dino and the future he had dreamed of in that son?

"It all returned once," Baldassarre continued presently. "I was master of everything. I saw the whole world again, my gems, my books; and I thought I held him in my power, so I went to expose him where—the lights shone and the trees stood. He lied again, saying I was mad, and they dragged me away to prison... Wickedness is strong; and he wears armor."

Fierceness flamed up within him again. He spoke with his former intensity, grasping Romola's arm once more.

"But you will help me? He has been false to you too. He has another wife, and she bears children. He makes her believe he is her husband, and she is a foolish, helpless creature. I will show you where she lives."

The first shock that passed through Romola was visibly one of anger. The woman's sense of indignity was inevitably paramount. Baldassarre instinctively felt her standing in sympathy with him.

"You hate him," he pressed on. "Is it not true? There is no love between you; I know that. I know women can hate; and you have proud blood. You hate falseness, and you can love revenge."

Romola sat paralyzed by the shock of conflicting emotions. She was unaware of the grasp that was bruising her tender arm.

"You shall contrive it," Baldassarre said presently, in an eager whisper. "I have committed to memory that you are his rightful wife. You are a noble woman. You go to hear the preacher of vengeance; you will aid justice. But you must think for me. My mind fails—everything goes sometimes—all but the fire. The fire is God: it is justice: it will not die. You believe that—is it not so? If they will not hang him for robbing me, you will take away his armor—you will make him go without it, and I will stab him. I possess a knife, and my arm is still strong enough."

He slid his hand beneath his tunic and drew out the hidden blade, feeling the edge abstractedly, as if he needed the sensation to keep his ideas alive.

To Romola, it seemed as if every fresh hour of her life was destined to become more difficult than the last. Her judgment was too vigorous and rapid for her to fall into the error of using futile deprecating words to a man in Baldassarre's state of mind. She chose not to answer his final speech. Instead, she would win time for his excitement to subside by asking something else she cared to know. She spoke rather tremulously—

"You say she is foolish and helpless—that other wife—and believes him to be her true husband. Perhaps he is: perhaps he married her before he married me."

"I cannot tell," Baldassarre replied, pausing in his action of feeling the knife, looking bewildered. "I remember no more. I only know where she lives. You shall see her. I will take you; but not now," he added hurriedly, "_he_ may be there. The night is approaching."

"It is true," Romola said, starting up with a sudden realization that the sun had set and the hills were darkening; "but you will come and take me—when?"

"In the morning," Baldassarre said, dreaming that she, too, wished to hasten to her vengeance.

"Come to me, then, where you came to me today, in the church. I will be there at ten; and if you are not there, I will go again towards mid-day. Can you remember?"

"Mid-day," Baldassarre repeated—"only mid-day. The same place, and mid-day. And, after that," he added, rising and grasping her arm again with his left hand while holding the knife in his right, "we will have our revenge. He shall feel the sharp edge of justice. The world is against me, but you will help me."

"I would help you in other ways," Romola said, making a first, timid effort to dispel his illusion regarding her. "I fear you are in want; you must labor and earn little. I should like to bring you comforts, and make you feel again that there is someone who cares for you."

"Speak no more of that," Baldassarre said fiercely. "I will accept nothing else. Help me to wring one drop of vengeance on this side of the grave. I have nothing but my knife. It is sharp; but there is a moment after the thrust when men see the face of death—and it shall be my face that he will see."

He released his hold and sank down again into a sitting posture. Romola felt helpless; she must defer all intentions until the morrow.

"Mid-day, then," she said in a distinct voice.

"Yes," he answered, with an air of exhaustion. "Go; I will rest here."

She hastened away. Turning at the last spot from whence he was likely to be visible, she saw him seated still.

A singular purpose drove Romola forward, a resolve that had coalesced from the scattered anxieties of the afternoon into a single, urgent necessity. Ignoring the encroaching dusk and refusing the slow, cautious protection of Maso, she crossed the bridge where the river churned black beneath the fading crimson of the sky. She took the shortest path to the Old Palace, accepting the risk of encountering her husband as a trivial price to pay for the need to speak. She did not calculate the odds; she simply had to unload the weight pressing upon her soul. Whether she passed unnoticed through the pillared court or climbed the broad stairs remained a blur; her only certainty was the desperate urgency of her request to an usher. She gave her name, demanding a private audience with the Gonfaloniere.

She was not long left alone amidst the silent frescoes and the flickering new candles. The door swung open, and Bernardo del Nero entered, his white hair held high and proud above his silk lucco.

"Romola, my child, what is this?" he asked, his voice tight with anxious surprise as he shut the door against the corridor.

She uncovered her head and moved toward him in silence. He placed a hand on her shoulder, holding her at a respectful distance to study her features. Her face was ravaged by exhaustion and prolonged turmoil, her hair tumbling in disarray, yet her eyes burned with a fierce excitement that seemed to have conquered her physical frailty.

"What has he done?" Bernardo demanded abruptly. "Speak, child; cast aside your pride. I am your father."

"It is not about myself—nothing concerns me personally," Romola replied quickly. "Dearest godfather, it concerns you. I have heard whispers—some I dare not utter. But you are in peril within these walls; you are in danger everywhere. Fanatics seek to harm you, and there are traitors among you. Trust no one. If you place your trust, you will be betrayed."

Bernardo smiled faintly.

"Have you driven yourself into such a frenzy, my poor child," he said, lifting a hand to stroke her hair gently, "to repeat such ancient truths to an old man like me?"

"Oh, no, no! These are not old truths," Romola insisted, clutching her hands together with painful force as if to stifle the words she could not yet speak. "These are fresh horrors I know, but cannot reveal. Dearest godfather, you know I am not foolish. I would not disturb you without cause. Is it too late to warn you against anyone, every single one who appears to serve your interests? Is it too late to say, 'Retreat to your villa and hide in the countryside once these final three days of office end'? Oh God! Perhaps it is too late! And if harm comes to you, it will feel as though I have caused it!"

The final words tore from her involuntarily, a long-suppressed emotion finding spasmodic release. Yet, she was startled by her own outburst and fell silent.

"I mean," she added, her voice trembling, "I know nothing definite. I only know what fills me with dread."

"Poor child!" Bernardo said, regarding her with quiet intensity for a moment. Then he spoke softly, "Go, Romola—return home and rest. These fears may merely be the monstrous shadows of something small and harmless. Even traitors require motive; the rats run only where they smell the cheese, and we do not yet know which direction the scent drifts."

He paused, turning his gaze away with an air of abstract resignation, until, with a slow shrug, he continued,

"As for warnings, they avail me nothing, child. I enter no conspiracies, yet I never abandon my colors. If I march alongside obstinate men who rush toward guns and pikes, I must share the consequences. Let us say no more of that. I have not many years left in my sack for them to steal. Go, child; return home and rest."

He touched her head again with affection, and she could not resist clinging to his arm, pressing her forehead against his shoulder. His caress felt like the final remnant of that youthful filial bond, which now appeared so bright to her even in its distress, for those troubles were untainted by malice.

"Is silence best, my Romola?" the old man asked.

"Yes, now; but I cannot tell if it will always be so," she answered hesitantly, lifting her head with a pleading gaze.

"Well, you have a father's ear while I draw breath," he said, lifting the black drapery to fold it tenderly around her head, adding, "and a father's home; remember that." Opening the door, he urged, "Hasten away. You look like a black ghost; you will find safety enough."

That night, when Romola finally succumbed to sleep, it was deep and profound. Agitation had reached its limit; she needed to gather strength before she could endure further suffering. In defiance of her rigid habits, she slept well past sunrise.

Her awakening came to the sound of gunfire. Piero de' Medici, backed by thirteen hundred men, stood before the gate facing Rome.

Romola learned this from Maso, accompanied by many circumstantial details of dubious reliability. A countryman had arrived before dawn to alarm the Signoria; otherwise, the city would have fallen by surprise. His master was absent, having been summoned to the Palazzo long ago. Romola sent the old man out again to gather news while she ascended to the loggia repeatedly, straining to discern any sign of the dreaded entry or its repulsion. Maso reported that the great Piazza teemed with armed men and that many leading citizens, suspected of favoring the Medici, had been summoned and detained. Some of the populace seemed indifferent to Piero's arrival, with rumors even suggesting the Signoria itself had invited him; yet, regardless of the truth, they offered him a grim welcome, and soldiers from Pisa were moving against him.

In her recollection of those morning hours, few external events stood out clearly above the tumultuous waves of retrospect and anticipation. She knew she had walked to the Badia at the appointed time despite the street alarms, and she knew she had waited there in vain. However, the scene she witnessed upon leaving the church, standing on the steps while the doors closed behind her for the afternoon recess, returned to her with the vivid clarity of a remembered dream.

There was a distinct shift in the faces and tones of the armed and unarmed crowds pausing or hurrying through the streets. The guns fired again, but this time the sound provoked only laughter. She soon understood the cause of the change. Piero de' Medici and his horsemen had turned their backs on Florence, galloping as fast as possible along the road to Siena. She learned this from a substantial shopkeeper, a Piagnone who had not yet laid down his pike.

"It is true," he concluded, with a bitter emphasis. "Piero is gone, but those left behind who were privy to his coming remain—we all know that; and if the new Signoria fulfills its duty, we shall soon know who they are."

The words struck Romola like a sharp spasm, but the evil they foreshadowed was not yet immediate. As she entered her home once more, her most pressing anxiety shifted to the possibility that she had lost sight of Baldassarre for a long while.

The sun stretched its golden fingers across the days, elongating them without delivering the answer Romola craved or the terror she feared. There was no word from Baldassarre, and despite the Government's vigilant eyes, the shadow of the suspected conspiracy remained unbroken. Yet, in this suspended silence, other forces surged forward, pressing close against her heart and weaving a bridge between the phantom-laden corridors of her anxiety and the tangible trials of the present. These forces were the spreading Plague and the thunderous Excommunication of Savonarola.

Both calamities served to halt her drifting away from the Frate, anchoring her once more to the man who had unveiled for her a life of sacred duty. Now, as he appeared to falter in his struggle against the tide of profligacy, Romola found she could not carry the sublime, ecstatic joy of her own existence into the hallowed halls of pestilence and suffering without acknowledging the debt she owed to Fra Girolamo. How could she witness the silencing of a soul whose greatness lay not in heresy or superstition, but in the fierce energy with which he forged the Christian life into reality, without feeling pulled irresistibly to his defense?

Deep into the scorching days of June, the decree from Rome arrived and was solemnly proclaimed within the vast expanse of the Duomo. Romola attended, seeking to fortify the sympathy she felt for Savonarola, a wellspring of her own strength. The scene stood in stark, memorable contrast to the vibrant gatherings she had known before. Gone were the upturned faces of citizens, rising in amphitheater-like tiers toward the walls to form a garland of hope around the elders; gone was the mighty voice that thrilled the heart with visions of visible and invisible struggles. Instead, the evening air grew heavy, the bare walls darkened by the flickering glow of tapers. A black and grey flock of monks and secular clergy stood with bent, expectant faces, listening to the occasional tinkling of small bells interrupting a monotonous voice that read a sentence already hanging in the air for weeks. Finally, the lights died, leaving only the slow, shuffling tread of monkish feet retreating into a dim, suffocating silence.

Romola's fervor for the Frate was doubled by the gleeful triumph etched onto the hard, coarse faces of the crowd, and by the fear-stricken confusion visible in the expressions of many of his staunchest allies. The boundary between the duty of obedience and the right of resistance was never easy to define, but here it was rendered overwhelmingly difficult by a conviction that the Church was not merely a political compromise, but a living organism infused with divine power to bless and to curse. For most pious Florentines, this belief was not a chosen opinion but an inalienable impression, as undeniable as the curve of the sky. Thus, Savonarola's bold arguments—that the Excommunication was unjust and therefore void—did not reassure them; instead, they trembled more deeply, viewing his defiance as a sacrilege cast against a mystic image whose power knew no defense.

Romola, however, had never drawn her early nourishment from the traditional currents of the Christian community where her father had lived apart. Her relation to the Church flowed solely through Savonarola; his moral force was the only authority she had ever bowed to. In his excommunication, she saw only the menace of hostile vice. On one side stood a man devoted to public virtue and spiritual purity; on the other, the assault of alarmed selfishness, led by a lustful, greedy, lying, and murderous old man—Rodrigo Borgia, now elevated to infamy as Pope Alexander the Sixth. The finer shades of truth that soften such stark antitheses are rarely seen by those not distressed by the folly of martyrs or the prudence of their burners. But Romola needed a strength that neutrality could not provide. This Excommunication, by simplifying and ennobling Savonarola's resistance, seemed to offer her a rescue from the threatening isolation of doubt. The Frate was no longer trapped in a petty antagonism with Florentine enemies; he stood simply as a standard-bearer leaping into the breach against a vicious exercise of ecclesiastical power. Life seemed clearest when the heart beat faster at the sight of such generous self-sacrifice. In that moment, there was no doubt of the highest prize the soul could win, and a renewed current of enthusiasm carried her through these difficult summer days.

She had said nothing to Tito regarding her recent interview with Baldassarre or the revelation he had made. What agitating words could she possibly extract from him? Only a cool sarcasm about her sympathy with his assassin, or perhaps nothing at all. Baldassarre was evidently helpless; the true danger was not that he would harm Tito, but that Tito, tracking him down, might devise a new scheme to rid himself of the injured man who haunted his conscience. Romola felt she could take no decisive action until she saw Baldassarre again and learned the full truth about that "other wife"—whether she was the woman to whom Tito was first bound.

The possibilities surrounding that other wife, which struck the deepest wound to her hereditary pride, mingled with the earliest memories of her illusory love. These suspicions ate away at the lingering tenderness of her past with her husband, shrinking her from Tito with a horror so profound it might have spurred a passionate outburst had he not been unusually absent from home. Like many wealthy citizens during the plague, Tito spent his leisure hours in the countryside. The agreeable Melema was welcomed at many villas, and since Romola had refused to leave the city, he had no need to maintain a country residence of his own.

Finally, in the later days of July, the alleviation of these public troubles left Romola to face the raw weight of her personal lot. The Plague had nearly vanished, and Savonarola's position had grown hopeful thanks to a favorable magistracy writing urgent vindicatory letters to Rome, entreating the withdrawal of the Excommunication. Romola's healthy frame, exhausted by continuous excitement and over-exertion, began to succumb to the inevitable languor of reaction. Yet, her mental restlessness refused to let her remain idle. During the sultry hours, she stayed indoors, but in the cool of the mornings and evenings, she walked constantly, varying her direction with a vague, desperate hope. If Baldassarre still lived, perhaps she might encounter him. Maybe some illness had paralyzed his memory, causing him to forget where she lived, or even her existence entirely. That was her most sanguine explanation for his silence. But the explanation she felt was most probable was far sadder: that he had died of the Plague.

The morning sun had grown heavy and oppressive to Romola by the time she turned from the walls of San Marco back into the intersecting lanes near Santa Croce. The Borgo La Croce lay in a profound, sun-drenched silence, so still that she could hear the rhythm of her own footsteps on the pavement. As she rounded a bend, a small figure emerged from the glare—a toddler, no older than three, clad only in a white shirt. He paused mid-waddle, his back square and sturdy beneath a cloud of reddish-brown curls.

When he turned, Romola saw dark eyes wide with tears and a lower lip trembling as he clutched his shirt in helpless fists. A tall black figure casting a shadow over him seemed to trigger a climax of bewildered fear, sending a loud sob rolling from his throat.

Acting on a maternal instinct that stirred deep within her, Romola uncovered her head, stooped low, and wrapped her arms around the child, pressing her cheek against his. At first, his cries grew louder, but he made no attempt to flee. Soon, the outburst ceased with the strange abruptness characteristic of childhood emotions; his face smoothed out, fixed in an open-mouthed stare at her.

"You have lost yourself, little one," she said softly, kissing him. "Never mind! We will find the house again. Perhaps your mother will meet us."

She sensed he had escaped while his mother's attention was elsewhere and believed he would soon be pursued.

"Oh, what a heavy, heavy boy!" she murmured, attempting to lift him. "I cannot carry you. Come, then, you must toddle back by my side."

The parted lips remained motionless in awed silence, one brown fist still gripping the shirt with tenacity, while the other yielded willingly to her soft, strong hand.

"Do you have a mother?" Romola asked, looking down at the boy with a yearning she could not suppress. He offered no answer. A girl might have chirped, but this square-shouldered little man with his big cloud of curls remained mute.

He was, however, keenly aware of his destination. At the turn by San Ambrogio, he dragged Romola toward it, looking up at her.

"Ah, that is the way home, is it?" she smiled. He merely thrust his head forward and pulled, urging her to hurry.

After another turn, Romola found herself in a short street opening onto garden grounds. The boy paused before a house at the end, pulling her toward stone stairs. He showed no desire to release her hand, and she refused to leave him without ensuring he was delivered to his guardians. They ascended the stairs, emerging from the sunlight into dimness, until a stream of light spilled from an open doorway. Passing through a small lobby, they entered another room where Romola paused. No sound greeted her arrival.

At the far end of the room, opposite the light, sat Tessa with one hand on the edge of a cradle, her head drooping slightly as she slept. Near a window, with her back to the door, Monna Lisa sat preparing salad in a deaf, unconscious state. Romola had only an instant to take in the stillness before Lillo snatched his hand away and ran to his mother's side, leaning his head back against her arm to survey Romola seriously from a distance.

As Lillo pushed against her, Tessa opened her eyes in bewilderment. But her gaze rested on the figure at the doorway, and she started up, blushing deeply and trembling, unable to speak or move forward.

"Ah! We have seen each other before," Romola said, smiling and stepping forward. "I am glad it was your little boy. He was crying in the street; I suppose he had run away. So we walked together a little way, and then he knew where he was and brought me here. But you had not missed him? That is well, else you would have been frightened."

The shock of discovering Lillo had wandered away overwhelmed Tessa. Her color drained, and seizing the boy's arm, she ran to Monna Lisa, whispering loudly in the old woman's ear with a half-sob:

"Oh, Lisa, you are wicked! Why did you stand with your back to the door? Lillo ran away ever so far into the street."

"Holy Mother!" Monna Lisa exclaimed in her meek, thick tone, dropping her spoon. "Where were *you*, then? I thought you were there, watching him."

"But you *know* I go to sleep when I rock," Tessa retorted pettishly.

"Well, well, we must keep the outer door shut, or tie him up," Monna Lisa advised. "For he'll be as cunning as Satan before long, and that's the holy truth. But how did he come back?"

This question brought Tessa back to the present. Without answering, she turned toward Romola, blushing and timid again, while Monna Lisa's eyes followed her. The old woman made a low reverence and said, "Doubtless the most noble lady brought him back." Advancing slightly, she added, "It is my shame that he was found with only his shirt on; but he kicked and wouldn't wear his other clothes this morning, and the mother, poor thing, will never hear of him being beaten. But what can an old woman do without a stick when the lad's legs get so strong? Let your nobleness look at his legs."

Lillo, conscious his legs were being inspected, pulled his shirt up higher and looked down at their olive roundness with a dispassionate curiosity. Romola laughed, stooping to give him a caressing shake and a kiss. This action helped reassure Tessa, who had already begun to feel relief from Monna Lisa's respectful address. For when Naldo had been told of the adventure at the Carnival, and Tessa had asked who the heavenly lady who appeared just when needed might be—perhaps the Holy Madonna herself?—he had replied, "Not exactly, my Tessa; only one of the saints," choosing not to elaborate. Thus, in Tessa's dreamlike combination of small experiences, Romola remained confusedly associated with church pictures. When she reappeared, the grateful memory of her protection was slightly tinged with religious awe—not deeply, for Tessa's dread was chiefly of ugly and evil beings. It seemed unlikely that good beings would be angry and punish her, as Nofri and the devil were wont to do. Now that Monna Lisa spoke freely of Lillo's legs and Romola laughed, Tessa felt more at ease.

"Ninna is in the cradle," she said. "She's pretty too."

Romola went to look at the sleeping Ninna, and Monna Lisa, one of the exceptionally meek deaf who never expected to be spoken to, returned to her salad.

"Ah! She is waking; she has opened her blue eyes," Romola noted. "You must take her up, and I will sit down in this chair—may I?—and nurse Lillo. Come, Lillo!"

She sat in Tito's chair and extended her arms toward the lad, whose eyes had followed her. He hesitated, pointing his small fingers at her with a half-puzzled, half-angry expression. "That's Babbo's chair," he said, not seeing how to resolve the difficulty if Babbo returned to find Romola in his place.

"But Babbo is not here, and I shall go soon. Come, let me nurse you as he does," Romola said, wondering for the first time what sort of Babbo he was whose wife was dressed in contadina fashion yet possessed a certain daintiness indicating idleness and plenty. Lillo consented to be lifted, and finding the lap exceedingly comfortable, began to explore her dress and hands, searching for ornaments beside the rosary.

Tessa, having coaxed Ninna out of her waking peevishness, sat down in her low chair near Romola's knee, arranging Ninna's tiny person with jealousy that the strange lady seemed to notice the boy as much as Naldo did.

"Lillo was going to be angry with me because I sat in Babbo's chair," Romola said, bending to kiss Ninna's little foot. "Will he come soon and want it?"

"Ah, no!" Tessa replied. "You can sit in it a long while. I shall be sorry when you go. When you first came to take care of me at the Carnival, I thought it wonderful; you came and went away so fast. And Naldo said, perhaps you were a saint, and that made me tremble a little, though the saints are very good, I know; and you were good to me, and now you have taken care of Lillo. Perhaps you will always come and take care of me. That was how Naldo did a long while ago; he came and took care of me when I was frightened, one San Giovanni. I couldn't think where he came from—he was so beautiful and good. And so are you," Tessa concluded, looking up at Romola with devout admiration.

"Naldo is your husband. His eyes are like Lillo's," Romola said, examining the boy's darkly pencilled eyebrows, unusual for his age. She spoke not interrogatively, but with a quiet certainty of inference that was necessarily mysterious to Tessa.

"Ah! You know him!" Tessa said, pausing in wonder. "Perhaps you know Nofri and Peretola, and our house on the hill, and everything. Yes, like Lillo's; but not his hair. His hair is dark and long—" she continued, growing excited. "Ah! If you know it, ecco!"

She placed her hand on a thin red silk cord around her neck and drew from her bosom the tiny old parchment *Breve*, a horn of red coral, and a long dark curl carefully tied at one end and suspended with those mystic treasures. She held them toward Romola, keeping them away from Ninna's snatching hand.

"It is a fresh one. I cut it lately. See how bright it is!" she said, laying it against the white background of Romola's fingers. "They get dim, and then he lets me cut another when his hair grows; and I put it with the *Breve*, because sometimes he is away a long while, and then I think it helps to take care of me."

A slight shiver passed through Romola as the curl was laid across her fingers. At Tessa's first mention of her husband arriving mysteriously from unknown quarters, a possibility had risen before Romola that made her heart beat faster; for one anxiously searching for a certain object finds peculiar significance in the faintest suggestions. And when the curl was held toward her, it seemed for an instant like a mocking phantom of the lock she herself had cut five years ago. Yet she preserved her outward calmness, bent not only on knowing the truth but on arriving at that knowledge in a way that would not pain this poor, trusting, ignorant creature with the child's mind in a woman's body. "Foolish and helpless:" yes; so far she corresponded to Baldassarre's account.

"It is a beautiful curl," she said, resisting the impulse to withdraw her hand. "Lillo's curls will be like it, perhaps, for his cheek, too, is dark. And you never know where your husband goes when he leaves you?"

"No," Tessa said, putting back her treasures out of the children's way. "But I know Messer San Michele takes care of him, for he gave him a beautiful coat, all made of little chains; and if he puts that on, nobody can kill him. And perhaps, if—"

Tessa hesitated, under a recurrence of that original dreamy wonder about Romola which had been dispelled by chatting contact—"if you *were* a saint, you would take care of him, too, because you have taken care of me and Lillo."

An agitated flush came over Romola's face in the first moment of certainty, but she had bent her cheek against Lillo's head. The feeling that leaped out in that flush was something like exultation at the thought that the wife's burden might be about to slip from her overladen shoulders; that this little ignorant creature might prove to be Tito's lawful wife. A strange exultation for a proud and high-born woman to experience! But it seemed to Romola as if that were the only issue that would make duty anything other than an insoluble problem. Yet she was not deaf to Tessa's last appealing words; she raised her head and said, in her clearest tones—

"I will always take care of you if I see you need me. But that beautiful coat? Your husband did not wear it when you were first married? Perhaps he used not to be so long away from you then?"

"Ah, yes! He was. Much—much longer. So long, I thought he would never come back. I used to cry. Oh me! I was beaten then; a long, long while ago at Peretola, where we had the goats and mules."

"And how long had you been married before your husband had that chain-coat?" Romola asked, her heart beating faster and faster.

Tessa looked meditative and began counting on her fingers, while Romola watched them as if they would reveal the secret of her destiny.

"The chestnuts were ripe when we were married," Tessa said, marking off her thumb and fingers again as she spoke; "and then again they were ripe at Peretola before he came back, and then again, after that, on the hill. And soon the soldiers came, and we heard the trumpets, and then Naldo had the coat."

"You had been married more than two years. In which church were you married?" Romola asked, too entirely absorbed by one thought to pose any question less direct. Perhaps before the next morning she might go to her godfather and declare she was not Tito Melema's lawful wife—that the vows binding her to strive after an impossible union had been rendered void beforehand.

Tessa gave a slight start at Romola's new tone of inquiry and looked up with a hesitating expression. Hitherto she had prattled on without consciousness that she was making revelations, any more than when she repeated old things to Monna Lisa.

"Naldo said I was never to tell about that,"

Tito possessed ample justification for his claim of safety. Over the preceding three months, anticipating the inevitable exposure of the Medicean conspirators, he had meticulously fortified his position. He had expanded his influence in Rome and Milan, acting as a conduit for clandestine intelligence and executing subtle maneuvers against the Frate and the popular faction. Simultaneously, he had cultivated the favor of that very popular party with deceptive fervor, projecting an image of unwavering political alignment. Yet, paradoxically, he had deepened his reliance on the Mediceans, seeking their exclusive trust and active employment. This triple game was effortlessly maintained. The Mediceans, accustomed to duplicity in their own dealings, lacked the moral framework to judge a colleague devoid of hereditary ties and traditional prejudices. To them, deceiving the enemy was a legitimate strategy; deceiving their own was a baseness they did not entertain. In employing Tito's facile talents, they remained blind to the fact that his lack of ancestral attachment—their primary safeguard of honor—was precisely what rendered him a perfect instrument of betrayal. Similarly, the *Arrabbiati*, the aristocratic enemies of Savonarola, operated a network of espionage rooted in profound hypocrisy, demanding exorbitant fees for their services. Suspecting an agent merely because he played a role convincingly was, in their eyes, a logical fallacy. Conversely, the *Piagnoni* of the popular party, driven by the directness of energetic conviction, were inclined to believe Tito's professed loyalty, largely because he feigned no religious sympathy.

Under these conditions, the last quarter had been a period of flattering success for Tito. His primary ambition was to secure a permanent station in Rome or Milan. He harbored a growing resolve to abandon Florence for a great capital where life was less arduous and the rewards for talent more splendid. Currently, the scales tipped toward Milan; if he could render decisive services to Duke Ludovico Sforza within the year, the prospect of a court appointment outweighed the allure of Rome.

The revelation of the Medicean conspiracy was, therefore, a calculated risk Tito had anticipated, though not the specific manner of its occurrence. The arrest of Lamberto dell'Antella, found in possession of incriminating correspondence and fueled by bitter hatred for the Medici, was an unforeseen variable. Despite the careful pretexts guarding his agency, Tito could not escape implication in a broad discovery. However, his sharp mind quickly charted a course to ensure his safety with minimal collateral damage. While it is pleasant to remain unscathed, one must acknowledge that the skin remains sensitive to the atmosphere.

His calculations proved accurate. That night, before returning home, he secured the three outcomes he desired: immunity from prosecution regarding his Medicean complicity, the retention of his secretaryship for another year, and the strict confidentiality of the price exacted for these guarantees. A sum considered heavy by most, and one Tito himself would have preferred to avoid paying, it was nonetheless the currency of his survival.

His first move was to win over Francesco Valori, head of the *Piagnoni* and one of the Ten under whom Tito served. Valori, a man of fine qualities tempered by violent partisanship, an arrogant temper, and deep-seated animosity toward Bernardo del Nero, was also a member of the special council investigating the plot. In a brief, private interview sealed by a pledge of secrecy, Tito confessed his agency for the Mediceans, citing motives he presented with frankness. He declared his belief in the futility of their efforts and his sincere preference for the popular government. He feigned confidence in Valori, revealing his personal dislike for Bernardo del Nero, before delivering his crucial proposition: there existed another Medicean plot, and if granted certain conditions, he could travel to Siena and Romagna, where Piero de' Medici was gathering forces, to obtain documentary evidence for the council. This mission required that his reputation as a Medicean agent remain unblemished in the eyes of his former masters; thus, his role as a source of information to the authorities had to be buried in profound secrecy. Yet, fearing that even precautions might leak, he insisted on immediate assurances of immunity from prosecution and job security for the coming year.

These propositions did not resonate with Valori as they do with modern sensibilities. Valori's mind was not focused on weighing Tito's moral conduct; it was singularly obsessed with securing an extreme sentence against the five prisoners. He anticipated immense efforts to save them and believed that the strongest possible evidence was necessary to alarm the populace to the dangers of clemency. In the legal culture of the time, evidence was a commodity attainable only through foul means. Torturing suspects into confession was viewed as a step toward justice, and the appearance of a traitor was often welcomed to validate the guilt of others. Lamberto dell'Antella had been tortured to extract knowledge he barely possessed, yet stronger facts were deemed essential, particularly against Bernardo del Nero, who had thus far refrained from betraying the plot despite previous attempts to discourage it. For Valori, the welfare of Florence demanded that Bernardo's guilt be illuminated in the starkest light. Driven by zeal, perhaps unconsciously fueled by his own hatred, Valori accepted Tito's proposal. He presented it to his colleagues anonymously and secured their agreement. Late that afternoon, Tito was summoned before the Special Council. By revealing a second plot designed to install Piero de' Medici as master of Florence, scheduled for execution in mid-August, he caused a sensation. He argued that documentary evidence would clarify the right course of action. He was commissioned to depart for Siena at dawn and, departing from the council chamber, carried with him a written guarantee of his immunity and the retention of his office.

Among the twenty Florentines who regarded Tito with grave eyes as he stood before them, speaking of startling matters with easy circumlocution and an apparent lack of higher motive—a mask often worn by the most intense affectation—some began to reassess him. They silently concluded that this ingenious and serviceable Greek was now to be utilized for public necessity rather than private intimacy. Unprincipled men were useful tools, allowing those with scruples to keep their hands relatively clean in a world requiring dirty work. Indeed, it was unclear to the respectable Florentine mind, unless one adhered to the Frate's extravagant belief in earthly purity, how any department of life could function without instruments whom it was proper to kick or spit upon while paying their wages. Some of these very men, soon to be engaged in a memorable transaction requiring unscrupulousness as resolute as Tito's, reflected on the dichotomy of their nature. As their own poet Pulci had noted: "Betrayal pleases many, but no one likes the traitor." Society had erected gibbets for both murderers and martyrs, offering execrations for both dastardly acts and words of generous truth. This mixed condition signaled not hopelessness, but a struggling order.

For Tito himself, he was acutely aware that he had slightly diminished in the esteem of those who had accepted his services. Possessing the self-contemplation inherent in acting on well-considered reasons, he would have preferred to avoid their disapproval. He had never intended to be judged poorly; he aimed to conduct himself so ably that opposition to societal standards went unnoticed. The barrier between himself and Romola had been raised by the impossibility of such concealment with her. He shrank from condemnatory judgments as one shrinks from a climate to which he cannot adapt. Yet, reality was not as malleable as cleverness wished, and events had turned inconveniently. He bore no rancor against Messer Bernardo del Nero; he held personal likings for Lorenzo Tornabuoni and Giannozzo Pucci. He had served them ably, meriting high reward had their party prevailed. Was he to relinquish the agreeable fruits of life solely because their party had failed? His offer of additional proof against them would likely alter their fate little; he was convinced they would escape extreme consequences. Had he withheld it, however, his own promising fortunes would have been utterly ruined. What motive could any man possess but self-interest? Florentines engaged in petty political schemes might derive self-interest from family pride and ancient hatreds; a modern simpleton swallowing an old philosophy might mistake indigestion for divine influx; fanatics believing in the coming Scourge might find their interest in a future palm-branch. But no man of clear intellect allowed his course to be determined by such puerile impulses or questionable inward fumes. Did not Pontanus, poet and philosopher of unrivalled Latinity, deliver the finest oration at Naples welcoming the French king, who came to dethrone his royal friend and patron? And yet, Pontanus held his head high and prospered. Men did not truly care about such things unless their personal spleen was touched. Weakness alone was despised; power carried immunity. No man could mount high without incurring unpleasant necessities that laid him open to enmity, and perhaps to hissing, when enmity sought a pretext.

It was a faint prognostic of that hissing, gathered by Tito from indications during his audience, that gave his present conduct the character of an epoch. It was not that he was taking a deeper step in wrongdoing, for he felt no tie to the Mediceans stronger than that to his father. His conduct toward his father had been hidden by successful lying; his present act, however, admitted of no total concealment—it was, in its very nature, a revelation. Tito winced under this new liability to disesteem.

Very well. A little patience, and in another year, or perhaps half a year, he might turn his back on these hard, eager Florentines with their futile quarrels and sinking fortunes. His brilliant success in Florence had indeed possessed ugly flaws: he had fallen in love with the wrong woman, and Baldassarre had returned under incalculable circumstances. But as Tito galloped with a loose rein toward Siena, he saw a future ahead where he would no longer be haunted by those mistakes. He had much money safely out of Florence; he was in the fresh ripeness of twenty-eight years; he was conscious of well-tried skill. Could he not strip himself of the past, as of rehearsal clothing, and discard the old bundle to robe himself for the real scene?

It did not enter Tito's meditations on the future that, as he issued from the council-chamber and descended the stairs, he had brushed against a man whose face he had not paused to recognize in the lamplight. The man was Ser Ceccone—also willing to serve the State by providing information against unsuccessful employers.

Tito returned from Siena with swift efficiency, yet his departure marked the beginning of a longer absence; he did not return until the seventeenth of August. Nearly two weeks had elapsed since the arrest of the accused, and the shadow of uncertainty still clung to them within the prison walls. For Romola, these days had felt like a suspension of existence, her entire world narrowed to the precarious balance of probabilities regarding their fate. The mood in the city was a volatile mixture of fear and calculation. On one hand, the clamor grew louder that the Republic teetered on the brink of ruin, and that mercy shown to the prisoners would invite immediate attack from their enemies. On the other, the certainty loomed that condemning five citizens of such distinguished standing to death and confiscating their estates would breed a rancorous hatred from their families that no authority could withstand.

The power to deliver the final judgment rested with the Eight, the magistrates overseeing criminal justice, whose sentence required a majority of six votes. Yet, the Eight recoiled from this heavy burden, requesting that the responsibility be shared by the Signoria—the Gonfaloniere and the eight Priors. The Signoria, in turn, shrugged off the weight, proposing an appeal to the Great Council. According to a law championed by Savonarola three years prior, any citizen condemned to death by the "six beans" (*set fave*) possessed the right to appeal to the Great Council. However, at this critical juncture, the friends of the accused resisted the formal appeal, driven primarily by a desperate need for delay. Since strict legality demanded a sentence be passed before an appeal could be lodged, their resistance forced a compromise: the case was referred to a massive assembly convened on the seventeenth, comprising all higher magistracies, the Senate of Eighty, and a select body of citizens.

On this fateful day, Romola, her anxiety sharpened by the fear that her godfather's destiny might be sealed before the proceedings concluded, had secured leave to visit him for the second time, though only in the presence of witnesses. She returned to the Via de' Bardi accompanied by her cousin, Monna Brigida, who remained unaware of whether the council had reached a decisive verdict. Brigida departed again to await news at a friend's house within one of the magistracies, promising to return with authentic tidings the moment they were available.

Exhausted and sick at heart, Romola collapsed onto the first seat in the bright saloon, too agitated to care for her surroundings or notice the discordant arrangement of the room. She sat with her back to the door, resting her head in her hands, waiting for Brigida's return. When the door finally opened, she knew instantly that it was not her cousin who entered.

Since her parting from Tito on that memorable night, Romola had possessed no external proof that he had secured his safety through treachery. To the contrary, she had evidence that he was still trusted by the Mediceans, believed to be carrying out their errands in Romagna under the guise of a government commission. The obscurity surrounding the conspirators allowed the comforting illusion that Tito had escaped any implication. Yet, Romola's suspicion was insurmountable. Her horror at his conduct toward Baldassarre projected itself over every interpretation of his actions; it was as if she had witnessed a murder and carried a permanent, diseased impression that his hands were stained with fresh blood.

As she heard his step on the stone floor, a chill shudder ran through her. She could not turn, could not rise to offer greeting. He did not speak but, after a brief pause, took a seat opposite her across the table. When she finally raised her eyes to meet his gaze, she found herself mute. He showed no irritation, only a cool composure.

"This meeting corresponds with our parting, Romola," he said softly. "But I understand it is a moment of terrible suspense. I have come, if you will listen, to bring you the relief of hope."

Romola started, shifting her position but regarding him with deep doubt.

"It will not be unwelcome to hear—even though it is I who tell it—that the council is prorogued until the twenty-first. The Eight have finally been frightened into passing a sentence of condemnation, but a demand has now been made on behalf of the condemned for an Appeal to the Great Council."

Romola's doubtful expression vanished; she asked eagerly, "And when is it to be made?"

"It has not yet been granted, but it *may* be. The Special Council meets again on the twenty-first to deliberate whether the Appeal shall be allowed. In the meantime, there is an interval of three days—a window in which chances may arise in favor of the prisoners, where interest may be used on their behalf."

Romola sprang from her seat. Color rushed to her face like a visible thought, and her hands trembled. In that instant, her feelings toward Tito were forgotten.

"Possibly," Tito said, rising as well, "your own intention anticipated what I was about to say. You are thinking of the Frate."

"I am," Romola replied, looking at him with surprise. "Has he done something? Is there anything to tell me?"

"Only this: it was Messer Francesco Valori's bitterness and violence that chiefly determined the council's course today. Half the men who voted against the prisoners were frightened into it. There are numerous friends of Fra Girolamo, both inside and outside this Special Council, who strongly oppose the death sentence—Piero Guicciardini, for instance, a member of the Signoria who offered stoutest resistance; and Giovan Battista Ridolfi, who, as a Piagnone, will not lightly forgive the death of his brother Niccolò."

"But how can the Appeal be denied?" Romola cried indignantly. "When it is the law! Was it not one of the chief glories of our popular government to enact such a law?"

"They call this an exceptional case. Of course, there are ingenious arguments, but there is much more loud bluster about the danger to the Republic. Yet, no opposition could prevent the assembly from being prorogued. A certain powerful influence, rightly applied during these next three days, might determine the wavering courage of those who wish the Appeal granted, and perhaps check the headlong enmity of Francesco Valori. It has come to my knowledge that the Frate has already interfered by sending a message to Valori in favor of Lorenzo Tornabuoni. I know you sometimes have access to the Frate; it would certainly be worthwhile to use your privilege now."

"It is true," Romola said, her voice abstracted. "I cannot believe the Frate would approve of denying the Appeal."

"I heard it said by many in the Palazzo court before I left that it would be to Fra Girolamo's everlasting discredit to allow a government composed almost entirely of his party to deny the Appeal without protest, especially when he boasts in his books and sermons that he secured the law's passage. But between ourselves, with all respect for your Frate's ability, my Romola, he has fallen into the habit of preaching that form of human sacrifice called killing tyrants and wicked malcontents—a stance some of his followers might find inconsistent with lenity in this specific case."

*I know, I know,* Romola thought, pain etching her features. *He is driven into those excesses of speech. It used to be different.* "I *will* ask for an interview. I cannot rest without it. I trust in the greatness of his heart."

She did not look at Tito; her eyes were bent in a vague gaze toward the ground, lacking distinct consciousness of the words issuing from her husband.

"Better lose no time, then," Tito said, his tone unmixt with suavity, moving his cap in his hands as if preparing to depart. "And now, Romola, you will perhaps be able to see, despite prejudice, that my wishes align with yours in this matter. You will not regard the misfortune of my safety as an offense."

An electric shock passed through Romola: the full, crushing consciousness of her husband's presence returned to her. She looked at him without speaking.

"At least," he added, his tone hardening slightly, "you will endeavor to base our intercourse on reasonings other than the fact that an evil deed is possible, *I* have done it. Am I alone to be cast beyond the pale of your extensive charity?"

The feeling that had been suppressed from Romola's lips two weeks prior rose again with the gathered force of a tidal wave. She spoke with a decision that signaled her disregard for consequences.

"It is too late, Tito. There is no killing the suspicion that deceit has once begotten. And now I know everything. I know who that old man was: he was your father, to whom you owe everything—to whom you owe more than if you had been his own child. By comparison, it is a small thing that you broke my trust and my father's. As long as you deny the truth about that old man, a horror rises between us; the law that should make us one can never be obeyed. I too am a human being. I have a soul of my own that abhors your actions. Our union is a pretense—as if a perpetual lie could be a sacred marriage."

Tito did not answer immediately. When he finally spoke, it was with calculated caution, stimulated by alarm.

"And you mean to carry out that independence by quitting me, I presume?"

"I desire to quit you," Romola said impetuously.

"And suppose I do not submit to part with what the law gives me some security for retaining? You will then, of course, proclaim your reasons in the ear of all Florence. You will bring forward your mad assassin, who is doubtless ready to obey your call, and tell the world that you believe his testimony because he is so rational as to desire to assassinate me. You will first inform the Signoria that I am a Medicean conspirator, and then inform the Mediceans that I have betrayed them. In both cases, you will offer the excellent proof that you believe me capable in general of everything bad. It will certainly be a striking position for a wife to adopt. And if, on such evidence, you succeed in holding me up to infamy, you will have surpassed all the heroines of the Greek drama."

He paused, but she stood mute. He continued with a sense of mastery.

"I believe you have no other grievance against me—except that I failed in fulfilling some lofty, indefinite conditions on which you gave me your wifely affection, so that, by withdrawing it, you have gradually reduced me to the careful supply of your wants as a fair Piagnone of high condition and liberal charities. I think your success in gibbeting me is not certain. But doubtless you would begin by winning the ear of Messer Bernardo del Nero?"

"Why do I speak of anything?" Romola cried in anguish, sinking back onto her chair. "It is hateful in me to be thinking of myself."

She did not notice when Tito left the room, nor did she know how long it was before the door opened to admit Monna Brigida. But in that instant, she sprang up and declared, "Cousin, we must go to San Marco directly. I must see my confessor, Fra Salvestro."

The morning broke with a pale, earnest light as Romola set out for San Marco. She had secured, the night before through Fra Salvestro, a rare audience with Fra Girolamo in the chapter-house. Such meetings were exceptional; Savonarola guarded his solitude with a rigidity that brooked no pretext for slander, ensuring that when he did grant access, it was stripped of all mystery. Thus, she arrived during the bustling hours of the outer cloisters, when the air was thick with the chatter of lay visitors.

She chose to traverse the heart of the city first, seeking to read the pulse of public sentiment. Every loggia and corner of the piazza buzzed with the feverish energy of gratuitous debate. The languor of trade had given way to the vigor of politics; the factions supporting and opposing the death of the conspirators were desperate to gauge the popular mood during these three days of suspension. Handbills fluttered through the streets like black birds. Some proclaimed in massive, bold letters the stark choice: justice for the conspirators or ruin for the Republic. Others, equally shouting, demanded the observance of the law and the granting of the Appeal. Around these islands of giant type swarmed smaller print, offering arguments deemed unnecessary to read aloud, for in the fresh flush of the printing press's triumph, it was believed that no phrase could convince the masses quite like a question-begging headline.

Romola, however, cared little for the shouting headlines. She sought the quiet, complex arguments in the smaller type. Though she hurried, her eyes scanned the crowds anxiously for copies. For a long stretch, she found only sheets clutched by eager readers or torn from walls by the *sbirri*. Finally, passing behind San Giovanni, she spotted Bratti, a familiar face of the humble Florentine life, exchanging pamphlets for small coins.

"Have you both sorts, Bratti?" she asked, her voice cutting through his slow movements. "Let me have them quickly."

"Two sorts," Bratti replied, separating the damp sheets with a deliberate slowness that tested her patience. "'Law,' and 'Justice.'"

"Which sells faster?"

"'Justice.' It flies off the shelves, so I raised the price to two danari. But then I thought, 'Law' is just as worthy a commodity. People scorn cheap things; if I sold 'Law' for one danaro, I'd be wronging it. I'm a fair trader. Both are good wares, bought for nothing and sold for profit. You want more than one of each?"

"No," Romola said, pressing a white quattrino into his hand and snatching the bills before he could elaborate further. She folded them tightly and hastened toward the convent.

In the outer cloisters, Fra Salvestro awaited her, lost in conversation with lay visitors. Under the current government, the fear that had gripped San Marco following the Excommunication was slowly receding. Among the listeners was Andrea Cambini, a known satellite of Francesco Valori, gesturing emphatically as he recounted news. Fra Salvestro listened with that trivial curiosity that signals a mind interested in gossip rather than truth. Romola recognized the topic immediately from the disjointed fragments reaching her ear: the fate of the conspirators. She avoided the group, waiting until Fra Salvestro's attention shifted before turning toward the chapter-house door. A lay brother opened it for her, closing it softly behind her.

Inside, the sad frescoed figures seemed to mourn anew with her the death of her brother Dino. Yet, the intensity of her present dread rendered the memory less a clear picture than a blur of impressions, blending with her agitating fears. She felt her current anxiety as a revival of a past yearning, once again repelled by the cold rigidity of marble. Without pausing to dwell on the past, she unfolded the handbills, hoping to read them before Fra Girolamo's arrival. By the time she finished the pamphlet urging legal observance, the door swung open, and she stood expectant, papers doubled in her hands.

When the Frate entered, she knelt, adhering to the custom of those who sought private audiences. But as soon as he offered a benedictory greeting, she rose and stood opposite him at a respectful distance. His seclusion since the Excommunication meant this was their first meeting in months, and the years had etched deeper lines of mental strain and physical austerity onto his face. Yet, Romola felt less the weight of age than a subtle shift in his essence. Was the serene elevation and pure fellowship that had once moved her diminished? Or was it the growing sense of division regarding her godfather that clouded her vision? Perhaps both currents ran together. Our relations with others are often decided by such converging tides; the final blow rarely comes until affection has been eroded by repeated excuses.

Savonarola's gaze held a hardness born of self-preoccupation. He sensed the purpose of her visit—the fate of the conspirators—and knew he had already silenced inner voices that might grow loud if encouraged from without. Seated in his cell, correcting the sheets of his *Triumph of the Cross*, he found it easier to maintain a posture of neutrality.

"It is a matter of great moment, doubtless, on which you wish to see me, my daughter," he began, his tone gentle, though controlled rather than inclined. "I know you do not usually stress trifles."

"Father, you know what it is before I speak," Romola said, pouring forth her plea instantly. "You know what I care for—it is the life of the old man I love best in the world. The thought of him has accompanied the thought of my father since I can remember daylight. That is my warrant for coming to you, even if my coming proves needless. Perhaps you have already decided that your power over hearts will be used to deny Florentines a right you yourselves helped secure."

"I meddle not with the functions of the State, my daughter," Fra Girolamo replied, disinclined to reopen a debate he had already wrestled with internally. "I have preached and labored that Florence should have a good government, for it is needful to the perfecting of the Christian life; but I keep my hands from particular affairs which it is the office of experienced citizens to administer."

"Surely, father—" Romola broke off. The word escaped her impetuously, but she was halted by the counter-agitation of feeling herself in an attitude of remonstrance toward the man who had been her guide and strength. In the act of rebelling, she bruised her own reverence.

Savonarola was too keen not to divine the conflict arresting her—too noble, deliberately, to assume the calm, self-justifying evasiveness he often displayed in public.

"Say what is in your heart; speak on, my daughter," he said, standing with arms crossed, looking at her with quiet expectation.

"I was going to say, father, that this matter is surely of higher moment than many about which I have heard you preach fervidly. If it belonged to you to urge that men condemned for offenses against the State should have the right to appeal to the Great Council—if—Romola grew eager—"if you count it a glory to have won that right for them, can it less belong to you to declare yourself against the right being denied to almost the first men who need it? Surely that touches the Christian life more closely than whether you knew beforehand that the Dauphin would die, or whether Pisa will be conquered."

A subtle movement, like a subdued sign of pain, crossed Savonarola's strong lips before he spoke.

"My daughter, I speak as it is given me to speak. I am not master of the times when I may become the vehicle of knowledge beyond the common lights of men. In this case, I have no illumination beyond what wisdom may give to those charged with the safety of the State. As to the law of Appeal against the Six Votes, I labored to have it passed so that no Florentine should suffer loss of life or goods through the private hatred of a few in power. But these five men, who desired to overthrow a free government and restore a corrupt tyrant, have been condemned with the assent of a large assembly of their fellow-citizens. They refused at first to bring their cause before the Great Council. They have lost the right to the appeal."

"How can they have lost it?" Romola cried. "It is the right to appeal against condemnation, and they have never been condemned till now! And forgive me, father, it *is* private hatred that would deny them the appeal; it *is* the violence of the few that frightens others. Else why was the assembly divided again directly after it seemed to agree? And if anything weighs against the observance of the law, let this weigh for it: that you used to preach more earnestly than all else that there should be no place for hatred and bloodshed born of party strife, so that private ill-will should not find opportunity in public acts. Father, you know there is private hatred here. Will it not dishonor you not to interpose on the side of mercy, when many hold it is also the side of law and justice?"

"My daughter," Savonarolo said, with more visible emotion than before, "there is a mercy which is weakness, and even treason against the common good. The safety of Florence, which means even more than the welfare of Florentines, now demands severity, as it once demanded mercy. It is not only for a past plot that these men are condemned, but also for a plot which has not yet been executed. The devices leading to its execution remain active: the tyrant still gathers his forces in Romagna, and the enemies of Florence, who sit in the highest places of Italy, are ready to hurl any stone that will crush her."

"What plot?" Romola asked, reddening and trembling with alarmed surprise.

"You carry papers in your hand, I see," Savonarola pointed out, indicating the handbills. "One of them will, perhaps, tell you the government has new information."

Romola hastily opened the unread pamphlet and saw that the government now possessed positive evidence of a second plot, scheduled for this very August. To her mind, it felt like reading a confirmation that Tito had won his safety by foul means; his pretense of wanting the Frate to act on behalf of the condemned only deepened her wretched conviction. She crushed the paper in her hand and turned to Savonarola with new passion.

"Father, what safety can there be for Florence when the worst man can always escape? And," she continued, a sudden flash of remembrance striking her regarding her husband, "have not you yourself encouraged this deception which corrupts the life of Florence, by wanting more favor shown to Lorenzo Tornabuoni, who wears two faces and flatters you with a show of affection, when my godfather has always been honest? Ask all Florence who of those five men has the truest heart, and there will not be many who will name any other than Bernardo del Nero. You did interpose with Francesco Valori for the sake of one prisoner; you have *not* then been neutral. And you know that your word will be powerful."

"I do not desire the death of Bernardo," Savonarola said, coloring deeply. "It would be enough if he were sent out of the city."

"Then why do you not speak to save an old man of seventy-five from dying a death of ignominy—to give him at least the fair chances of the law?" Romola burst out, her nature so roused by indignation that she forgot everything else. "It is not that you feel bound to be neutral; else why did you speak for Lorenzo Tornabuoni? You spoke for him because he is more friendly to San Marco; my godfather feigns no friendship. It is not, then, as a Medicean that my godfather is to die; it is as a man you have no love for!"

When Romola paused, cheeks glowing and lips quivering, there was a dead silence. As she saw Fra Girolamo standing motionless before her, she seemed to hear her own words echoing in strange, painful dissonance with the memories that made part of his presence to her. The moments of silence expanded with gathering compunction and self-doubt. She had committed sacrilege in her passion. Even the sense that she could retract nothing of her plea, that her mind could not submit to Savonarola's negative, made it more needful to satisfy those reverential memories. With a sudden movement toward him, she said:

"Forgive me, father; it is pain to me to have spoken those words—yet I cannot help speaking. I am little and feeble compared with you; you brought me light and strength. But I submitted because I felt the proffered strength—because I saw the light. *Now* I cannot see it. Father, you yourself declare that there comes a moment when the soul must have no guide but the voice within it, to tell whether the consecrated thing has sacred virtue. And therefore I must speak."

Savonarola possessed a readily-roused resentment toward opposition, hardly separable from a power-loving nature accustomed to seeking great ends that cast a reflected grandeur on the means. His sermons burned with that red flame. If he had been a meaner man, his susceptibility might have shown as irritation at Romola's accusatory freedom, which contrasted sharply with the deference he habitually received. But at this moment, such feelings were nullified by the hard struggle that made half the tragedy of his life: the struggle of a mind possessed by a never-silent hunger after purity and simplicity, yet caught in a tangle of egoistic demands, false ideas, and difficult outward conditions that made simplicity impossible. Keenly alive to the suggestions of Romola's remonstrance, he rapidly surveyed the courses of action open to him and their probable results. But it was a question on which arguments seemed decisive only in proportion as they were charged with feeling, and he had received no impulse that could alter his bias. He looked at Romola and said:

"You have full pardon for your frankness, my daughter. You speak, I know, out of the fulness of your family affections. But these affections must give way to the needs of the Republic. If those men who have a close acquaintance with the affairs of the State believe, as I understand they do, that the public safety requires the extreme punishment of the

The moon, rising just above the rooftops of the Piazza della Signora past the stroke of midnight, failed to cast its usual patterns of light and shadow upon the cobblestones. There was no pavement visible, no empty space for the moon to illuminate; there was only the sea of heads, a churning multitude pressing forward. The silence that usually accompanied the nocturnal wanderers of Florence—the soft patter of feet, the hum of conversation, the strumming of lutes—had been swallowed by a deafening roar. Shouts, curses, the trampling of boots, and the accidental clash of weapons formed a chaotic backdrop against which only a piercing shriek or the heavy, rhythmic tolling of a bell could be distinguished.

Every citizen of Florence who could stir himself was awake, either trapped within the square or fighting desperately to reach it. Inside the Old Palace, the Council Chamber remained a theater of fierce contention. The chief magistrates, the eighty senators, and the select citizens had debated through the daylight and torchlight whether to grant an appeal or execute the prisoners immediately to prevent the dangers of delay. The debate had degenerated into a quarrel so violent that its echoes reached the crowd outside. Only in the final hour had a decision been reached. The Signoria had been split, with four members stubbornly voting for an appeal despite the threat that their homes would be sacked if they refused. It was Francesco Valori who broke the deadlock. In a brief, furious speech, he declared that if the Signoria would not defend the liberties of the Florentine people by executing the five conspirators, others would seize the cause and endanger everyone who opposed them. The Florentine Cato had triumphed. When the votes were recounted, the four obstinate white beans vanished; the entire nine cast fatal black ballots, sentencing the five prisoners to immediate death—a verdict that also, though tacitly and with greater delay, sentenced Francesco Valori himself.

As the judicial Eight departed for the Bargello to prepare the scaffold, the five condemned men were led barefoot and in irons through the center of the council chamber. This humiliation had been orchestrated by their friends: would the Florentines not be moved by the sight of such cruel ignominy visited upon two venerable elders, Bernardo del Nero and Niccolò Ridolfi, whose loyalty predated the current political shift? Would they not mourn the brilliant young men, Tornabuoni and Pucci, whose absence would leave a haunting void in every gathering of the elite? It was futile. Any pity stirred now was of a hopeless variety, leading not to rescue but to the slower, darker action of revenge.

While this scene unfolded above, Romola stood below, leaning against a massive pillar in the palace courtyard. She waited for the moment her godfather would appear on his way to execution. Through powerful intervention, she had secured permission to visit him that evening and remain until the council's decision was final. Now, she waited with his confessor to follow the guard leading him to the Bargello. Her heart was resolved to cling to the presence of this childless old man until the very last moment, just as her father would have done; she had silenced all remonstrances. Giovan Battista Ridolfi, a disciple of Savonarola who went in bitterness to witness the death of his elder brother Niccolò, had promised to guard her and now stood beside her.

Tito was also in the palace, though Romola had not seen him. Since the evening of the seventeenth, they had avoided one another. Tito knew only by inference from the friar's neutral report that Romola's pleas had failed. Surrounded by official and foreign dignitaries awaiting the council's conclusion, he maintained a subdued air and grave silence, caught in a painful strife between public duty and private feeling. When allusions were made to his wife regarding these events, he implied that her violent mental excitement caused her to view his continued office under a government condemning her godfather with diseased hostility. For her sake, he felt it best not to approach her.

"Ah, the old Bardi blood!" Cennini remarked with a shrug. "I shall not be surprised if this business shakes her loose from the Frate, as well as some others I could name."

"It is excusable in a woman, who is doubtless beautiful, since she is the wife of Messer Tito," a young French envoy smiled, bowing to Tito. "To think that her affections must overrule the good of the State, and that nobody is to be beheaded who is anybody's cousin; but such a view is not to be encouraged in the male population. It seems to me your Florentine polity is much weakened by it."

"That is true," Niccolò Machiavelli replied. "But where personal ties are strong, the hostilities they raise must be taken into account. Many of these half-measures are merely hot-headed blunders. The only safe blows to be inflicted on men and parties are those too heavy to be avenged."

"Niccolò," Cennini said, "there is a clever wickedness in thy talk sometimes that makes me mistrust thy pleasant young face as if it were a mask of Satan."

"Not at all, my good Domenico," Machiavelli smiled, laying his hand on the elder's shoulder. "Satan was a blunderer, an introducer of novelty, who made a stupendous failure. If he had succeeded, we should all be worshipping him, and his portrait would be far more flattering."

"Well, well," Cennini conceded. "I say not thy doctrine is not too clever for Satan: I only say it is wicked enough for him."

"I tell you," Machiavelli insisted, "my doctrine is the doctrine of all men who seek an end a little farther off than their own noses. Ask our Frate, our prophet, how his universal renovation is to be brought about: he will tell you, first, by securing a free and pure government; and since this cannot be achieved by making all Florentines love each other, it must be done by cutting off every head that happens to be obstinately in the way. Only if a man incurs odium by sanctioning a severity that is not thorough enough to be final, he commits a blunder. And something like that blunder, I suspect, the Frate has committed. It was an occasion on which he might have won lustre by exerting himself to maintain the appeal; instead, he has lost lustre and gained no strength."

Before anyone else could speak, the announcement came that the prisoners were leaving the council chamber. The majority of those present hurried toward the door, intent on securing the clearest path to the Bargello behind the prisoners' guard, for the scene of the execution drew alike those moved by deep passion and those driven by cold curiosity.

Tito remained behind. He possessed a native repugnance to sights of death and pain. Five days prior, whenever he had considered this execution a possibility, he had hoped it would not happen, that the utmost sentence would be exile; his own safety demanded no more. But now, he felt that the death of Bernardo del Nero would be a welcome guarantee of his security. The new knowledge and new attitude revealed to him by Romola on the day of his return had instilled in him a fresh dread of the power she possessed to make his position insecure. If any act of hers succeeded in making him an object of suspicion and odium, he foresaw not only frustration but frustration under unpleasant circumstances. Her belief in Baldassarre had clearly determined her wavering feelings against further submission, and if her godfather lived, she would win him to share her belief without much trouble. Romola seemed more than ever an unmanageable fact in his destiny. But if Bernardo del Nero were dead, the difficulties that would beset her in placing herself in opposition to her husband would probably be insurmountable to her shrinking pride. Therefore, Tito felt easier knowing that the Eight had gone to the Bargello to order the instant erection of the scaffold. Four other men—his intimates and confederates—were to die besides Bernardo del Nero. Yet a man's own safety is a god that sometimes makes very grim demands. Tito felt them to be grim: even in the pursuit of what was agreeable, this paradoxical life forced upon him the desire for what was disagreeable. As he heard through the open doorway the shuffle of many feet and the clanking of metal on the stairs, he answered the questions of the young French envoy without showing signs of any feeling other than sad resignation to state necessities.

Those sounds fell upon Romola as if her power of hearing had been exalted along with every other sensibility of her nature. She needed no arm to support her; she shed no tears. She felt that intensity of life which seems to transcend both grief and joy—in which the mind seems to itself akin to elder forces that wrought out existence before the birth of pleasure and pain. Since her godfather's fate had been decided, the previous struggle of feeling within her had given way to an identification of herself with him in these supreme moments. She was inwardly asserting for him that, if he suffered the punishment of treason, he did not deserve the name of traitor; he was the victim of a collision between two kinds of faithfulness. It was not given him to die for the noblest cause, and yet he died because of his nobleness. He might have been a meaner man and found it easier not to incur this guilt. Romola was feeling the full force of that sympathy with the individual lot that is continually opposing itself to the formulae by which actions and parties are judged. She was treading the way with her second father to the scaffold, nerving herself to defy ignominy by the consciousness that it was not deserved.

The path was fenced in by three hundred armed men, placed as a guard by the orders of Francesco Valori. Among the apparent contradictions belonging to this event, not the least striking was the alleged alarm on one hand at the popular rage against the conspirators, and the alleged alarm on the other lest there should be an attempt to rescue them in the midst of a hostile crowd. When they arrived within the court of the Bargello, Romola was allowed to approach Bernardo with his confessor for a moment of farewell. Many eyes were bent on them even in that struggle of an agitated throng as the aged man, forgetting that his hands were bound with irons, lifted them toward the golden head bent toward him, and then, checking that movement, leaned to kiss her. She seized the fettered hands that hung down again and kissed them as if they had been sacred things.

"My poor Romola," Bernardo said in a low voice, "I have only to die, but thou hast to live—and I shall not be there to help thee."

"Yes," Romola said hurriedly, "you *will* help me—always—because I shall remember you."

She was taken away and conducted up the flight of steps leading to the loggia surrounding the grand old court. She took her place there, determined to watch until the moment when her godfather laid his head on the block. Now, while the prisoners were allowed a brief interval with their confessor, the spectators pressed into the court until the crowd became dense around the black scaffold. Torches fixed in iron rings against the pillars threw a varying, startling light at one moment on passionless stone carvings, at another on pale faces agitated with suppressed rage or suppressed grief—the faces of many near relatives of the condemned, who were presently to receive their dead and carry them home.

Romola's face looked like a marble image against the dark arch as she stood watching for the moment when her godfather would appear at the foot of the scaffold. He was to suffer first, and Battista Ridolfi, who stood by her side, had promised to take her away through a door behind them once she had seen the last look of the man who alone in all the world had shared her pitying love for her father. And still, in the background of her thought, there was the possibility striving to become a hope, that some rescue might yet come, something that would keep that scaffold unstained by blood.

For a long while there was constant movement, lights flickering, heads swaying to and fro, confused voices within the court, rushing waves of sound through the entrance from without. It seemed to Romola as if she were in the midst of a storm-troubled sea, caring nothing about the storm, caring only to hold out a signal till the eyes that looked for it could seek it no more.

Suddenly there was stillness, and the very tapers seemed to tremble into quiet. The executioner was ready on the scaffold, and Bernardo del Nero was seen ascending it with a slow, firm step. Romola made no visible movement, uttered not even a suppressed sound; she stood more firmly, caring for *his* firmness. She saw him pause, saw the white head kept erect while he said, in a voice distinctly audible:

"It is but a short space of life that my fellow-citizens have taken from me."

She perceived that he was gazing slowly around him as he spoke. She felt that his eyes were resting on her, and that she was stretching out her arms toward him. Then she saw no more till—a long while after, as it seemed—a voice said, "My daughter, all is peace now. I can conduct you to your house."

She uncovered her head and saw her godfather's confessor standing by her, in a room where there were other grave men talking in subdued tones.

"I am ready," she said, starting up. "Let us lose no time."

She thought all clinging was at an end for her: all her strength now should be given to escape from a grasp under which she shuddered.

On the eighth day following that unforgettable night, Romola stood upon the precipice of the Mediterranean, gazing at the gentle, rhythmic pulse of the summer sea just above the tiny fishing hamlet of Viareggio. Once more, she had fled from Florence, and this time, no commanding voice had summoned her return. Clad once again in the grey habit of the religious order, she felt no shame in the disguise; indeed, in the depths of her heart-sickness, she cared nothing for the label she bore. A fresh rebellion had ignited within her, fueled by a profound despair. Why should she cling to one title over another, or insist on being addressed by her own name? She had lost faith in the existence of any consistent duty attached to that identity. What power remained to forge within her that sacred motive men call duty, a force that exists only through the vessel of believing love?

Every bond of strong affection had been severed. In her marriage, the highest of all ties, she could no longer perceive the mystical union that guarantees indissolubility, nor even the obligation of a voluntary pledge. Had she not demonstrated that the things to which she had bound herself were impossible? The urge to liberate herself surged with overwhelming force, yet she knew this freedom would merely be an exchange of one calamity for another. There is no recompense for the woman who realizes that the central relationship of her life was nothing more than a mistake. She had lost her crown. The deepest secret of human blessedness had half-whispered its truth to her, only to slip past her forever.

Now, Romola's greatest support in her supreme sorrow had vanished. The vision of any grand purpose, any end to existence capable of ennobling endurance and elevating the mundane dust of daily life with divine ardor, was utterly eclipsed by a sense of confusion in human affairs. Every effort felt like dragging at tangled threads; every fellowship, whether for resistance or advocacy, appeared as mere unfairness and exclusivity. Who, after all, was the man who had embodied for her the highest heroism—the heroism not of stoic, self-contained endurance, but of willing, self-offering love? What cause was he truly fighting for? Romola had lost her trust in Savonarola, extinguishing the fervor of admiration that had previously made her blind to his aberrations, allowing her to focus solely on the grand arc of his destiny. Now that her deep affection for her godfather had cast her into opposition with the Friar, she viewed the repulsive and inconsistent details of his teachings with a painful, exaggerated clarity. In the bitterness of her disappointment, she declared that his striving to renovate the Church and the world was a pursuit of a mere name—a title that signified nothing more than the measures designed to strengthen his own position in Florence, or perhaps questionable deeds performed merely to shield his influence from the consequences of his own errors. The political reform that had once ignited a new interest in her life now seemed reduced to narrow schemes for the safety of Florence, a contemptible contradiction to his alternating professions of blind trust in Divine care.

It was inevitable that she should judge the Friar unfairly regarding a question of individual suffering, viewing it through the lens of personal tenderness, while he viewed it through the eyes of theoretic conviction. In his declaration that the cause of his party was the cause of God's kingdom, she heard only the ring of egoism. Perhaps such words are rarely spoken without that meaner undertone; yet they remain the implicit formula of all energetic belief. If such belief, pursuing a grand and remote end, often risks becoming a form of demon-worship where the votary sends his children through the fire with a readiness that hardly resembles sacrifice, then tender fellow-feeling for the near and dear has its own dangers too. It is apt to become timid and skeptical toward the larger aims without which life cannot rise into religion. Thus, poor Romola was being blinded by her tears.

No one who has ever known the agony of losing faith in a fellow-man whom he has profoundly loved and revered will lightly claim that such a shock can leave the faith in the Invisible Goodness unshaken. With the sinking of high human trust, the dignity of life sinks as well; we cease to believe in our own better selves, for that too is part of the common nature degraded in our thoughts, and all the finer impulses of the soul grow dull. Romola felt even the springs of her once active pity drying up, leaving her to barren, egoistic complaining. Had not she suffered her own sorrows? And while she had cared for many, few had cared for her. She had done enough; she had striven for the impossible and was weary of this stifling, crowded existence. She longed for that repose in mere sensation, a dream she had sometimes entertained during the sultry afternoons of her early girlhood, when she had fancied herself floating naively in the waters.

The clear waves seemed to beckon her; she wished she could lie down upon them and pass from sleep into death. Yet Romola could not directly seek death; the fullness of young life within her forbade such a direct act. She could only wish that death would come to her.

At the spot where she paused, the shore curved deeply, and a small boat with a sail was moored there. In her longing to glide over the waters turning golden under the level sun-rays, she recalled a story from Boccaccio that she had loved to dwell upon when her father slept and she crept from her stool to the floor to read the *Decamerone*. It was the tale of the fair Gostanza, who, in her lovesick despair, desired no longer to live but lacked the courage to attack her young life. She had placed herself in a boat, pushed off to sea, and lain down, wrapping her mantle around her head, hoping to be wrecked so that her fear would be helpless to flee from death. The memory had remained a mere thought in Romola's mind, without blossoming into a distinct wish; but now, as she paused again in her pacing to and fro, she saw another boat gliding black against the red gold, carrying a single man toward the bend where the first, smaller boat was moored. Walking on again, she finally saw the man land, pull his boat ashore, and begin to unload cargo. He was perhaps the owner of the smaller boat as well; he would be departing soon, and her opportunity would vanish with him—her chance to purchase that small vessel. She had not yet admitted to herself that she intended to use it, but she felt a sudden eagerness to secure the possibility of using it, revealing the half-unconscious growth of a thought into a desire.

"Is that little boat yours also?" she asked the fisherman, who had looked up, slightly startled by the tall grey figure, and made a reverence to this holy Sister wandering thus mysteriously in the evening solitude.

It was indeed his boat; an old one, hardly seaworthy, yet worth repairing to any man who would buy it. By the blessing of San Antonio, whose chapel stood in the village yonder, his fishing had prospered, and he now possessed a better boat, once belonging to Gianni, who had died. But he had not yet sold the old one. Romola asked him its value, and then, while he was busy, thrust the price into a small satchel lying on the ground, which contained the remnants of his dinner. Afterward, she watched him furl his sail and asked him how he should set it if he wished to go out to sea. Pacing up and down again, she waited to see him depart.

The imagination of herself gliding away in that boat upon the darkening waters grew into a longing, as the thought of a cool brook in sultriness becomes a painful thirst. To be freed from the burden of choice when all motive was bruised, to commit herself, sleeping, to destiny which would either bring death or else new necessities that might rouse a new life in her—it was a thought that beckoned her the more because the soft evening air made her long to rest in the still solitude, rather than return to the noise and heat of the village.

At last, the slow fisherman had gathered up all his belongings and was walking away. Soon the gold was shrinking and growing dusky in the sea and sky, and there was no living thing in sight, no sound but the lulling monotony of the lapping waves. In this sea, there was no tide that would carry her away if she waited for its ebb; but Romola thought the breeze from the land was rising slightly. She stepped into the boat, unfurled the sail, and fastened it as she had learned in that first brief lesson. She saw that it caught the light breeze, and this was all she cared for. Then she loosed the boat from its moorings and tried to urge it with an oar until she was far out from the land, until the sea was dark even to the west, and the stars were disclosing themselves like a palpitating life over the wide heavens. Resting at last, she threw back her cowl and, removing the kerchief underneath that confined her hair, doubled them both under her head for a pillow on one of the boat's ribs. Her fair head was still very young and could bear a hard pillow.

Thus she lay, with the soft night air breathing upon her as she glided on the water, watching the deepening quiet of the sky. She was alone now; she had freed herself from all claims, and she had freed herself even from that burden of choice which presses with heavier and heavier weight when claims have loosened their guiding hold.

Had she found anything like the dream of her girlhood? No. Memories hung upon her like the weight of broken wings that could never be lifted—memories of human sympathy which, even in its pains, leaves a thirst that the Great Mother has no milk to still. Romola felt orphaned in those vast spaces of sea and sky. She read no message of love for her in that far-off symbolic writing of the heavens, and with a great sob, she wished that she might be gliding into death.

She drew the cowl over her head again and covered her face, choosing darkness rather than the light of the stars, which seemed to her like the hard light of eyes looking at her without seeing her. Presently, she felt that she was in the grave, yet not resting there; she was touching the hands of the beloved dead beside her, trying to wake them.

February 27th dawned with a peculiar gravity, the air thick with the final breath of Carnival. By ten o'clock, the usual currents of Florentine life had shifted decisively toward San Marco. The populace knew the second Bonfire of Vanities awaited them before the Old Palace, yet the true magnet drew them all to the square. The Piazza di San Marco was a sea of humanity, a surging tide of new arrivals pressing against the rigid front ranks that had already formed a dense, immovable wall around the semicircular barrier guarding the church entrance. Within this enclosure, the Dominican Brethren assembled in silence, their black mantles absorbing the morning light.

Yet, the temporary wooden pulpit erected above the church door remained starkly empty. It was destined for the man the Pope had exiled from the Duomo, the cleric shunned by the ecclesiastical hierarchy and forbidden to the citizens under threat of excommunication. This man, Savonarola, had dared declare that a wicked, bribed Pontiff was no Vicar of Christ, that his curses were broken swords and his commands antithetical to the Christian life. He had proclaimed it lawful not merely to disobey, but to refuse obedience entirely. Despite the Pope's terrifying threats of interdict and ruin, the people still flocked to hear him, still accepted Communion from his hands. They wondered: if this friar truly held sway over divine judgment, why wait for a sign? If God had chosen him to rebuke the High Priest, surely the choice would be attested by unmistakable power.

For months, the demand for a miracle had swelled in Savonarola's ear, a fatal question gnawing at his resolve. As long as his preaching offered hope without immediate peril, no sign was needed; his words were a music to which the city marched willingly. But now, with the threat of commercial collapse and political isolation looming, the crowd demanded proof. "What miracle showest thou?" the question echoed in his mind. His faith wavered, though his speech remained unbroken—a necessary performance for any man speaking to a hungry multitude, relying on yesterday's conviction to fuel tomorrow's hope.

The wooden pulpit had been raised specifically to answer this popular impatience for a supernatural guarantee. As the ordinary friars in black entered, arranging themselves and chanting, the multitude's gaze did not yet fix upon the empty platform. They watched the monks, noting the familiar faces of high-born families mingling with the sons of artisans and shopkeepers who formed the bulk of the crowd. Only when the choir was complete, their voices rising in psalmody, did a hush fall, heavy with anticipation. "Fra Girolamo must be coming now," someone whispered, and the silence deepened, spreading like a pale solemn light over thousands of upturned faces.

In an instant, the pulpit was no longer empty. A figure, cloaked entirely in black from head to foot, stepped inside and knelt, head bowed, face turned away. To the eager crowd, the time seemed interminable as the black figure knelt and the monks continued their chant. Yet the stillness held; the friar's communion with Heaven carried an electric awe that unnerved even those ready to stone him.

Finally, a vibration rippled through the multitude, a silent passing of hands like a shared breath as the expected presence revealed itself. Savonarola rose, turned toward the people, and pushed back his cowl. The monotonous wail of the choir ceased, merging instantly into the force of his flashing glance as he looked out upon the silence. He stretched forth his hands—exquisite, delicate instruments transformed from tools of grasping into vessels of acute sensibility. They seemed to speak from the soul masked by his strong, passionate face, now etched with deeper lines than forty-four years of ordinary life could produce.

At the first extension of his hands, some in the front ranks fell to their knees, and scattered devout disciples followed suit. But the majority stood firm. Some resisted the impulse to kneel before an excommunicated man, fearing judgment upon the act itself; others viewed it with scorn, seeing the ambitious deceiver staging a new comedy, a fashion they felt powerless to resist.

Then came the voice, clear and low, uttering the words of absolution: "*Misereatur vestri*." More fell to their knees. As the voice rose, clearer and stronger, the number of erect heads dwindled until, at the climax "*Benedicat vos omnipotens Deus*," it erupted into a masculine cry, a trumpet blast protesting the demon's clutch that sought to stifle it. The sound rang to the extremities of the Piazza, and under its resonance, every head bowed.

After the blessing, Savonarola himself fell to his knees, hiding his face in temporary exhaustion. Such great jets of emotion were necessary to his existence; he had told the people long ago, "Without preaching I cannot live." But it was a life that shattered him.

Minutes passed. Some rose, but a larger number remained kneeling, all faces fixed intently on him. He held a crystal vessel containing the consecrated Host and addressed the crowd.

"You remember," he said, his voice carrying in the vast stillness, "three days ago I besought you. When I held this Sacrament in my hand before you all, I asked you to pray fervently to the Most High: if this work of mine does not come from Him, let Him send a fire to consume me, that I may vanish into eternal darkness, away from His light which I have hidden with my falsity. Again I beseech you to make that prayer, and to make it *now*."

It was a breathless moment. Perhaps no one truly prayed, save those in devout obedience making the effort. Every consciousness was dominated by the sense that Savonarola was praying, his voice distinct and audible in the wide silence.

"Lord, if I have not wrought in sincerity of soul, if my word cometh not from Thee, strike me in this moment with Thy thunder, and let the fires of Thy wrath enclose me."

He ceased speaking, standing motionless with the consecrated Mystery in his hand, eyes uplifted, his whole aspect quivering with excitement. All else was motionless and silent. Sunlight, which had pierced the greyness in fitful streaks for the last quarter-hour, suddenly parted wider. With a gentle quickness, like a smile, a stream of brightness poured onto the crystal vase and spread over Savonarola's face with mild glorification.

An instantaneous shout tore through the Piazza: "Behold the answer!"

The warm radiance thrilled through Savonarola's frame, and so did the shout. It was his last moment of untroubled triumph. In rapturous confidence, he felt carried to a grander scene, before an audience representing all Christendom, where he would be sealed as the messenger of supreme righteousness, charged with Divine strength. It was but a moment that expanded into a vision. While the shout still rang in his ears, he turned away within the church, feeling the strain too great to bear longer.

When the friar disappeared and the sunlight returned to its impartial, ordinary spreading over clean and unclean alike, a confusion of voices arose alongside the crowd's movement. Strong discords and varying scales of laughter revealed that the previous silence and universal kneeling had been a submission to a momentary spell, hostility and scorn merely holding their ground.

"It seems to me the plaudits are giving way to criticism," observed Tito, watching from an upper loggia opposite the church. "Nevertheless, it was a striking moment, was it not, Messer Pietro? Fra Girolamo is a man to make one understand that there was a time when the monk's frock was a symbol of power over men's minds rather than over the keys of women's cupboards."

"Assuredly," replied Pietro Cennini. "And until I have seen proof that Fra Girolamo has much less faith in God's judgments than the common run of men, instead of having considerably more, I shall not believe that he would brave Heaven in this way if his soul were laden with a conscious lie."

March had arrived, bringing with it the heavy, expectant air of a city holding its breath. A month after the Carnival's chaotic revelry, Tito descended the marble steps of the Old Palace, his destination San Marco, yet his path was deliberately indirect. He chose to loop through the Piazza di Santa Croce, drawn by the swelling tide of people emerging from the great church following the early Lenten sermon.

Inside Santa Croce, the atmosphere had grown feverish. Fra Girolamo Savonarola's voice, once the thunder of the city, had been silenced in his own church of San Marco by a hostile Signoria obeying a papal threat of interdict. Yet, in Santa Croce, the hunger for his words had only intensified, now fueled by the spectacle of his vilification. The crowd's excitement peaked at a daring proposal: a Franciscan preacher, Fra Francesco di Puglia, had challenged Savonarola to walk through fire. The logic was simple and terrifying; if the prophet emerged unscathed, his divine mandate was proven; if consumed, his falsehood exposed. To ensure the test could not be evaded, the Franciscan offered himself as the necessary counterweight, willing to be burned alongside the prophet.

Savonarola, as usual, ignored the pulpit attacks. But the challenge had ignited a spark in Fra Domenico, a fervent follower preaching to women in the Via del Cocomero. He had seized the gauntlet, declaring his readiness to share the flames for his master. The populace, eager for a shortcut to conviction, watched with bated breath. Yet, Savonarola, keenly aware that mere discussion could be dangerous, commanded Fra Domenico to withdraw. The Franciscan accepted, noting he had challenged the prophet directly, not a subordinate.

By the time Tito reached the piazza, the crowd was thick, converging not on the church doors but near the Franciscan monastery. There, pinned to a wall by order of the Signoria, was a large placard covered in official Latin script. Curiosity gnawed at the onlookers; while they knew the gist of the decree, the written word remained a barrier of learned tongues. They whispered among themselves, trying to decipher the government's intent.

"It is the Frate's doctrines he must prove by burning," declared Goro, a prominent figure in the throng. "The Signoria has made it plain."

"Nay, Goro," corrected a sleek shopkeeper with pity. "The Frate must prove his doctrines by *not* being burned. He walks through the fire and emerges whole."

"Yes, but Fra Girolamo objects," interjected a young sculptor, tipping his white-streaked cap. "Being whole already, he sees no need to walk through fire to remain so. He leaves such odds and ends to Fra Domenico."

"Then he flinches like a coward!" Goro wheezed. "Remember the Carnival? He had us watching lightning strike him, and nothing happened."

"Silence your bleating," snapped a tall shoemaker, his shoulders laden with slippers. "You are as wise as a calf with water on its brain. The Frate will flinch from nothing. Perhaps he says nothing beforehand, but when the moment comes, he walks through without asking a grey-frock to accompany him. Though, I would give a shoestring to know what this Latin actually says."

"There is so much of it," sighed the shopkeeper. "Is there no scholar here?"

The heads turned in unison as Tito approached, his black mantle and gold fibula catching the light, his velvet cap marking him as a man of high station.

"Here is one," the sculptor smiled, raising his cap.

"He is the secretary of the Ten," the shopkeeper announced, bowing deeply—a rare honor for a Florentine. "Make way."

Tito acknowledged the deference with a graceful nod. "Thanks, my friend. I merely wished, as you did, to see what is at the foot of this placard. Ah, as I expected. The government permits anyone to subscribe their name as a candidate to enter the fire—an act of liberality worthy of the magnificent Signoria—reserving, of course, their right to select. Surely many believers are eager to sign."

He paused, lifting his shoulders with an oratorical flourish. "What is it to enter the fire to one whose faith is firm? A man fears fire because he believes it burns him; but if he believes the contrary?" He scanned the faces around him. "For which reason, I have never disbelieved the Frate when he said he would enter the fire to prove his doctrine. In his place, if you believed the fire would not burn you, which of you would not step in as readily as you would walk along the dry bed of the Mugnone?"

The crowd shifted, their eyes brightening like dogs scenting something pungent. The abstract debate was becoming practical.

"Then, Messer Segretario," the sculptor pressed, "it seems Fra Francesco is the greater hero, offering to enter for the truth, certain the fire will burn him."

"I do not deny it," Tito replied blandly. "But if Fra Francesco is mistaken, he will be burned for the wrong side, and the Church has never counted such victims as martyrs. We must suspend judgment until the trial truly takes place."

"True enough," the shopkeeper murmured with impatience. "But will you interpret the Latin for us?"

"Assuredly," Tito smiled. "It expresses the doctrines the Frate teaches, which the trial will prove true or false. First, that Florence—"

"Bit by bit, then, and the meaning," the shoemaker insisted.

"Willingly," Tito agreed. "_Ecclesia Dei indiget renovatione_: The Church of God needs purifying or regenerating. That means the priests must lead better lives; no miracle is needed for that. _Flagellabitur_: It will be scourged. _Renovabitur_: It will be purified. _Florentia quoque post flagellam renovabitur et prosperabitur_: Florence also, after the scourging, shall be purified and shall prosper."

"That means we get Pisa again," the shopkeeper declared.

"And the wool from England as we used to," added an elderly man in a berretta. "There has been enough scourging with the sinking of our trade."

Just then, a tall figure topped with a red feather emerged from the convent door, exchanging a casual glance with Tito before the bystanders timidly parted to make way for Messer Dolfo Spini.

"_Infideles convertentur ad Christum_: The infidels shall be converted to Christ," Tito continued. "Those are the Turks and Moors. Well, I have nothing against that."

"_Haec autem omnia erunt temporibus nostris_: And all these things shall happen in our times."

"Why, what use would they be else?" Goro asked.

"_Excommunicato nuper lata contra Reverendum Patrem nostrum Fratrem Hieronymum nulla est_: The excommunication lately pronounced against our reverend father, Fra Girolamo, is null. _Non observantes eam non peccant_: Those who disregard it are not committing a sin."

"I shall know better what to say to that when we have the Trial by Fire," the shopkeeper noted.

"Which doubtless will clear up everything," Tito said. "That is all the Latin—the conclusions to be tested. The rest is simply a proclamation in good Tuscan, calling on those eager to walk through the fire to come to the Palazzo and subscribe their names."

With an easy, natural bow, Tito turned and quickened his pace. After a few turns, he paused before a quiet door, knocking with a light, peculiar rhythm. A young woman opened it, and he chucked her under the chin before passing through an ajar inner door into a handsome, untidy room.

Dolfo Spini sat there, playing with a fine stag-hound that alternately sniffed a basket of pups and licked his hands with affectionate disregard for her master's morals. Spini looked up briefly as Tito entered, then resumed his play, lost in the persistence of an irrelevant action.

"A handsome *bracca* that," Tito said quietly, standing with his thumbs in his belt. "When you have finished such caresses as cannot possibly be deferred, my Dolfo, we will talk of business. My time, which I could wish to be eternity at your service, is not entirely my own this morning."

"Down, Mischief, down!" Spini snapped, pushing the dog aside with sudden roughness. "Malediction!" He stood close, placing a hand on Tito's shoulder. "I hope your sharp wits see all the ins and outs of this business, my fine necromancer, for it seems to me no clearer than the bottom of a sack."

"These accursed Frati Minori at Santa Croce are drawing back," Spini complained. "Fra Francesco himself seems afraid of sticking to the challenge. He talks of the Prophet using magic to create a false miracle, thinks he might be burned while the Prophet emerges whole by sorcery, leaving the Church no better. And after all our talking, there isn't even a blessed lay brother willing to pair with that pious sheep, Fra Domenico."

"It is the peculiar stupidity of the tonsured skull that prevents them from seeing how little consequence it is whether they are burned or not," Tito said calmly. "Have you sworn them no danger of entering the fire?"

"No," Spini looked puzzled. "Because one of them will be obliged to go in with Fra Domenico, who thinks it a thousand years till the fagots are ready."

"Not at all. Fra Domenico himself is unlikely to go in. I have told you, my Dolfo, that now you have the Signoria taking up this affair to prevent Fra Girolamo from hushing it up, nothing is required but that on a given day the fuel be prepared in the Piazza and the people gathered expecting a prodigy. If, after that, the Prophet quits the Piazza without a miracle, he is ruined. The people will pelt him out of the city; the Signoria will banish him; and His Holiness may do as he pleases. Therefore, my Alcibiades, swear to the Franciscans that their grey-frocks shall not come within singeing distance of the fire."

Spini rubbed the back of his head and tapped his sword against his leg, stimulating his mind to grasp the intangible. "But unless we fall on him in the Piazza when the people are in a rage and make an end of him and his lies then and there, Valori and the Salviati and the Albizzi will take up arms for him. I know this was talked of on Ascension Sunday. The people may turn again; there may be a story of the French king returning, or some other cursed chance in the hypocrite's favor. The city will never be safe till he is out of it."

"He *will* be out of it before long, without your giving yourself further trouble than this little comedy of the Trial by Fire," Tito assured him. "The wine and the sun will make vinegar without any shouting to help them, as your Florentine sages would say. You will have the satisfaction of delivering your city from an incubus by an able stratagem, instead of risking blunders with sword-thrusts."

"But suppose he *did* get magic and the devil to help him and walk through the fire after all?" Spini grimaced, hiding a shyness in treading this speculative ground. "How do you know there is nothing in those things? Plenty of scholars believe in them, and this Frate is bad enough for anything."

"Oh, of course there are such things," Tito shrugged. "But I have particular reasons for knowing the Frate is not on such terms with the devil as can give him confidence in this affair. The only magic he relies on is his own ability."

"Ability!" Spini scoffed. "Do you call it ability to set Florence at loggerheads with the Pope and all the powers of Italy—all to keep beckoning at the French king who never comes? You may call him able, but I call him a hypocrite who wants to be master of everybody and get himself made Pope."

"You judge with your usual penetration, my captain, but our opinions do not clash," Tito said with bland gravity. "The Frate, wanting to be master and carrying out his projects against the Pope, requires the lever of a foreign power and Florence as a fulcrum. I used to think him a narrow-minded bigot, but now I think him a shrewd ambitious man who knows what he aims at and directs his aim as skilfully as you direct a ball when playing at *maglio*."

"Yes, yes," Spini nodded cordially. "I can aim a ball."

"It is true," Tito said. "And I should not have troubled you with my trivial remark on the Frate's ability, but that you may see how this will heighten the credit of your success against him at Rome and Milan, which is sure to serve you in good stead when the city changes its policy."

"Well, thou art a good little demon, and shalt have good pay," Spini said patronizingly. The Greek adventurer smiled with gratification. "Of course, any advantage to me depends entirely on your—"

"We shall have our supper at my palace tonight," Spini interrupted, nodding significantly and patting Tito's shoulder affectionately. "And I shall expound the new scheme to them all."

"Pardon, my magnificent patron," Tito said. "The scheme has been the same from the first—it has never varied except in your memory. Are you sure you have a fast hold of it now?"

Spini rehearsed the plan.

"One thing more," he said as Tito hastened away. "There is that sharp-nosed notary, Ser Ceccone; he has been handy of late. Tell me, you who can see a man wink when you are behind him, do you think I may go on making use of him?"

Tito dared not say "No." He knew his companion too well to trust him with advice when all Spini's vanity and self-interest were not engaged in concealing the adviser.

"Doubtless," he answered promptly. "I have nothing to say against Ceccone."

The suggestion of the notary's intimate access to Spini caused Tito a passing twinge, interrupting

The Prophet in His Cell.

The announcement of Tito's arrival had preceded him, and Fra Niccolò, Savonarola's secretary, ushered him immediately up the spiraling stairs into the monastery's long, echoing corridors. These halls, lined with cells, bore witness to the delicate artistry of Fra Angelico; his frescoes, soft as rainbows on melting clouds, broke the austerity of the stone, casting sudden, ethereal reflections of the Madonna in radiant glory and the Divine Infant with perpetual promise upon the unaccustomed eye.

It was a hour of quietude within the monastery, and most cells stood empty. Light filtered through narrow windows to illuminate nothing but bare walls, hard pallets, and crucifixes. Even at the far end of a long corridor, in the inner cell accessible only through an antechamber where the Prior typically sat at his desk, a single shaft of light fell upon a solitary figure. It was a man in the long white Dominican tunic and scapulary, kneeling with bowed head before a crucifix. To the casual observer, he might have been any ordinary Fra Girolamo, confessing only trivial sins—thoughts of impropriety during choir service or a fleeting spite when a fellow monk dropped ink upon his illuminated breviary—a soul content merely to climb the narrow ladder of prayer, fasting, and obedience toward Paradise. Yet beneath this plain white garment beat a heart pulsing with a consciousness alien to the average monk, perhaps incomprehensible to any man who has not traversed a tumultuous inner life. Here, irrevocable errors and lapses from truth were inextricably entwined with noble purposes and sincere beliefs; self-justifying expediency was woven into the very fabric of a great work that the whole being seemed unable to abandon, just as the body cannot cease trembling before the objects of hope and fear. Consequently, no matter the course chosen, perfect repose for the conscience remained elusive.

Savonarola was not merely in the posture of prayer; Latin supplications flowed from his lips, yet he was not truly praying. He had collapsed to his knees seeking a calmness that would serve as a warrant against the resolutions urged upon him by crowding thoughts and passions, fearing he was being wrested from Divine support. But the previsions and impulses working within him for the last hour were too imperious. While his hands pressed against his face and his lips uttered *"Cor mundum crea in me,"* his mind remained cluttered with images of the snares his enemies had prepared, busy constructing arguments to justify himself against their taunts.

His defense was required not only against his opponents. That morning, he had received fresh proof that his own friends and followers were as eager to press for the Trial by Fire as his adversaries. They desired and tacitly expected that he would finally accept the challenge, evoking the long-awaited miracle to dissipate doubt and triumph over malignity. Had he not declared that God would reveal Himself at the fitting time? To the plain Florentines, eager to settle party questions, no time seemed more fitting than the present. Certainly, if Fra Domenico walked through the flames unhurt, *that* would be a miracle, and the fervor of that good brother served as a cheering augury. Yet Savonarola was acutely conscious that his reasons for refusal had failed to quell the secret longing of his followers to see him accept the challenge.

It was impossible for him to satisfy them. With bitter distress, he realized he could no longer resist the prosecution of the trial in Fra Domenico's case. He had not spoken a falsehood when declaring his belief in a future supernatural attestation; however, his constitution was such that while it was easy for him to believe in a distant, undefined miracle screened by strong reasons, and even easier to believe in inward miracles like his own prophetic inspiration, it was insurmountably difficult for him to believe in the probability of a miracle pressing all its details upon his imagination—a miracle demanding not just belief but exceptional action.

Savonarola's nature held opposing tendencies in almost equal strength: a passionate sensibility, impatient of definite thought and flooding every idea with emotion, alternating with a keen perception of outward facts and a vigorous practical judgment. In this case, the latter characteristics were stimulated by an acute physical sensitiveness that gave overpowering force to the conception of pain and destruction as a necessary sequence of past experiences. The promptitude with which men consent to touch red-hot iron with a wet finger is not measured by their theoretical acceptance of the impossibility of burning; practical belief depends on what is most strongly represented in the mind at a given moment. With the Frate's constitution, when the Trial by Fire was urged upon his imagination as an immediate demand, it was impossible for him to believe that he or any other man could walk through the flames unhurt—impossible for him to believe that even if he resolved to offer himself, he would not shrink at the last moment.

But the Florentines were unlikely to make such fine distinctions. To the common run of mankind, finding moral questions easy and judging conduct by concise alternatives is a proof of mental vigor. Nothing seemed plainer than that a man who declared God would not leave him without a miraculous guarantee, yet drew back when the test was proposed, had said what he did not believe. Were not Fra Domenico and Fra Mariano, along with scores of Piagnoni, ready to enter the fire? What caused their superior courage if not superior faith? Savonarola could not explain his conduct satisfactorily to his friends, nor thoroughly to himself. Our naked feelings hasten to clothe themselves in propositions lying at hand among our store of opinions; to give a true account of what passes within us requires something besides sincerity, even when that sincerity is unmixed. In these very moments, as Savonarola knelt in audible prayer, he had ceased to hear the words on his lips. They were drowned by argumentative voices within him shaping reasons for an outward audience.

"To appeal to heaven for a miracle by a rash acceptance of a challenge, which is a mere snare prepared by ignoble foes, would be a tempting of God, and the appeal would not be responded to. Let the Pope's legate come, let the ambassadors of all great Powers come and promise that the calling of a General Council and the reform of the Church shall hang on the miracle, and I will enter the flames, trusting that God will not withhold His seal from that great work. Until then, I reserve myself for higher duties directly laid upon me: it is not permitted to me to leap from the chariot for the sake of wrestling with every loud vaunter. But Fra Domenico's invincible zeal to enter the trial may be the sign of a Divine vocation, may be a pledge that the miracle—"

No! When Savonarola brought his mind close to the threatened scene in the Piazza, imagining a human body entering the fire, his belief recoiled. It was not an event his imagination could simply see; he felt it with shuddering vibrations traveling to the extremities of his sensitive fingers. The miracle could not be. Nay, the trial itself was not to happen; he was warranted in doing all in his power to hinder it. The fuel might be ready in the Piazza, the people assembled, the formalities gone through—all this was perhaps inevitable now, and he could no longer resist it without bringing dishonor upon himself, yes, and therefore upon the cause of God. But it was not really intended that the Franciscan should enter the fire; while *he* hung back, there would be means to prevent Fra Domenico's entrance. At the very worst, if Fra Domenico were compelled to enter, he should carry the consecrated Host with him, and with that Mystery in his hand, there might be a warrant for expecting that the ordinary effects of fire would be stayed; or, more probably, this demand would be resisted, becoming a final obstacle to the trial.

These intentions could not be avowed; he must appear frankly to await the trial and trust in its issue. This dissidence between inward reality and outward seeming was not the Christian simplicity after which he had striven through years of youth and prime, which he had preached as a chief fruit of the Divine life. In the stress and heat of the day, with cheeks burning and shouts ringing in the ears, who is so blest as to remember the yearnings of the cool, silent morning and know that he has not belied them?

"O God, it is for the sake of the people—because they are blind—because their faith depends on me. If I put on sackcloth and cast myself among the ashes, who will take up the standard and head the battle? Have I not been led by a way I knew not to the work that lies before me?"

The conflict could not end. In the effort at prayerful pleading, the uneasy mind laved its smart continually in thoughts of the greatness of that task which there was no other man to fulfill if he forsook it. It was not a thing of everyday that a man should be inspired with the vision and daring that made a sacred rebel.

Even the words of prayer had died away. He continued to kneel, but his mind was filled with images of results to be felt through all Europe; the sense of immediate difficulties was being lost in the glow of that vision, when the knocking at the door announced the expected visit.

Savonarola drew on his mantle before leaving his cell, as was his custom when receiving visitors. With that immediate response to any appeal from without which belongs to a power-loving nature accustomed to make its power felt by speech, he met Tito with a glance as self-possessed and strong as if he had risen from resolution instead of conflict.

Tito did not kneel but simply offered a greeting of profound deference, which Savonarola received quietly without sacerdotal words. Desiring him to be seated, he asked at once: "Your business is something of weight, my son, that could not be conveyed through others?"

"Assuredly, father, else I should not have presumed to ask it. I will not trespass on your time by any proem. I gathered from a remark of Messer Domenico Mazzinghi that you might be glad to make use of the next special courier sent to France with despatches from the Ten. I must entreat you to pardon me if I have been too officious; but inasmuch as Messer Domenico is at this moment away at his villa, I wished to apprise you that a courier carrying important letters is about to depart for Lyons at daybreak tomorrow."

The muscles of Fra Girolamo's face were eminently under command, as must be the case with all men whose personality is powerful, and in deliberate speech he was habitually cautious, confiding his intentions to none without necessity. But under any strong mental stimulus, his eyes were liable to a dilatation and added brilliancy that no strength of will could control. He looked steadily at Tito and did not answer immediately, as if considering whether the information he had just heard met any purpose of his.

Tito, whose glance never seemed observant but rarely let anything escape it, had expected precisely that dilatation and flash of Savonarola's eyes which he had noted on other occasions. He saw it, and then immediately busied himself in adjusting his gold fibula, which had become misaligned, seemingly implying that he awaited an answer patiently.

The fact was that Savonarola had expected to receive this intimation from Domenico Mazzinghi, one of the Ten, an ardent disciple whom he had already employed to write a private letter to the Florentine ambassador in France, preparing the way for a letter to the French king himself in Savonarola's handwriting, which now lay ready in the desk at his side. It was a letter calling on the king to assist in summoning a General Council that might reform the abuses of the Church and begin by deposing Pope Alexander, who was not rightfully Pope, being a vicious unbeliever elected by corruption and governing by simony.

This fact was not what Tito knew, but what his constructive talent, guided by subtle indications, had led him to guess and hope.

"It is true, my son," said Savonarola quietly, "it is true I have letters which I would gladly send by safe conveyance under cover to our ambassador. Our community of San Marco, as you know, has affairs in France, being, amongst other things, responsible for a debt to that singularly wise and experienced Frenchman, Signor Philippe de Comines, on the library of the Medici, which we purchased; but I apprehend that Domenico Mazzinghi himself may return to the city before evening, and I should gain more time for preparation of the letters if I waited to deposit them in his hands."

"Assuredly, reverend father, that might be better on all grounds, except one, namely, that if anything occurred to hinder Messer Domenico's return, the despatch of the letters would require either that I should come to San Marco again at a late hour, or that you should send them to me by your secretary; and I am aware that you wish to guard against the false inferences which might be drawn from a too frequent communication between yourself and any officer of the government." In throwing out this difficulty, Tito felt that the more unwillingness the Frate showed to trust him, the more certain he would be of his conjecture.

Savonarola was silent; but while he kept his mouth firm, a slight glow rose in his face with the suppressed excitement growing within him. It would be a critical moment—that in which he delivered the letter out of his own hands.

"It is most probable that Messer Domenico will return in time," said Tito, affecting to consider the Frate's determination settled, and rising from his chair as he spoke. "With your permission, I will take my leave, father, not to trespass on your time when my errand is done; but as I may not be favoured with another interview, I venture to confide to you—what is not yet known to others, except to the magnificent Ten—that I contemplate resigning my secretaryship and leaving Florence shortly. Am I presuming too much on your interest in stating what relates chiefly to myself?"

"Speak on, my son," said the Frate; "I desire to know your prospects."

"I find, then, that I have mistaken my real vocation in forsaking the career of pure letters, for which I was brought up. The politics of Florence, father, are worthy to occupy the greatest mind—to occupy yours—when a man is in a position to execute his own ideas; but when, like me, he can only hope to be the mere instrument of changing schemes,

The Piazza della Signoria, usually a stage for civic pride, transformed into a theater of suspense on the seventh of April. A crowd, denser than any gathered for the Feast of San Giovanni, pressed against every available inch of the square. Men hung precariously from iron rods jutting from walls, wedged themselves between rough stone pillars, and balanced atop the necks of statues, their limbs cramped and skin chafed, yet utterly unmindful of discomfort. They had come to witness a miracle. While humanity often hears of wonders and accepts them with varying degrees of skepticism, the Florentines were about to see one unfold before their eyes. At the very least, they would witness the descent; if the monk emerged unscathed, it would be a divine sign; if he perished, the verdict would be equally clear.

Before them stood the long platform, eight feet wide and stretching twenty yards across the marble terrace near the Old Palace, flanked by the frowning gaze of the stone lion, the Marzocco. Upon it lay a terrifying grove of fuel: dry oak branches, crackling thorns, and tow soaked in oil, prepared to roar into a consuming flame. To ensure the spectacle's gravity, the Signoria had deployed five hundred hired soldiers before the palace, while five hundred Compagnacci under Dolfo Spini waited on the opposite side. Between them, three hundred armed citizens loyal to Savonarola, led by Marco Salviati, stood guard near Orgagna's Loggia, where the Franciscans and Dominicans were to face each other.

The air buzzed with anticipation as the Franciscans took their silent, grey-robed places on one side of the loggia. From the other side, a deafening chant rose from two hundred voices: "Let God arise, and let His enemies be scattered." The leader, Fra Domenico, wore a cope of flame-colored velvet, his simple mind exalted by faith and his genuine intent to walk into the fire for the glory of God and his rival, Fra Girolamo. Behind him walked Savonarola in white vestments, carrying the consecrated Host. He, too, projected an aura of unshakeable confidence, his face flashing with energy under the scrutiny of thousands.

Yet, beneath this public performance, a profound internal struggle tore at Savonarola. He was not merely acting the part of a prophet facing martyrdom; he was performing a desperate charade to avoid impending ruin. The weight of foreboding pressed upon his heart, heavier than the leaden sky above. Two evenings prior, the courier of the Ten had been arrested, his dispatches stolen. Savonarola's private letters were now in the hands of the Duke of Milan and soon the Pope, providing the very justification for the extreme measures currently being plotted against him.

Watching this drama from a window of the Old Palace was Tito Melema. His satisfaction was not born of malice, but of the mild self-gratification of a gambler who had finally won. To Tito, the complex web of human nature, molded into the figure of a plain-faced friar, was merely a puzzle solved. Fra Girolamo was an immensely clever man, capable of keeping secrets and mixing absurd superstition with shrewd political notions, but he was also a tool Tito had used to climb the ladder. Now, with the trap sprung, Tito intended to leave Florence entirely. The "Trial by Fire" was merely the final act of a comedy written by Tito, one that the thick-headed Dolfo Spini could never have orchestrated alone.

As the chanting swelled into a roar, joined by the Piagnoni waving their red crosses, the tension in the square reached a fever pitch. The Franciscans, however, remained silent, their grey robes a stark contrast to the fiery colors of their opponents. They had two champions: Fra Giuliano paired with Fra Domenico, while the original challenger, Fra Francesco, reserved his dispute solely for Savonarola.

The crowd grew restless. "All must be ready now," they thought, watching the flame-colored cope. But the Dominicans did not move. Instead, figures passed to and fro between the loggia and the palace. Dignitaries debated with the Franciscans, and eventually, Fra Domenico was summoned inside. The crowd assumed the fire had been lit and the miracle was imminent. But the cope vanished, only to return moments later with another Dominican, guarded by Franciscans lest he be "enchanted."

The realization dawned slowly: Fra Domenico was not entering the fire. The focus shifted to Fra Girolamo. He stood firm, delivering a bold, ironic speech demanding the cessation of delays, reminiscent of Elijah challenging the priests of Baal. But words were useless to a crowd hungry for action and trapped in uncomfortable positions. If the miracle did not begin, the blame would fall squarely on Fra Girolamo for failing to offer himself when the fuel was ready.

Time slipped away as clouds gathered, darkening the light and sending a chill through the hungry, impatient multitude. Suddenly, the dynamic shifted. Fra Domenico insisted on carrying a crucifix into the fire, an object the Franciscans deemed too sacred to profane. Reluctantly yielding, Savonarola handed him the vessel containing the Host instead. A theological debate erupted instantly. Was it impious to burn the Sacrament? Could the "Accidents" of the Eucharist survive the flames while the "Substance" remained? The question was elastic, impossible to settle by fire, yet both sides dug in their heels.

The sky darkened further, and the air grew colder. The chanting faded into confused murmurs and rising shouts of scorn. "Light the fire!" "Drive them in!" "What is your last vision?" The crowd's patience evaporated, replaced by a chaotic uproar of clashing metal and trampling feet. Dolfo Spini's Compagnacci surged forward, eager to seize the "arch-hypocrite," pushing the civilians aside and threatening the loggia.

But the guard under Marco Salviati held firm, repulsing the rush. In that moment of utter confusion, the heavens opened. Rain began to fall, initially in scattered drops, then with violent force. It soaked the dry fuel on the platform, turning the potential inferno into a damp mess. Streams of water ran off the stones, drenching the weary, hungry crowd. The rain washed away the dust of the square and extinguished the possibility of the trial before it could truly begin.

The Signoria, relieved to have an excuse to disperse the dangerous gathering, declared the event over. Savonarola stepped away from the loggia, the rain plastering his white robes to his frame. He knew the design of his enemies was fulfilled; his honor was not saved. He would have to face the enraged mob again, knowing that friends who once defended him with their lives would now turn against him.

He asked for a guard from the Signoria, which was granted. He had been willing to die for his cause, but to die in dishonor, branded a false prophet? "O God! That is not martyrdom," he thought, his courage mounting despite the moral assault. "It is the blotting out of a life that has been a protest against wrong. Let me die because of the worth that is in me, not because of my weakness."

As the rain ceased and the breaking clouds cast a pale, impartial light upon him, Savonarola walked away with the Sacrament in his hand. There was no glory in the light, no smile from heaven. Only the cold, steady illumination that justifies or condemns by simply revealing the truth of things. He heard no blessings, only taunts and threats. He knew this was a foretaste of the bitterness to come, yet his spirit remained unbroken.

"Well parried, Frate!" Tito Melema called out as Savonarola descended the steps. "But I fear your career at Florence is ended. What say you, my Niccolò?"

"It is a pity his falsehoods were not all of a wise sort," Machiavelli replied, shaking his head with a melancholy shrug. "With the times so much on his side as they are about Church affairs, he might have done something great."

The following day was Palm Sunday, known in the olive-rich valleys of the Valdarno simply as Olive Sunday. The morning sun broke with a crystalline clarity, washing away the lingering damp of the previous night's rain. Once more, Savonarola ascended the pulpit of San Marco, gazing upon a congregation whose faith remained unshaken. In a tone of calm, sorrowful sincerity, he proclaimed his readiness to die, seeing his own doom clearly before him, undisturbed by any other vision. He offered the benediction, and beneath his gaze rose the faces of men and women lifted in veneration and love. Then, having descended the steps, he turned his back upon that sight forever.

Before the sun had set, Florence erupted into chaos. The passions stirred the day prior had smoldered through the quiet morning, now bursting forth with a fury aided by design and sanctioned by official complicity. The disturbance began at the Duomo, where certain Compagnacci attempted to disrupt the evening sermon the Piagnoni had gathered to hear. But once blood was drawn and the gathering turned to affray, the cry rang out: "To San Marco! Fire to San Marco!"

Long before darkness fully claimed the sky, the church and convent were besieged by an enraged, swelling multitude. Resistance was fierce. The monks, long aware of the hostility brewing outside, kept arms within their walls; some fought with such vigor in their long white tunics that they resembled Knights Templar. Even Savonarola's command could not quell the instinct for self-defense that surged beneath the Dominican serge. Laymen who had refused to flee also fought desperately. From the high altar near the great crucifix came the crack of gunfire; from the convent roof, stones and burning embers rained down; within the cloisters, swords clashed in close combat. Despite the overwhelming force of the attackers, the assault raged until the depths of night.

The government's demonstrations had targeted the convent directly. Early in the attack, guards were summoned not to disperse the mob, but to order everyone inside to lay down arms, to command all laymen to depart, and to demand that Savonarola himself leave Florentine territory within twelve hours. Had Savonarola obeyed then, he likely would have been torn apart; he was willing to go, but his friends restrained him. It was deemed too perilous even for men of high standing to exit via the garden wall, yet among those who chose to flee was Francesco Valori, hoping to rally rescue forces from without.

Now, as the night grew deep—and the struggle could hardly endure much longer, with the Compagnacci poised to breach the library where Savonarola prayed with the brethren who had laid down their arms—a second body of guards arrived. Commissioned by the Signoria, they demanded the surrender of Fra Girolamo and his two coadjutors, Fra Domenico and Fra Salvestro.

A roar of triumphant hate echoed as the lantern-light revealed the friar emerging from the convent door, escorted by a guard offering no safety save that of the prison. The struggle shifted instantly to a race: who should reach the stream rushing up the narrow street first to witness the Prophet carried back in ignominy to the Piazza, where he had dared them the day before? Who should stand closest to hurl insults, or worse, to strike and trample him? This was easy for some armed Compagnacci, who mingled freely with the guards.

As Savonarola felt himself dragged and shoved through the jeering crowd, as lanterns were raised to reveal mocking faces, and as he endured spittle, blows, and kicks accompanied by the grossest insults, it seemed to him that the bitterest cup of life had been drained. If men judged him guilty and thirsted for his blood, death alone awaited him. Yet the deepest bitterness cannot be wrung from the lips by external force; the lowest depth of resignation is not found in martyrdom, but only when one covers one's head in silence and feels, "I am not worthy to be a martyr; the Truth shall prosper, but not by me."

That brief, imperfect triumph of humiliating the friar, who soon vanished beneath the doorway of the Old Palace, was merely like the taste of blood to a tiger. Were there not the houses of the hypocrite's friends to be sacked? Already, half the armed multitude, too far in the rear to share heavily in the siege, had turned to the more profitable work of attacking wealthy homes. They did not plunder with planless greed, but with discriminating selection, striking only the residences of chief Piagnoni. This showed the riot was guided, the rabble with clubs and staves well officered by sword-girt Compagnacci. Next in rank of criminality stood the ambitious Francesco Valori, suspected of plotting with the Frate to make himself a Doge or Gonfaloniere for life. And there was the grey-haired man who, eight months prior, had raised his voice in ferocious demands for justice against five fellow citizens. He had barely escaped San Marco to experience what *others* called justice: his house surrounded by an angry, greedy throng, his wife struck dead by an arrow, and himself murdered on his way to answer a summons to the Palazzo by the swords of men named Ridolfi and Tornabuoni.

Thus, this Masque of the Furies, called Riot, was enacted in Florence through the hours of night and into the early morning.

Yet the chief director remained invisible, issuing orders from a private retreat, for his name was too high to let his red feather wave amidst the work done before dawn. The retreat was the same house and room in a quiet street between Santa Croce and San Marco where we had seen Tito pay a secret visit to Dolfo Spini. Here the Captain of the Compagnacci sat through this memorable night, receiving visitors who came and went, some disguised as armed Compagnacci, others dressed obscurely without visible arms. Abundant wine lay on the table, cups ready for chance comers. Though Spini guarded against excess, he drank enough to heighten the excitement produced by the ceaseless news brought to him.

Among the obscurely dressed visitors, Ser Ceccone was one of the most frequent. As the hours advanced toward the morning twilight, he remained Spini's constant companion, joined by Francesco Cei, who was then in careless hiding in Florence, expecting his banishment revoked once the Frate's fall was accomplished.

The tapers had burned themselves into low, shapeless masses, and holes in the shutters were marked by a sombre outward light, when Spini, having risen and paced with an angry flush on his face after some talk with those two unmilitary companions, burst out:

"The devil spit him! He shall pay for it, though. Ha, ha! The claws shall be down on him when he little thinks of them. So *he* was to be the great man after all! He has been pretending to chuck everything towards my cap, as if I were a blind beggar, all the while winking and filling his own *scarella*. I should like to hang skins about him and set my hounds on him! And he has that fine ruby of mine, which I was a fool enough to give him yesterday. Malediction! And he was laughing at me in his sleeve two years ago, spoiling the best plan that ever was laid. I was a fool for trusting myself with a rascal who had long-twisted contrivances that nobody could see to the end but himself."

"A Greek, too," said Francesco Cei, a slight smile of amusement on his face at Spini's fuming, "who dropped into Florence with gems packed about him. You did not choose your confidant very wisely, my Dolfo."

"He is a cursed deal cleverer than you, Francesco, and handsomer too," Spini retorted, turning on his associate with a general desire to worry anything that presented itself.

"I humbly conceive," said Ser Ceccone, "that Messer Francesco's poetic genius will outweigh—"

"Yes, yes, rub your hands! I hate that notary's trick of yours," interrupted Spini, whose patronage consisted largely in this sort of frankness. "But here comes Taddeo, or somebody: now is the time! What news, eh?" he continued as two Compagnacci entered with heated looks.

"Bad!" said one. "The people have made up their minds they were going to sack Soderini's house, and now that they have been balked, we shall have them turning on us if we do not take care. I suspect there are some Mediceans buzzing about among them, and we may see them attacking your palace over the bridge before long, unless we can find another bait for them."

"I have it!" cried Spini. Seizing Taddeo by the belt, he drew him aside to give directions while the other went on telling Cei how the Signoria had interfered regarding Soderini's house.

"Ecco!" exclaimed Spini, presently giving Taddeo a slight push toward the door. "Go, and make quick work."

On the far bank of the Arno, where the twilight had settled into a chill, slate-grey hue, another figure emerged from the shadows, moving with a purpose entirely disconnected from the armed bands crossing the river nearby. This man sought not the city's heart, but its neglected margins. He made his way to a stretch of the riverbank hidden from view by towering warehouses and granaries, a place where the silence was heavy and the air damp with the scent of rotting rushes and stagnant gutters. Here, amidst the long, sodden grass, he sat down, bending his weary frame over the swift, dark current.

He had come for the river's bounty. In times past, a kind-hearted beggar had dropped a crust of bread, a raw carrot, or apple parings into his lap. These small, anonymous gifts were the only reason he endured the cold vigil. To wait here, unseen, was preferable to the silent, humiliating supplication required on the church steps beyond the Porta San Frediano.

Baldassarre loathed begging with a visceral hatred; he would have preferred death to the act of asking for charity. Yet, he lived for a single, consuming reason. It was no longer a hope, but a delusion that had taken root deep in his mind—a possibility so persistent it defied logic. It was the kind of obsession that drives a woman to watch a headland for a ship long known to be a wreck, refusing to accept the neighbors' certainty of doom. Since fleeing the convent hospital of San Miniato, where the monks had tended him only until he became helpless, Baldassarre had searched in vain for the Wife who was to be his salvation. She had vanished, likely claimed by the pestilence that seemed to swallow Florence whole. Without her, the idea of sacred vengeance through his own hand had crumbled. His knife was lost, and his body and mind were too shattered to forge another weapon or devise a plan. He was a broken, bewildered old man, yet he clung to life, waiting for something formless and dim that pulsed within him with the intensity of a waking dream. He crept out into the grey light, seated himself in the dank grass, and watched the waters, searching for a faint, elusive promise.

While Baldassarre waited in solitude, the Compagnacci were already in motion. The formidable bands of armed men, left largely unchecked by a distracted Signoria, had split into two streams, both converging on the Arno. One mass headed for the Ponte Rubaconte, the other for the Ponte Vecchio, yet their destination was identical: the Via de' Bardi. A whispered command had spread through the rabble, promising plunder and the sack of a specific house. The leaders understood the true intent: to ambush the master of that house in his morning slumber.

But the master, Tito, was neither asleep nor in bed. The events of the previous day had driven him to flee Florence. Investigations were imminent, and delay meant danger. Fear, once a tangible armor he had worn, had died, only to be replaced by its ghost—the undying habit of dread. He felt unsafe within the city's fierce, turbid walls. His house was being handed over to a new tenant, his horses awaited in San Gallo, and his family, Tessa and the children, were lodged safely in the Borgo. Tito descended the stone steps into his courtyard, passing through the great doorway. He was no longer the man who had once fallen in love with Romola; that life was cast off, and he was ready to depart.

He turned swiftly toward the Piazza dei Mozzi, intending to cross the Ponte Rubaconte, but sounds caught his ear, forcing him to reverse course. Was the mob approaching from the Oltrarno? He hurried toward the Ponte Vecchio, drawing his mantle tight around him. Before he could reach the end of the Via de' Bardi, the sounds grew louder, unmistakable now. The mob was coming over the bridge. Driven by an impulse stronger than reason, he turned to confirm it, only to find the street filled with the throng entering from the opposite end. He did not retreat to his house; he reasoned they would not attack him personally, yet he carried valuables, and chaos made all things possible. Necessity forged his courage. He marched toward the bridge, the roar of trampling feet and confused shouts drowning out everything else.

At the end of the street, the crowd pouring from the bridge hemmed him in. Before he could process the sudden shout rising around him, he felt himself surrounded not by unarmed rioters, but by armed Compagnacci. His cap was knocked from his head, and he was shoved violently forward into the crush of the mob along the narrow bridge passage. The cries erupted instantly: "Piagnone! Medicean! Throw him over the bridge!"

Strong hands tore at his mantle, threatening to strangle him until his belt buckle gave way. They snatched at his money pouch, the *scarsella*, but he was already being dragged and hustled. Shouts of execration rang in his ears, spreading panic even to those who had not yet recognized him. Tito's horror was that he would be trampled or struck down before reaching the open arches of the bridge. His only hope was that they would throw him into the river before inflicting fatal wounds. His entire soul focused on this desperate gamble.

They reached the central arches. In that moment of extremity, Tito summoned a final reserve of strength. With a frantic effort, he unclasped his belt and flung the pouch forward onto a patch of clear space near the parapet, shouting in a ringing voice, "There are diamonds! There is gold!"

In the instant the mob's attention shifted to the pouch, Tito seized his chance. He threw himself onto the parapet and leaped with all his might, plunging into the dark river below with a great splash. It was his salvation. He had survived drowning before, and as he broke the surface, gasping for air, he felt a surge of deliverance. He struck out with the energy of his youth, aided by the current. If he could reach the Ponte alla Carrara, he might land in a remote district and make his way to San Gallo. Life was still possible. The idiot mob on the bridge, shouting and bellowing, would assume he was drowned.

They believed him. Peering over the parapet into the darkness, they saw nothing but the moving blackness of floating hair and velvet sleeves.

From the other side, however, a pale olive face emerged from the dark water, white and strained against the current. It was a face unforgettable in its features: a square forehead, long low arches of eyebrows, and lustrous, agate-like eyes. The face drifted onward, nostrils inflated, blue veins distended on the temples. He passed the bridge of Santa Trinita. Should he risk landing now? No. He heard, or imagined he heard, cries pursuing him. Terror pressed hardest from the side of his fellow men; he was less afraid of fate than of humanity, and he swam on, panting and straining, though exhaustion began to cloud his senses.

The last bridge passed. He felt vaguely that he was safe, but the current carried him blindly, exhaustion creeping into a dreamy state bordering on unconsciousness.

Then, eyes discerned him—aged, strong eyes fixed on the distance. Baldassarre, looking up blankly from his vigil by the runlet, saw a white object drifting along the broader stream. Could this be fortune? He watched until the object took form, then leaned forward with a start, his eyes filling with a new, fierce light. Yet he remained motionless. Something was being brought to him.

The next instant, a man's body was cast violently onto the grass just two yards from him. Baldassarre sprang forward like a panther, clutching the velvet tunic as he fell upon the body, flashing a look into the man's face.

Dead? The eyes were rigid. But no, it could not be. Justice often brought men back from the brink. Baldassarre did not feel feeble now; he knew exactly what he could do. He inserted his large fingers into the neck of the tunic, holding them tight, kneeling on one knee beside the body and watching the face. A fierce hope burned in his heart, mixed with trembling. In his eyes, there was only ferocity; the slow-burning remnant of life within him seemed to leap into flame.

Rigid. Still rigid. Those eyes with half-fallen lids were locked against vengeance. Could he truly be dead? Time was hard to measure, but it seemed long enough for hope to freeze into despair.

Surely now the eyelids were quivering. The eyes were no longer rigid. A vibrating light flickered within them; they opened wide.

"Ah, yes! You see me—you know me!"

Tito knew him, but he did not know if it was life or death that had brought him into the presence of his injured father. It might be death—and death might mean this chill gloom with the hideous past hanging over him forever.

Now, Baldassarre's only dread was that the young limbs should escape him. He pressed his knuckles against the round throat and knelt upon the chest with all the force of his aged frame. Let death come now!

He kept his watch on the face. When the eyes went rigid again, he dared not trust them. He would never release his hold until someone came. Justice would send a witness, and then he, Baldassarre, would declare that he had killed this traitor, to whom he had once been a father. They would perhaps believe him now, and then he would be content with the struggle of justice on earth—then he would desire to die with his hold on this body, following the traitor to hell to clutch him there.

So he knelt, pressing his knuckles against the throat, refusing to trust the seeming death, until the light grew strong and he could kneel no longer. Then he sat on the body, still clutching the neck of the tunic. But the hours passed, and no witness came. No eyes descried the two human bodies lying among the tall grass by the riverside. Florence was busy with greater affairs, preparing for a deeper tragedy.

Not long after those two bodies lay in the grass, Savonarola was being tortured, crying out in agony, "I will confess!"

It was not until the sun had sunk westward that a wagon drawn by a mild grey ox arrived at the edge of the grassy margin. As the driver leaned to gather the round stones heaped nearby, ready for removal, he detected a startling object in the grass. The aged man had fallen forward, his dead clutch still gripping the garment of the other. It was impossible to separate them; indeed, it was better to place them in the wagon and carry them as they were into the great Piazza, so notice might be given to the Eight.

As the wagon entered the frequented streets, a growing crowd escorted it with its strange burden. No one recognized the bodies for a long while, for the aged face had fallen forward, half hiding the younger. But before they were moved out of sight, recognition came.

"I know that old man," Piero di Cosimo testified. "I painted his likeness once. He is the prisoner who clutched Melema on the steps of the Duomo."

"He is perhaps the same old man who appeared at supper in my gardens," said Bernardo Rucellai, one of the Eight. "I had forgotten him. I thought he had died in prison. But there is no knowing the truth now."

Who can point to the work of justice and say, "It is there"? Justice is like the Kingdom of God—it is not merely a fact without us, but a great yearning within us.

Romola drifted from the turbulence of her dreams into a profound, heavy slumber, only to rise again into a restless, busy dreaming until the final image solidified: she stretched her arms wide within the cold, flickering court of the Bargello, where the shadows of the tapers burned brighter and brighter until the darkness was utterly consumed by light. Her eyes snapped open to the pale, insistent gray of morning. Her boat lay motionless in a secluded cove; to her right stretched the unblemished, sapphire expanse of the Mediterranean, and to her left unfolded a landscape of recurring, rhythmic beauty, a scene etched into the shores of that loveliest sea.

Deep within a curve of the mountains, a swath of green land lay sheltered, draped in the soft shadows of trees leaning against rocky heights. Here and there, gleaming above the canopy, a path wound upward to a cluster of buildings that seemed to have scrambled hastily up the slope, securing a precarious perch solely to display its tall belfry as a beacon to the scattered village below. The sun, newly risen, cast oblique rays upon the western horn of this crescent-shaped bay; the rest of the valley remained bathed in dewy shadow. No sound disturbed the stillness; the waters themselves seemed to have curved inward to rest.

The golden rays touched Romola, thrilling her limbs with a gentle caress. She lay motionless, hardly watching the scene, but simply absorbing the presence of peace and beauty. In the early hours of youth, passive existence can sometimes become a form of Lethe, where the exquisite, indefinite sensation of the present creates a bliss devoid of memory or desire. As the warmth seeped into her young limbs and her eyes rested on this secluded luxuriance, the agitating past seemed to glide away like the dark specter of the Bargello, and the afternoon dreams of her girlhood returned. For a minute or two, the oblivion was untroubled; she did not even conceive that she could rest here forever, she merely felt that she rested.

Then, consciousness sharpened. She realized she was lying in a boat that had borne her over the waters all night. Instead of delivering her to death, it had served as the gently lulling cradle of a new life. Despite her evening despair, she was glad the morning had come, glad to rest in the familiar sunlight rather than in the unknown regions of death. *Could* she not rest here? No sound from Florence could reach her. Already, however, the oblivion was troubled; from behind the golden haze pierced the silhouettes of domes, towers, and walls, parted by a river and enclosed by green hills.

She rose from her reclining posture and sat up in the boat, willing herself to resist the rush of thoughts conjured by the conjecture of how far the boat had carried her. Why should she mind? This was a sheltered nook where simple villagers would not harm her. For a little while, at least, she might rest and resolve on nothing. Soon she would procure bread and milk, then nestle in the green quiet to feel a pause in her life. She turned to watch the crescent-shaped valley, seeking to reclaim the soothing sense of peace she had felt upon waking.

She had not been in this contemplative state more than a few minutes when a piercing cry cut across the stillness. It was not a brief cry, but continuous, growing more intense with every passing second. Romola felt certain it was the cry of a child in distress, unanswered. She started up, placing one foot on the side of the boat, ready to leap onto the beach, but she paused to listen. The mother must be near; the cry should soon cease. But it continued, drawing Romola irresistibly, seeming all the more pitiful for the preceding peace, until she jumped onto the sand and walked many paces before knowing which direction to take.

The cry appeared to emanate from a rough garden growth yards to her right, where she spotted a half-ruined hovel. Climbing a low, broken stone fence, she moved across patches of weedy green crops and ripe, neglected corn. The cry grew plainer, confirming her suspicion, yet even in this hurried walk, she felt an oppressive change in the air as she left the sea behind. Was there some taint lurking among the green luxuriance that had seemed such an inviting shelter? She could now see the opening to the hovel, and the cry darted through her like a physical pain. The next moment her foot was within the doorway, but the sight that met her in the sombre light arrested her with a shock of awe and horror.

On the straw-strewn floor lay three dead bodies: a tall man, a girl of about eight years old, and a young woman whose long black hair was being clutched and pulled by a living child—the child sending forth the piercing cry. Romola's experience in the haunts of death and disease made her thought and action prompt. She lifted the little living child, and while trying to soothe it against her bosom, she glanced back at the bodies to confirm they were truly dead. The strongly marked features and peculiar garb led her to conjecture they were Spanish or Portuguese Jews, perhaps put ashore and abandoned by rapacious sailors who claimed their property. Such things happened continually to Jews compelled to flee their homes by the Inquisition; the cruelty of greed thrust them from the sea, and the cruelty of superstition thrust them back to it.

"But surely," thought Romola, "I shall find some woman in the village whose mother's heart will not let her refuse to tend this helpless child—if the real mother is indeed dead."

This doubt lingered because while the man and the girl looked emaciated and showed signs of having been dead for some time, the woman seemed harder, retaining the robustness of her form. Kneeling, Romola was about to lay her hand on the heart, but as she lifted the piece of yellow woollen drapery across the bosom, she saw the purple spots marking the familiar pestilence. It struck her then that if the villagers knew of this, she might face greater difficulty in gaining their help; they might shrink from her with the child in her arms. But she had money to offer, and they would not refuse goat's milk in exchange.

She set out toward the village, her mind filled with the effort to soothe the little dark creature and wondering how she might win a woman's compassion. She could not help hoping, with a certain awe she had observed in herself, that her appearance as an unknown stranger in religious dress would inspire trust. As she crossed a breadth of cultivated ground, she noticed with wonder that patches of corn had been left to over-ripeness, untouched by the sickle, and that golden apples and dark figs lay rotting on the weedy earth. There were grassy spaces, but no cows, sheep, or goats. The stillness began to have something fearful in it to Romola; she hurried toward the thickest cluster of houses, where the most life would appeal on behalf of the helpless life she carried. She had picked up two figs, biting little pieces from the sweet pulp to still the child.

She entered between two lines of dwellings. It was time for villagers to be stirring, yet not a soul was in sight. The air became increasingly oppressive, laden with some horrible impurity. One door stood open, revealing grim emptiness. Another opened to show a man lying dead, fully clothed, his head resting athwart a spade handle, an earthenware cruse in his hand as if he had fallen suddenly.

Horror took possession of Romola. Was she in a village of the unburied dead? She wanted to listen for any faint sound, but the child cried out afresh when she ceased to feed it, filling her ears. Finally, she saw a figure crawling slowly out of a house, soon sinking back into a sitting posture against the wall. She hastened toward it; it was a young woman in fevered anguish, holding a pitcher. As Romola approached, the woman did not start; the one need was too absorbing for any other idea.

"Water! Get me water!" she moaned.

Romola stooped to take the pitcher and said gently in her ear, "You shall have water; can you point toward the well?"

The hand lifted toward the distant end of the little street, and Romola set off with all the speed she could manage while carrying the pitcher and feeding the child. The little one grew more content as the morsels of sweet pulp were repeated, ceasing to distress her with its cry, allowing Romola to pay less distracted attention to her surroundings.

The well lay twenty yards or more beyond the end of the street. As Romola approached it, her eyes were drawn to the opposite green slope below the church. High up, on a patch of grass between the trees, she had descried a cow and a couple of goats, and she tried to trace a line of path that would lead her close to that cheering sight once her errand was done. Occupied thus, she was unaware that she was very near the well, and that someone approaching it from the other side had fixed astonished eyes upon her.

Romola certainly presented a sight that could hardly be seen without causing pause and palpitation. With her gaze fixed intently on the distant slope, the long lines of her thick grey garment giving a gliding character to her rapid walk, her hair rolling backward and illuminated on the left side by the sun-rays, and the little olive baby on her right arm looking out with jet-black eyes, she might well startle the youth of fifteen accustomed to swinging the censer before a Madonna less fair and marvellous than this.

"She carries a pitcher in her hand—to fetch water for the sick. It is the Holy Mother, come to take care of the people who have the pestilence."

It was a sight of awe; he would perhaps be angry with those who fetched water for themselves alone. The youth flung down his vessel in terror, and Romola, aware now of someone near her, saw the black-and-white figure fly as if for dear life toward the slope she had just contemplated. But remembering the parched sufferer, she half-filled her pitcher quickly and hastened back.

Entering the house to look for a small cup, she saw salt meat and meal; there were no signs of want in the dwelling. With nimble movement, she seated the baby on the ground and lifted a cup of water to the sufferer, who drank eagerly and then closed her eyes, leaning her head backward as if giving herself up to the sense of relief. Presently she opened her eyes and, looking at Romola, said languidly, "Who are you?"

"I came over the sea," said Romola. "I only came this morning. Are all the people dead in these houses?"

"I think they are all ill now—all that are not dead. My father and my sister lie dead upstairs, and there is no one to bury them: and soon I shall die."

"Not so, I hope," said Romola. "I am come to take care of you. I am used to the pestilence; I am not afraid. But there must be some left who are not ill. I saw a youth running towards the mountain when I went to the well."

"I cannot tell. When the pestilence came, a great many people went away, and drove off the cows and goats. Give me more water!"

Suspecting that if she followed the direction of the youth's flight, she would find men and women still healthy and able, Romola determined to seek them out at once, hoping to win them to take care of the child so she could return to attend to others. She trusted her powers of persuasion to conquer the aid of the timorous once they knew what was to be done.

Promising the sick woman she would return, Romola lifted the dark bantling again and set off toward the slope. She felt no burden of choice now, no longing for death. She was thinking how she would go to the other sufferers as she had gone to that fevered woman.

But with the child on her arm, it was not so easy to walk up a slope, and it seemed a long while before the winding path took her near the cow and the goats. She was beginning to feel faint from heat, hunger, and thirst. As she reached a double turning, she paused to consider whether she would wait near the cow, which someone was likely to milk soon, rather than toil up to the church before resting. Raising her eyes to measure the steep distance, she saw peeping between the boughs, not more than five yards off, a broad round face watching her attentively, and lower down the black skirt of a priest's garment and a hand grasping a bucket. She stood mutely observing, and the face remained motionless. Romola had often witnessed the overpowering force of dread in cases of pestilence, and she was cautious.

Raising her voice in a tone of gentle pleading, she said, "I came over the sea. I am hungry, and so is the child. Will you not give us some milk?"

Romola had divined part of the truth, but she had not divined the preoccupation of the priest's mind which charged her words with strange significance. Only a little while ago, the young acolyte had brought word to the Padre that he had seen the Holy Mother with the Babe, fetching water for the sick: she was as tall as the cypresses, with a light about her head, looking up at the church. The parish priest had not listened with entire belief; he had been more than fifty years in the world without having any vision of the Madonna, and he thought the boy might have misinterpreted the unexpected appearance of a villager. But he had been made uneasy, and before venturing to come down and milk his cow, he had repeated many *Aves*. The priest's conscience tormented him; he trembled at the pestilence but also trembled at the thought of the mild-faced Mother, conscious that that Invisible Mercy might demand something more of him than prayers and "Hails." In this state of mind—unable to banish the image the boy had raised of the Mother with glory tending the sick—the priest had come down to milk his cow and had suddenly caught sight of Romola pausing at the parted way. Her pleading words, with their strange refinement of tone and accent, had a preternatural sound for him. Yet he did not quite believe

In the hushed, pale hours of winter, as Romola lay spent by her labors, her mind drifted backward through the days and forward into the misty unknown of tomorrow. The world shifted beneath her gaze, viewed from a vantage point entirely new. Since she had awakened in the boat, her experience had struck her with the force of a fresh seal pressing upon dissolving wax. She had felt untethered, motiveless, sinking into a selfish despair that life offered no sustenance, whispering the fatal wish, "I am weary of life; I wish to die." That cry had accompanied her into sleep, yet from the moment she awoke to the sound of the weeping, reflection had ceased. Unlike in Florence, where she had once rationalized her survival as a duty to alleviate sorrow, she now simply lived. An impulsive, fierce energy drove her to share the burdens of others, to answer the urgent cries of need, and to perform the work that demanded to be done, rendering the arguments for endurance unnecessary.

This transformation felt like a second baptism. In Florence, the simple bonds of humanity had been tangled with the heavy chains of marriage, statecraft, and religious devotion; when these structures failed her, the blow had severed her from life and numbed her compassion. Now, she declared, "It was a base thing in me to crave death. If all else is uncertain, this suffering I can alleviate is certain; if the glory of the cross is a phantom, then sorrow is the only truth. While strength remains in my arm, I will extend it to the fainting; while light visits my eyes, let them seek out the forsaken."

Then, the past surged forth with renewed urgency. Her labor in this green valley was concluded, and the emotions released from the people surrounding her flowed back into the deep, familiar channels of use and affection. This rare solitude, born of total separation from her accustomed life, allowed her to judge herself with a severity unknown before. The compunction inherent in a sympathetic soul, keenly aware of the suffering of others, stirred within her with growing intensity. She questioned the justice of her own judgments and actions: she had been rash, arrogant, perpetually dissatisfied that others were not virtuous enough, while she herself had betrayed the highest ideals her soul once recognized. She began to condemn her flight as cowardly self-preservation, realizing that the reasons Savonarola had given for taking her back were truer and deeper than the excuses for her second departure. How could she claim to feel the needs of strangers while ignoring the needs of those nearest to her?

Yet, a reaction against this self-reproach soon arose. The memory of her life with Tito, of the conditions that rendered their true union impossible while forcing her into a role of false duty—a role that concealed and sanctioned what her mind revolted against—told her that flight had been her only recourse. All minds, save those dulled by insensibility, must endure this recurring conflict where life's twisted conditions forbid the fulfillment of a bond. Strictly speaking, no relation can be replaced; the presence of the new does not erase the breach of the old. Life had lost its perfection; it had been maimed. Until the wounds were fully scarred, conscience would continually cast backward, casting doubtful glances.

Romola shrank with dread at the prospect of returning to Tito, yet unease gnawed at her that she had placed herself beyond his reach, fearing a day when he might suffer and require her aid. A thread of pain remained within her, echoing Fra Girolamo's words: she could not cease to be a wife. Could anything truly end for her that had once mingled with the very current of her heart's blood?

Florence, and every moment of her existence there, returned to her like a ravenous hunger. Her feelings could not wander aimlessly after the possible and the vague; their living fiber was fed by the memory of familiar things. The thought that she had severed herself from them forever became increasingly importunate during these idle hours. What if Fra Girolamo had been mistaken? What if the life of Florence was merely a web of inconsistencies? Was she, then, something superior, entitled to shake the dust from her feet and declare, "This world is not good enough for me"? If she were truly higher, she would not have so easily lost all her trust.

Her indignant grief for her godfather no longer held complete sway, and her sense of debt to Savonarola began to regain predominance. Nothing that had occurred or would occur could erase the fact that there had been a great inspiration in him, one that had awakened a new life within her. Who, in all her experience, could demand greater gratitude from her than he? Yet, his errors—could they not bring calamity?

She could not rest. She scarcely knew whether it was her strength returning with the budding leaves that made her active again, or whether it was an eager longing to draw nearer to Florence. She did not imagine herself daring to enter the city, but the desire to be close enough to learn what transpired there urged itself with a power that excluded all other purposes.

On one March morning, the people of the valley gathered to witness the departure of the Blessed Lady. Jacopo had procured a mule for her and was to accompany her over the mountains. The Padre also went with her to the nearest town, intending to assist her in finding the safest route to Pistoja. Her store of trinkets and money, untouched since arriving in the valley, was ample for her needs.

Had Romola been less drawn by the longing pulling her away, it would have been a difficult moment as she walked the village street for the final time, while the Padre and Jacopo awaited her near the well with the mule. Her steps were hindered by the wailing crowd, who knelt to kiss her hands, then clung to her skirts, kissing the grey folds of her habit and crying, "Ah, why will you go, when the good season begins and the crops will be plentiful? Why will you go?"

"Do not be sorry," said Romola. "You are well now, and I shall remember you. I must go to see if my own people need me."

"Ah, yes, if they have the pestilence!"

"Look at us again, Madonna!"

"Yes, yes, we will be good to little Benedetto!"

Finally, Romola mounted her mule, but a vigorous scream from Benedetto as he saw her turn away in this new capacity served as an excuse for the entire populace to follow, insisting that he must ride on the mule's neck to the foot of the slope. The parting must eventually come, but as Romola turned repeatedly before passing out of sight, she saw the little flock lingering to catch the last wave of her hand.

April 14th marked Romola's return to the walls of Florence, a city that had swallowed her hopes and now demanded her presence. She had not found peace in Pistoia, where rumors of the Trial by Fire clashed like storm clouds, nor in Prato, where dread had held her in a paralyzed state. It was only the encounter with an Augustinian monk from San Spirito—a former confessor to her father—that broke her hesitation. He carried the weight of the city's collective grief, having walked beside the wagon bearing the terrible burden into the Piazza. From him, she learned the brutal finality of her husband's fate: Tito had leaped from the mob's assault into the Arno, only to be slain on the riverbank by an old enemy. Yet, the monk spoke of Savonarola with the bitter prejudice of the Black Friars, labeling the friar a deceiver, a man who had confessed his duplicity under the lash.

Romola absorbed these truths not as news, but as the heavy stones of a tomb she had already entered. That evening, she sat in a silent agony amidst the cacophony of Monna Brigida's house. The old woman, having briefly succumbed to vanity with false hair, now reverted to her piety, declaring she would rather be grey than lose her "dear child." But Romola remained unmoved by Brigida's gossipy details; the shadow of Tito's death and Savonarola's fall cast such a long darkness that minor circumstances dissolved into insignificance. Her mind, burdened by awe-stricken grief, focused on two desperate imperatives: to see Savonarola and to locate Tessa and the children.

"Tell me, cousin," Romola interrupted Brigida's rambling plans for their shared future, "has anything been seen or said of a young woman with two little children?"

Brigida recoiled, her hands rising in horror. "Cristo! No! Was he so bad as that?" she cried, her voice trembling. "Ah, then, that explains your flight. I thought you strange, flighty... 'She's got her father's temper,' I said to myself. But if you had told me the truth..."

"No, dear cousin," Romola insisted, her tone urgent. "Do not speak thus. I must find that woman and her children. They are helpless. That is my first duty."

"If that is being a Piagnone," Brigida muttered, lowering her voice, "I have been counting peas instead of prayers. Fra Girolamo says widows should not remarry; step inside the door and it is sin, but come down the chimney and you are welcome. Two children—Santiddio!"

"Cousin," Romola pleaded gently, "she has done no conscious wrong. She is ignorant. I will tell you later."

The next morning, Romola sought the house beyond San Ambrogio where she had last seen Tessa. It was empty. Old Lisa had departed a week prior with her belongings, leaving no trace of the young woman. Romola feared the worst: that Tito had sent Tessa away to a hiding place, perhaps intending to join her there. The thought was a knife twist; if Tessa were outside Florence, the chances of reunion were slim, and the image of the child waiting in helpless misery at a roadside haunted her. With no leads and a noble reserve preventing her from broadcasting Tessa's connection to Tito, days passed in anxious stillness. Every pair of round brown legs or short figure in peasant dress made her heart race.

She did not view this search as heroic charity, but as a sacred obligation. She needed to care for them, to clasp the children and make them love her, a sweet redemption for her own sorrows. Though she possessed a claim to Tito's property, she distrusted the purity of that wealth and resolved to surrender it to the State, keeping only enough to buy her father's library for Tessa's support. Brigida, however, clamored that Romola must stay with her, insisting that if Romola wished to raise others' children, she must do so alongside her own household.

Driven by a superstition of hope, Romola turned her gaze to the gate of San Gallo. She knew Tito had arranged horses there to escape Florence. Clad in her long widow's veil, she walked the Via San Gallo, scanning the crowd until she spotted Bratti haggling with a customer. A sudden movement caught her eye: something glinting from the corner of his basket. Her heart leaped.

"Bratti, my friend," she asked abruptly, "where did you get that necklace?"

"Your servant, madonna," Bratti replied, his face unreadable. "It is worth money, but my heart is too tender to trade it freely. I have pledged it."

"From a little woman named Tessa, is it not true?"

"Ah! If you know her," Bratti said, his eyes softening, "and would redeem it for her, you would be doing a great charity. She wept when she parted with it, as if running into a brook. I will charge you only a florin; I dislike to be hard-hearted."

Romola handed over the coin and retrieved the necklace, her fingers trembling with joy. "Where is she?"

"Outside the gate, at the other end of the Borgo, at old Sibilla Manetti's. Anybody knows the house."

With wings of purpose, Romola hastened to the address. Inside, the young woman and the children had been there for weeks, destitute, paying a poor widow merely with their clothes. But when Romola opened the door, Tessa did not turn. Seated on a low bed, she stared blankly at her children, who played in a corner—Lillo roaring at Ninna, then peering out with wide, fearful eyes. Expectation had long died in Tessa's heart.

Romola stepped forward, removing her veil and holding the necklace aloft. In the pure voice that once cheered her father, she called out, "Tessa!"

The woman sprang to her feet, her eyes widening in shock. "See," Romola said, fastening the beads around Tessa's neck. "God has sent me to you again."

Tessa screamed, a sound of pure release, and clung to the arms holding the necklace, sobbing uncontrollably. The children rushed from their corner, grabbing their mother's skirts and looking up at the stranger with wide, trusting eyes.

That afternoon, they returned to Monna Brigida's house in the Borgo degli Albizzi. Romola gently explained to Tessa that Naldo could never return—not out of cruelty, but because he was dead. "Be comforted, my Tessa," Romola assured her. "I am here to care for you always. And we have found Lillo and Ninna."

Brigida's face twisted in a struggle between reverence for Romola and the urge to assert her authority. *A thousand years,* she thought, *until I tell this simple country girl who Romola truly is.* Yet, before retiring, she confessed to Romola that it would be shameful not to care for such cherubs, though she requested Romola yield some control over their feeding, citing her own tragic experience with twin infants who had died at birth.

The spring had nearly faded when Romola returned home with Tessa and the children, her heart heavy with a fresh, crushing weight. The publication of Fra Girolamo's trial—the confessions extracted by the sixteen Florentine citizens commissioned to interrogate him—had ignited a storm of public suspicion and rage. The Signoria, alarmed by the uproar, ordered the document recalled, yet copies had slipped into the hands of eager readers, and a second, unauthorized edition circulated swiftly through the city.

Romola, having begun to despair of ever seeing the friar again, devoured the printed evidence. She sought a clearer light than the contradictory assertions swirling through the mouths of partisans and enemies alike. To the devout followers of Savonarola, his lack of constancy under torture and his retraction of prophetic claims caused a consternation too deep to be easily healed. They clung to the hope that any words contradicting their faith were not spoken by the prophet but forged by Ser Ceccone, the notary of evil repute who had compiled the digest. Yet, glaring flaws undermined the document's credibility. Was it not true that half the panel of sixteen examiners were bitter enemies of the prophet? Was not Dolfo Spini, a notorious figure, among the newly elected Eight, seemingly placed there to load the dice against a man whose ruin was already decided by the ruling party? It appeared to be a slow, formalized murder within the Old Palace. The Signoria had resolved to strike a bargain with the Pope and the Duke of Milan by extinguishing a man who was a nuisance to vicious citizens, greedy foreign tyrants, and a corrupt clergy alike. The Frate was doomed beforehand; the only debate remaining was whether the Republic should deliver him alive to the Pope in exchange for taxing ecclesiastical property, or if the Pope would grant the Republic the dignity of hanging and burning its own prophet on its own piazza.

Under such circumstances, who could give full credit to this so-called confession? If the Frate had denied his prophetic gift, it had been wrenched from him by the agony of torture—an agony that, in his sensitive frame, must quickly induce raving. What if the wicked examiners claimed he suffered only three times on a single day, and confessed only when free from bodily coercion? Could that be believed? He had been tortured far more; he had been broken in proportion to the distress his confessions caused in the hearts of those who loved him.

Other friends of Savonarola, less ardent in their partisanship, doubted the confession's genuineness only insofar as it had been colored by the notary's transpositions. They argued indignantly that nothing warranted a death sentence or even grave punishment. To any impartial observer, it was clear that if this examination were the sole evidence, the Frate died not for a crime, but because he had become inconvenient to the Pope, to the rapacious Italian states seeking to dismember Tuscany, and to unworthy citizens chasing private ambition against the common weal. No shadow of political crime had been proved against him. No stain marred his private conduct. Even his fellow monks, including a former secretary who possessed more culture than his companions and a tendency to critique Fra Girolamo's rule as Prior, testified to an unimpeachable purity and consistency that had commanded their veneration, even after the shock of his retraction. The Pope himself could raise no charge of heresy except for disobedience to a mandate and disregard of excommunication. While difficult to justify by argument, this breach of discipline sparked a moral insurgence in the minds of grave men, blurring the line between the Church and its men and softening the scandal of disobedience.

Men of ordinary morality and public spirit felt that the triumph of the Frate's enemies was truly the triumph of gross license. Shrewd Florentines like Soderini and Piero Guicciardini likely wore an angry smile at a severity that dispensed with all law to hang and burn a man whose zeal had warped the strictness of his veracity. They might have noted that if the Frate had mixed deeper fraud with a zeal less inconvenient to high personages, that fraud would have served as excellent oil for ecclesiastical and political wheels.

Yet, even these shrewd men were forced to admit that, however clumsily the Florentine government pretended to a judicial warrant for what was actually a predetermined act of policy, the Pope's measures against Savonarola were necessary acts of self-defense. To fail to rid himself of a man stirring the Powers of Europe to summon a General Council and depose him would have been adding ineptitude to iniquity. There was no denying that toward Alexander the Sixth, Savonarola was a rebel, and a dangerous one. Florence had heard him say, and understood, that he would not obey the devil. It was inevitably a life-and-death struggle between the Frate and the Pope; but it was less inevitable that Florence should make itself the Pope's executioner.

Romola's ears were filled with the suggestions of a faith still ardent under its wounds and the judgments of worldly discernment operating on a moderate standard of human nature. She could find satisfaction in neither. Her long meditations over the printed document were haunted by painful observations, registered consciously or unconsciously through years of discipleship, whispering a presentiment that Savonarola's retraction was not merely a spasmodic effort to escape torture. On the other hand, her soul cried out for an explanation that would allow her to believe the main striving of his life had remained pure and grand. The recent memory of selfish discontent, which had swept over her like a blighting wind alongside her loss of trust in this incarnation of the highest motives, had produced a reaction familiar to many: a faith springing from the very depths of despair. It was impossible, she told herself, that the negative, disbelieving thoughts which had made her soul arid could be founded in the truth of things. Impossible that it had not been a living spirit, not a hollow pretence, which once breathed in the Frate's words and kindled a new life in her. Whatever falsehood existed in him, it had been a fall, not a purpose; a gradual entanglement in which he struggled, not a contrivance encouraged by success.

Reading the printed confessions, she saw many sentences bearing the stamp of bungling fabrication: the emphasis and repetition of self-accusation used only by low hypocrites. Yet, the fact that these sentences stood in striking opposition to Savonarola's character and the general tone of the document strengthened her impression that the rest of the text represented what had truly fallen from his lips. Hardly a word was dishonorable to him except regarding his prophetic annunciations. He was unvarying in stating the ends he pursued for Florence, the Church, and the world. Apart from the mixture of falsity in his claim to special inspiration, there was no admission of using unworthy means. Even here, without expurgating the notary's malign phrases, Fra Girolamo shone as a man who sought his own glory indeed, but sought it by laboring for the highest end—the moral welfare of men—not through vague exhortations, but by striving to turn beliefs into energies working in the details of life.

"Everything that I have done," read one memorable passage, perhaps bearing erasures and interpolations, "I have done with the design of being for ever famous in the present and in future ages; and that I might win credit in Florence; and that nothing of great import should be done without my sanction. And when I had thus established my position in Florence, I had it in my mind to do great things in Italy and beyond Italy, by means of those chief personages with whom I had contracted friendship and consulted on high matters, such as this of the General Council. And in proportion as my first efforts succeeded, I should have adopted further measures. Above all, when the General Council had once been brought about, I intended to rouse the princes of Christendom, and especially those beyond the borders of Italy, to subdue the infidels. It was not much in my thoughts to get myself made a Cardinal or Pope, for when I should have achieved the work I had in view, I should, without being Pope, have been the first man in the world in the authority I should have possessed, and the reverence that would have been paid me. If I had been made Pope, I would not have refused the office: but it seemed to me that to be the head of that work was a greater thing than to be Pope, because a man without virtue may be Pope; but *such a work as I contemplated demanded a man of excellent virtues*."

That blending of ambition with belief in the supremacy of goodness held no new tone for Romola, who had heard it ring through the Duomo. It was the habit of Savonarola's mind to conceive great things and feel himself the man to accomplish them. Iniquity should be brought low; the cause of justice, purity, and love should triumph, and it should triumph by his voice, his work, and his blood. In moments of ecstatic contemplation, doubtless, the sense of self melted into the sense of the Unspeakable, containing the elements of genuine self-abasement; but in the presence of his fellow-men for whom he acted, pre-eminence seemed a necessary condition of his life.

Perhaps this confession, even describing a doubleness that was conscious and deliberate, implied no more than the wavering of belief concerning one's own impressions and motives to which most human beings are liable under a marked change of external conditions. In a life so tumultuously mixed as the Frate's, what possibility was opened for a change of self-judgment? Instead of eyes that venerated and knees that knelt, instead of a great work nearing accomplishment and prosperity stamping the agent as a chosen instrument, there came the hooting and spitting of the crowd, the hard faces of enemies acting as judges, and then the horrible torture, accompanied by the irrepressible cry, "It is true, what you would have me say: let me go: do not torture me again: yes, yes, I am guilty. O God! Thy stroke has reached me!"

As Romola thought of the anguish following the confession—whether conscience retracted or confirmed the self-taxing words in the subsequent solitude of the prison—that anguish pressed upon her own heart, urging slow, bitter tears. Every vulgar, self-ignorant person in Florence glibly pronounced on the man's demerits, while *he* knew a depth of sorrow known only to the soul that has loved and sought the most perfect thing, and beholds itself fallen.

She had not yet seen—what she would see later—the evidence of the Frate's mental state after laying his mouth in the dust. As days passed, reports of new, unpublished examinations eliciting no change in his confessions ceased. Savonarola was left alone in his prison, allowed pen and ink for a while so that, if he wished, he might use his poor, bruised, and strained right arm to write. He wrote; but what he wrote was no vindication of innocence, no protest against the proceedings used toward him. It was a continued colloquy with that divine purity with which he sought complete reunion; an outpouring of self-abasement; one long cry for inward renovation. There were no lingering echoes of the old vehement self-assertion, "Look at my work, for it is good, and those who set their faces against it are the children of the devil!" The Voice of Sadness told him, "God placed thee in the midst of the people even as if thou hadst been one of the excellent. In this way thou hast taught others, and hast failed to learn thyself. Thou hast cured others: and thou thyself hast been still diseased. Thy heart was lifted up at the beauty of thy own deeds, and through this thou hast lost thy wisdom and art become, and shalt be to all eternity, nothing... After so many benefits with which God has honoured thee, thou art fallen into the depths of the sea; and after so many gifts bestowed on thee, thou, by thy pride and vainglory, hast scandalised all the world." And when Hope spoke and argued that divine love had not forsaken him, it said nothing now of a great work to be done, but only, "Thou art not forsaken, else why is thy heart bowed in penitence? That too is a gift."

There was no jot of worthy evidence that from the time of his imprisonment to the supreme moment, Savonarola thought or spoke of himself as a martyr. The idea of martyrdom had been to him a passion dividing the dream of the future with the triumph of beholding his work achieved. And now, in place of both, had come a resignation which he called by no glorifying name.

*But therefore he may the more fitly be called a martyr by his fellow-men to all time.* For power rose against him not because of his sins, but because of his greatness—not because he sought to deceive the world, but because he sought to make it noble. And through that greatness he endured a double agony: not only the reviling, the torture, and the death-throe, but the agony of sinking from the vision of glorious achievement into that deep shadow where he could only say, "I count as nothing: darkness encompasses me: yet the light I saw was the true light."

The words echoed in Romola's mind, not as a whisper, but as a collective cry rising from the lips of many. They were the final utterances of Savonarola, spoken as he signed his confession before the brethren of San Marco: "Pray for me, for God has withdrawn from me the spirit of prophecy." These words struck her with a sudden, paralyzing doubt, casting a shadow over the memory of his earlier composure. Her uncertainty deepened when more pitiful tidings reached her ears.

May nineteenth had arrived, bringing with it the bright sunshine that marked the entry of the two Papal Commissaries into Florence. They came charged with concluding Savonarola's trial, welcomed by the populace with acclamations demanding the friar's death. The common cry was now a roar of vengeance: "It is the Frate's deception that has brought all our misfortunes; let him be burned, and all shall be right."

The following day, the records confirm, the tortured frame of the friar was subjected to fresh agony. At the mere sight of the horrific instruments, Savonarola, convulsed with agitation, fell to his knees. In brief, passionate words, he retracted his confession, declaring that he had lied in denying his prophetic gift and that if he suffered, it would be for the truth—"The things that I have spoken, I had them from God."

Yet the torture continued. When questioned under the lash why he had spoken those retracting words, the answer came, broken and desperate: "I said it that I might seem good; tear me no more, I will tell you the truth."

Florentine assessors witnessed this second retraction, and the news spread quickly through the city, filling Romola with dismayed uncertainty. Then, a thought flashed across her mind: *There will come a moment when he may speak.* A moment when the dread of falsehood would be the only thing left, when he stood before death itself, lifted above the mob, looking upon them for the last time. No one could hinder him from speaking a final, decisive word. *I will be there.*

Three days later, on May twenty-third, 1498, a long, narrow platform stretched across the great piazza, leading from the Palazzo Vecchio toward the Tetta de' Pisani. Unlike previous preparations, there was no grove of fuel scattered about; instead, a single great heap of combustible material stood on the circular area at the platform's end. Rising above this pyre was a gibbet with three halters. Though one arm had been truncated to avoid the appearance of a cross, the structure still bore a cruciform shape that made some observers deeply uneasy.

On the marble terrace of the Palazzo stood three tribunals. One, near the door, was reserved for the Bishop to perform the ceremony of degradation upon Fra Girolamo and his two brethren, who were to suffer as accomplices. Another was set aside for the Papal Commissaries to pronounce them heretics and schismatics, handing them over to the secular arm. The third, positioned close to the Marzocco statue at the corner where the platform began, was for the Gonfaloniere and the Eight, who would pronounce the sentence of death.

Once again, the Piazza was thronged with expectant faces, awaiting the great fire. For the majority of the crowd pressing around the gibbet, the anticipation was fueled by ferocious hatred or a morbid curiosity to witness a barbarous spectacle. Yet, on the wide pavement, on the rooftops, and at the windows, others remained. Amidst their bitter grief and their endurance of insults hurled at the hypocritical Piagnoni, they harbored a lingering hope. Even at this eleventh hour, they prayed that God might interpose, manifesting their beloved prophet as His servant. And there were still more, like Romola, who trembled with eagerness for that final moment when Savonarola might declare, "O people, I was innocent of deceit."

Romola stood at a window on the north side of the Piazza, far removed from the marble terrace where the tribunals stood. Near her, also gazing out with painful doubt at the man who had once commanded her reverence, was a young Florentine of twenty-two named Jacopo Nardi. Later, he would earn honor as one of the few to write about Fra Girolamo with a simple desire for veracity. Seeing the struggle in Romola's face—the shuddering horror of the scene warring with her yearning to witness the end—Jacopo had gently said, "Madonna, there is no need for you to look at these cruel things. I will tell you when he comes out of the Palazzo. Trust to me; I know what you would see."

Romola covered her face, but the hootings that seemed to make the hideous scene visible could not be shut out. Finally, her arm was touched, and she heard the whispered words, "He comes." She looked toward the Palace and saw Savonarola led out in his Dominican garb. She watched him stand before the Bishop, stripped of the black mantle, the white scapulary, and the long white tunic, until he stood in a close woollen under-tunic that revealed no sacred office, no rank. He had been degraded, cut off from the Church Militant.

The baser elements of the multitude delighted in degradations, understanding them as the ultimate satire. A fresh hoot of triumph rose as the three degraded brethren passed on to the tribunal of the Papal Commissaries, who pronounced them schismatics and heretics. Could the prophet not now be seen as a schismatic and a heretic? It was easy to believe in the damnable state of a man standing stripped and humiliated.

They passed the third tribunal, that of the Florentine officials who would pronounce the sentence. Among them, even from her distance, Romola discerned the odious figure of Dolfo Spini, clad in the grave black lucco as one of the Eight. The three figures, in their close white raiment, trod their way along the platform amidst yells and grating tones of insult.

"Cover your eyes, Madonna," Jacopo Nardi urged. "Fra Girolamo will be the last."

It was not long before she had to uncover them again. Savonarola was there. He was no longer far off; he had mounted the steps, and she could see him looking round upon the multitude.

But in that same moment, expectation died. She saw only what he saw: torches waving to kindle the fuel beneath his dead body, faces glaring with a light far worse than any before. She heard only what he heard: gross jests, taunts, and curses. The moment had passed. Her face was covered again, and she knew only that Savonarola's voice had passed into eternal silence.

***

On the evening of May twenty-second, 1509, five persons whose histories we have followed sat in a handsome upper room opening onto a loggia. From its right-hand corner, the view extended along the Borgo Pinti, over the city gate, and toward Fiesole and the solemn heights beyond.

At one end of the room, an archway led into a narrow inner recess where light fell from above upon a small altar draped in fair white linen. Over the altar hung a picture, discernible only as the small full-length portrait of a Dominican Brother, shaded from the overhead light by overhanging branches and wreaths of flowers. Fresh tapers stood unlit before it. The decoration seemed incomplete; part of the floor was strewn with a confusion of flowers and green boughs. Seated among them was a delicate, blue-eyed girl of thirteen, tossing her long, light-brown hair from her eyes as she selected blooms for the wreaths she wove. Occasionally, she looked up at her mother's work, offering instructions with a little air of superiority.

The mother, Tessa, was not particularly clever at weaving flowers or any other craft. Her fingers had not grown more adroit with the years; indeed, they had become much fatter. She worked slowly, turning her head frequently and asking Ninna's opinion with much deference, for Tessa never ceased to be astonished at the wisdom of her children. She still wore her contadina gown, only broader than the old one, with a silver pin in her rough, curly brown hair and the memorable necklace with its red cord resting against her bosom. Her rounded face wore a look of childish contentment that was even more perfect than in her youth; everyone was so good in the world, Tessa thought. Even Monna Brigida never found fault with her now, doing little else than sleeping—a practice Tessa found amiable and liked for herself.

Monna Brigida slept at that moment in a straight-backed armchair a couple of yards away. Her hair, parting backward under her black hood, possessed a soft whiteness unlike snow, simply the lovely whiteness of aged hair. Her chin had sunk upon her bosom, her hands resting on the elbow of the chair. She had not been weaving or working; she had only been looking on, as she usually did, before falling asleep.

The other two figures sat farther off at the wide doorway opening onto the loggia. Lillo sat on the ground with his back against the angle of the door-post, his long legs stretched out. He held a large book open on his knee, occasionally making a dash with his hand at an inquisitive fly with an air of interest stronger than that excited by the finely-printed copy of Petrarch kept open at one place, as if he were learning something by heart.

Romola sat nearly opposite Lillo, yet she observed him not. Her hands were crossed on her lap, her eyes fixed absently on the distant mountains. She was evidently unconscious of anything around her. An eager life had left its marks upon her: the finely-molded cheek had sunk a little, the golden crown of her hair less massive. Yet there was a placidity in Romola's face that had never belonged to it in her youth. It is but once that we can know our worst sorrows, and Romola had known them while life was new.

Absorbed thus, she was not at first aware that Lillo had ceased looking at his book and was watching her with a slightly impatient air, signaling his desire to talk but his uncertainty whether she wished it. Persevering looks eventually made themselves felt. Romola turned her eyes from the distance and met Lillo's impatient dark gaze with a brighter, brighter smile. He shuffled along the floor, keeping the book on his lap, until he got close to her and lodged his chin on her knee.

"What is it, Lillo?" Romola asked, pulling his hair back from his brow. Lillo was a handsome lad, though his features were turning out more massive and less regular than his father's. The blood of the Tuscan peasant ran in his veins.

"Mamma. Romola, what am I to be?" he asked, well contented that there was a prospect of talking until it would be too late to recite "Spirto gentil."

"What should you like to be, Lillo? You might be a scholar. My father was a scholar, you know, and taught me a great deal. That is the reason why I can teach you."

"Yes," said Lillo, hesitating. "But he is old and blind in the picture. Did he get a great deal of glory?"

"Not much, Lillo. The world was not always very kind to him, and he saw meaner men than himself put into higher places because they could flatter and say what was false. And then his dear son thought it right to leave him and become a monk; and after that, my father, being blind and lonely, felt unable to do the things that would have made his learning of greater use to men, so that he might still have lived in his works after he was in his grave."

"I should not like that sort of life," said Lillo. "I should like to be something that would make me a great man, and very happy besides—something that would not hinder me from having a good deal of pleasure."

"That is not easy, my Lillo. It is only a poor sort of happiness that could ever come by caring very much about our own narrow pleasures. We can only have the highest happiness, such as goes along with being a great man, by having wide thoughts and much feeling for the rest of the world as well as ourselves. And this sort of happiness often brings so much pain with it that we can only tell it from pain by its being what we would choose before everything else, because our souls see it is good. There are so many things wrong and difficult in the world that no man can be great—he can hardly keep himself from wickedness—unless he gives up thinking much about pleasure or rewards and gets strength to endure what is hard and painful. My father had the greatness that belongs to integrity; he chose poverty and obscurity rather than falsehood. And there was Fra Girolamo—you know why I keep to-morrow sacred: *he* had the greatness which belongs to a life spent in struggling against powerful wrong and in trying to raise men to the highest deeds they are capable of. And so, my Lillo, if you mean to act nobly and seek to know the best things God has put within reach of men, you must learn to fix your mind on that end and not on what will happen to you because of it. And remember, if you were to choose something lower and make it the rule of your life to seek your own pleasure and escape from what is disagreeable, calamity might come just the same; and it would be calamity falling on a base mind, which is the one form of sorrow that has no balm in it, and that may well make a man say, 'It would have been better for me if I had never been born.' I will tell you something, Lillo."

Romola paused for a moment. She had taken Lillo's cheeks between her hands, and his young eyes were meeting hers.

"There was a man to whom I was very near, so that I could see a great deal of his life, who made almost everyone fond of him, for he was young, clever, and beautiful, and his manners to all were gentle and kind. I believe, when I first knew him, he never thought of anything cruel or base. But because he tried to slip away
