The following morning, Shirley turned to Caroline with a radiant expression, recounting how thoroughly the gathering had succeeded.

"I truly enjoy hosting a circle of gentlemen," she confessed. "There is a peculiar amusement in observing how they delight in a meal carefully prepared for them. For us, these fine wines and scientifically arranged dishes hold little significance; yet gentlemen seem to retain a childlike simplicity regarding food. One delights in pleasing them—provided, of course, they display the dignified self-restraint of our worthy rectors. I often watch Moore, trying to discern what might please him, but he lacks that innocent simplicity. Have you ever discovered his weak point, Caroline? You have seen more of him than I."

"It is certainly not the same with my uncle or Dr. Boultby," Caroline replied, smiling. She always felt a shy pleasure in following Miss Keeldar's lead when discussing her cousin's character. Left to her own devices, she would never have broached the subject, but when invited, the temptation to speak of the man she constantly thought of was irresistible. "However," she added, "I confess I do not know what it is. I have never watched Robert without my scrutiny being baffled by the discovery that he was watching me."

"There it is!" Shirley exclaimed. "You cannot fix your gaze upon him without his flashing back at you. He is never off his guard; he refuses to give you the advantage. Even when he does not look at you, his thoughts seem busy among your own, tracing your words and actions to their source, contemplating your motives with perfect ease. Oh! I know that sort of character, or something akin to it. It piques me singularly. How does it affect you?"

This question exemplified one of Shirley's sharp, sudden turns. Caroline, initially fluttered by such remarks, had now learned to parry them with the steady composure of a little Quakeress.

"Pique you? In what way?" she asked.

"Here he comes!" Shirley suddenly cried, breaking off and darting to the window. "Here comes a diversion. I never told you of a superb conquest I have recently made—at those parties to which I can never persuade you to accompany me—and the feat was accomplished without effort or intention on my part, I swear. There is the bell! And, by all that is delicious, there are two of them. Do they never hunt except in pairs? You may have one, Lina, and you may choose. I hope I am generous enough. Listen to Tartar!"

The black-muzzled, tawny dog, previously glimpsed in the chapter introducing his mistress, let out a formidable bark from the hall, where the sound resonated deeply. This was followed by a growl more terrible than the bark itself, menacing like muttered thunder.

"Listen!" Shirley cried again, laughing. "You would think this the prelude to a bloody onslaught. They will be frightened. They do not know old Tartar as I do. They are unaware that his uproars are merely sound and fury, signifying nothing!"

Bustle erupted within. "Down, sir, down!" came a high-toned, imperious voice, accompanied by the crack of a cane. Immediately followed a yell, a scuttle, a run—a positive tumult.

"Oh, Malone, Malone!"

"Down! Down! Down!" the high voice commanded.

"He is really worrying them!" Shirley exclaimed. "They have struck him. A blow is something he is not accustomed to and will not tolerate."

She ran out. A gentleman fled up the oak staircase, seeking refuge in the gallery or upper chambers with hot haste; another backed rapidly toward the stairfoot, wildly flourishing a knotty stick while reiterating, "Down! Down! Down!" Meanwhile, the tawny dog bayed, bellowed, and howled, while a group of servants bundled out from the kitchen. The dog made a spring; the second gentleman turned tail and rushed after his companion. The first was already safe in a bedroom, holding the door shut against his fellow—nothing so merciless as terror. But the other fugitive struggled hard; the door was about to yield to his strength.

"Gentlemen," Shirley said in her silvery but vibrating tones, "spare my locks, if you please. Calm yourselves! Come down! Look at Tartar; he won't harm a cat."

She was caressing the beast. He lay crouched at her feet, forepaws stretched out, tail still agitated, nostrils snorting, his bulldog eyes conscious of a dull fire. He was an honest, phlegmatic, stupid, yet stubborn canine. He loved his mistress and John—the man who fed him—but was mostly indifferent to the rest of the world. Quiet enough unless struck or threatened with a stick, which instantly unleashed a demon within him.

"Mr. Malone, how do you do?" Shirley continued, lifting her mirth-lit face to the gallery. "That is not the way to the oak parlour; that is Mrs. Pryor's apartment. Request your friend Mr. Donne to evacuate. I shall have the greatest pleasure in receiving him in a lower room."

"Ha! Ha!" cried Malone in hollow laughter, quitting the door and leaning over the massive balustrade. "Really, that animal alarmed Donne. He is a little timid," he proceeded, stiffening himself and walking trimly to the stairhead. "I thought it better to follow in order to reassure him."

"It appears you did. Well, come down, if you please." Turning to her manservant, she said, "John, go upstairs and liberate Mr. Donne. Take care, Mr. Malone; the stairs are slippery."

In truth, they were, being of polished oak. The caution came a little late for Malone. He had already slipped in his stately descent, saved only by a clutch at the banisters that made the whole structure creak again.

Tartar seemed to think the visitor's descent was effected with unwarranted *éclat*, and accordingly he growled once more. Malone, however, was no coward. The spring of the dog had taken him by surprise, but he passed him now in suppressed fury rather than fear. If a look could have strangled Tartar, he would have breathed no more. Forgetting politeness in his sullen rage, Malone pushed into the parlour before Miss Keeldar. He glanced at Miss Helstone; he could scarcely bring himself to bend to her. He glared at both ladies. He looked as if, had either of them been his wife, he would have made a glorious husband at that very moment. In each hand, he seemed ready to clutch and gripe them to death.

However, Shirley took pity. She ceased to laugh; and Caroline, a true lady, did not smile even at anyone under mortification. Tartar was dismissed; Peter Augustus was soothed—for Shirley possessed looks and tones that could calm even a bull. He had sense enough to feel that, since he could not challenge the owner of the dog, he had better be civil. And civil he tried to be; and his attempts being well received, he grew presently very civil and quite himself again. He had indeed come for the express purpose of making himself charming and fascinating. Rough portents had met him on his first admission to Fieldhead, but that passage was over. Charming and fascinating he resolved to be. Like March, having come in like a lion, he purposed to go out like a lamb.

For the sake of air, or perhaps for a ready exit in case of some new emergency, he took his seat—not on the sofa where Miss Keeldar offered him enthronization, nor near the fireside to which Caroline, by a friendly sign, gently invited him, but on a chair close to the door. Being no longer sullen or furious, he grew, after his fashion, constrained and embarrassed. He talked to the ladies by fits and starts, choosing for topics whatever was most intensely commonplace. He sighed deeply, significantly, at the close of every sentence; he sighed in each pause; he sighed ere he opened his mouth. At last, finding it desirable to add ease to his other charms, he drew forth to aid him an ample silk pocket-handkerchief. This was to be the graceful toy with which his unoccupied hands were to trifle. He went to work with a certain energy. He folded the red-and-yellow square cornerwise; he whipped it open with a waft; again he folded it in narrower compass; he made of it a handsome band. To what purpose would he proceed to apply the ligature? Would he wrap it about his throat—his head? Should it be a comforter or a turban? Neither. Peter Augustus had an inventive, an original genius. He was about to show the ladies graces of action possessing at least the charm of novelty. He sat on the chair with his athletic Irish legs crossed, and these legs, in that attitude, he circled with the bandana and bound firmly together. It was evident he felt this device to be worth an encore; he repeated it more than once. The second performance sent Shirley to the window to laugh her silent but irrepressible laugh unseen; it turned Caroline's head aside, that her long curls might screen the smile mantling on her features. Miss Helstone, indeed, was amused by more than one point in Peter's demeanour. She was edified at the complete though abrupt diversion of his homage from herself to the heiress. The £5,000 he supposed her likely one day to inherit were not to be weighed in the balance against Miss Keeldar's estate and hall. He took no pains to conceal his calculations and tactics. He pretended to no gradual change of views; he wheeled about at once. The pursuit of the lesser fortune was openly relinquished for that of the greater. On what grounds he expected to succeed in his chase himself best knew; certainly not by skilful management.

From the length of time that elapsed, it appeared that John had some difficulty in persuading Mr. Donne to descend. At length, however, that gentleman appeared; nor, as he presented himself at the oak-parlour door, did he seem in the slightest degree ashamed or confused—not a whit. Donne, indeed, was of that coldly phlegmatic, immovably complacent, densely self-satisfied nature which is insensible to shame. He had never blushed in his life; no humiliation could abash him; his nerves were not capable of sensation enough to stir his life and make colour mount to his cheek; he had no fire in his blood and no modesty in his soul; he was a frontless, arrogant, decorous slip of the commonplace—conceited, inane, insipid; and this gentleman had a notion of wooing Miss Keeldar! He knew no more, however, how to set about the business than if he had been an image carved in wood. He had no idea of a taste to be pleased, a heart to be reached in courtship. His notion was, when he should have formally visited her a few times, to write a letter proposing marriage. Then he calculated she would accept him for love of his office; then they would be married; then he should be master of Fieldhead; and he should live very comfortably, have servants at his command, eat and drink of the best, and be a great man. You would not have suspected his intentions when he addressed his intended bride in an impertinent, injured tone—"A very dangerous dog that, Miss Keeldar. I wonder you should keep such an animal."

"Do you, Mr. Donne? Perhaps you will wonder more when I tell you I am very fond of him."

"I should say you are not serious in the assertion. Can't fancy a lady fond of that brute—'tis so ugly—a mere carter's dog. Pray hang him."

"Hang what I am fond of!"

"And purchase in his stead some sweetly pooty pug or poodle—something appropriate to the fair sex. Ladies generally like lap-dogs."

"Perhaps I am an exception."

"Oh, you can't be, you know. All ladies are alike in those matters. That is universally allowed."

"Tartar frightened you terribly, Mr. Donne. I hope you won't take any harm."

"That I shall, no doubt. He gave me a turn I shall not soon forget. When I *sor* him" (such was Mr. Donne's pronunciation) "about to spring, I thought I should have fainted."

"Perhaps you did faint in the bedroom; you were a long time there."

"No; I bore up that I might hold the door fast. I was determined not to let any one enter. I thought I would keep a barrier between me and the enemy."

"But what if your friend Mr. Malone had been worried?"

"Malone must take care of himself. Your man persuaded me to come out at last by saying the dog was chained up in his kennel. If I had not been assured of this, I would have remained all day in the chamber. But what is that? I declare the man has told a falsehood! The dog is there!"

And indeed Tartar walked past the glass door opening to the garden, stiff, tawny, and black-muzzled as ever. He still seemed in bad humour. He was growling again, and whistling a half-strangled whistle, being an inheritance from the bulldog side of his ancestry.

"There are other visitors coming," observed Shirley, with that provoking coolness which the owners of formidable-looking dogs are apt to show while their animals are all bristle and bay. Tartar sprang down the pavement towards the gate, bellowing *avec explosion*. His mistress quietly opened the glass door, and stepped out chirruping to him. His bellow was already silenced, and he was lifting up his huge, blunt, stupid head to the new callers to be patted.

"What! Tartar, Tartar!" said a cheery, rather boyish voice, "don't you know us? Good-morning, old boy!"

And little Mr. Sweeting, whose conscious good nature made him comparatively fearless of man, woman, child, or brute, came through the gate, caressing the guardian. His vicar, Mr. Hall, followed. He had no fear of Tartar either, and Tartar had no ill-will to him. He snuffed both the gentlemen round, and then, as if
