The evening air hung heavy and still, a sultry warmth promising a stifling night. Around the sinking sun, clouds blazed with a purple fire, casting Indian-like summer hues across the horizon. These rosy reflections bathed the hillsides, the fronts of houses, the trunks of trees, the winding roads, and the rolling pastures in a soft, dreamlike glow. The two girls descended slowly from the fields. By the time they reached the churchyard, the bells had fallen silent; the crowds had retreated inside. The entire scene was solitary.

"How peaceful and calm it is," Caroline murmured.

"And how stifling it will be within the church," Shirley replied. "What a tedious, long-winded speech Dr. Boultby will deliver! And how the curates will hammer away at their prepared orations! Personally, I would rather not enter."

"But my uncle will be furious if he notices our absence."

"I shall bear the brunt of his anger; he will not devour me. I am sorry to miss his sharp wit. I know his address will be all logic for the church and all stinging satire for the schismatics. He will not forget the Battle of Royd Lane. I am also sorry to deprive you of Mr. Hall's sincere, friendly homily, with all its zestful Yorkshire dialect; but here I must remain. The gray church and the grayer tombs look divine under this crimson light. Nature is now offering her evening prayers; she kneels before those red hills. I see her prostrate on the great steps of her altar, praying for a fair night for sailors at sea, for travelers in deserts, for lambs on the moors, and for unfledged birds in the woods. Caroline, I see her, and I will tell you what she resembles. She is what Eve was when she and Adam stood alone upon the earth."

"And that is not Milton's Eve, Shirley."

"Milton's Eve! Milton's Eve! I repeat. No, by the pure Mother of God, she is not! Cary, we are alone; we may speak our minds. Milton was great; but was he good? His intellect was correct; what of his heart? He saw heaven; he looked down upon hell. He beheld Satan, and Sin his daughter, and Death their horrific offspring. Serried angels stood before him in battalions; the long lines of adamantine shields flashed back upon his blind eyes the unutterable splendor of heaven. Devils gathered their legions in his sight; their dim, discrowned, tarnished armies passed rank and file before him. Milton attempted to see the first woman; but, Cary, he saw her not."

"You are bold to say so, Shirley."

"Not more bold than faithful. It was his cook he saw; or it was Mrs. Gill, as I have seen her, making custards in the heat of summer within the cool dairy, surrounded by rose-trees and nasturtiums near the latticed window, preparing a cold collation for the rectors—preserves and 'dulcet creams.' She puzzled over what choice to make for the finest delicacy, what arrangement would best avoid mixing tastes, not well-joined or inelegant, but bringing taste after taste, upheld with the kindest variety."

"All very well, Shirley."

"I would remind him that the first men of the earth were Titans, and that Eve was their mother; from her sprang Saturn, Hyperion, Oceanus; she bore Prometheus—"

"Pagan that you are! What does that signify?"

"I say, there were giants on the earth in those days—giants who strove to scale heaven. The first woman's breast, heaving with life on this world, yielded the daring to contend with Omnipotence, the strength to bear a thousand years of bondage, the vitality to feed that vulture of death through uncounted ages, the unexhausted life and uncorrupted excellence, sisters to immortality, which, after millennia of crimes, struggles, and woes, could conceive and bring forth a Messiah. The first woman was heaven-born. Vast was the heart from which gushed the wellspring of the blood of nations, and grand the undegenerate head where rested the consort-crown of creation."

"She coveted an apple and was cheated by a snake; but you have such a hash of Scripture and mythology in your head that no sense can be made of you. You have not yet told me what you saw kneeling on those hills."

"I saw—I now see—a Woman-Titan. Her robe of blue air spreads to the outskirts of the heath, where yonder flock grazes; a veil white as an avalanche sweeps from her head to her feet, with arabesques of lightning flame bordering it. Under her breast I see her zone, purple like that horizon; through its blush shines the star of evening. I cannot picture her steady eyes; they are clear, deep as lakes, lifted and full of worship, trembling with the softness of love and the lustre of prayer. Her forehead has the expanse of a cloud and is paler than the early moon, risen long before darkness gathers. She reclines her bosom on the ridge of Stilbro' Moor; her mighty hands are joined beneath it. So kneeling, face to face, she speaks with God. That Eve is Jehovah's daughter, as Adam was His son."

"She is very vague and visionary. Come, Shirley, we ought to go into church."

"Caroline, I will not; I will stay out here with my mother Eve, in these days called Nature. I love her—an undying, mighty being! Heaven may have faded from her brow when she fell in paradise, but all that is glorious on earth shines there still. She is taking me to her bosom, showing me her heart. Hush, Caroline! You will see her and feel as I do, if we are both silent."

"I will humour your whim; but you will begin talking again ere ten minutes are over."

Miss Keeldar, upon whom the soft excitement of the warm summer evening seemed to work with unwonted power, leaned against an upright headstone. She fixed her eyes on the deep-burning west and sank into a pleasurable trance. Caroline, moving a little apart, paced to and fro beneath the rectory garden wall, dreaming in her own way. Shirley had mentioned the word "mother." That word suggested to Caroline's imagination not the mighty and mystical parent of Shirley's visions, but a gentle human form—the shape she ascribed to her own mother, unknown, unloved, but not unlonged for.

"Oh that the day would come when she would remember her child! Oh that I might know her, and knowing, love her!"

Such was her aspiration.

The longing of her childhood filled her soul once more. The desire which many a night had kept her awake in her crib, and which fear of its fallacy had of late years almost extinguished, relit suddenly and glowed warm in her heart: that her mother might come some happy day, send for her to her presence, look upon her fondly with loving eyes, and say to her tenderly, in a sweet voice, "Caroline, my child, I have a home for you; you shall live with me. All the love you have needed, and not tasted, from infancy, I have saved for you carefully. Come; it shall cherish you now."

A noise on the road roused Caroline from her filial hopes and Shirley from her Titan visions. They listened and heard the tramp of horses. They looked and saw a glitter through the trees. Through the foliage, they caught glimpses of martial scarlet; a helm shone, a plume waved. Silent and orderly, six soldiers rode softly by.

"The same we saw this afternoon," whispered Shirley. "They have been halting somewhere until now. They wish to be as little noticed as possible and are seeking their rendezvous at this quiet hour, while the people are at church. Did I not say we should see unusual things ere long?"

Scarcely were the sight and sound of the soldiers lost when another, somewhat different disturbance broke the night-hush—a child's impatient scream. They looked. A man emerged from the church carrying in his arms an infant—a robust, ruddy little boy of some two years old—roaring with all the power of his lungs. He had probably just awakened from a church-sleep. Two little girls, aged nine and ten, followed. The influence of the fresh air and the attraction of some flowers gathered from a grave soon quieted the child. The man sat down with him, dandling him on his knee as tenderly as any woman; the two little girls took their places, one on each side.

"Good-evening, William," said Shirley, after a due scrutiny of the man. He had seen her before and appeared to be waiting to be recognized. He now took off his hat and grinned a smile of pleasure. He was a rough-headed, hard-featured personage, not old but very weather-beaten. His attire was decent and clean; that of his children was singularly neat. It was our old friend Farren. The young ladies approached him.

"You are not going into the church?" he inquired, gazing at them complacently, yet with a mixture of bashfulness in his look—a sentiment not by any means the result of awe of their station, but only of appreciation of their elegance and youth. Before gentlemen—such as Moore or Helstone, for instance—William was often a little dogged; with proud or insolent ladies, too, he was quite unmanageable, sometimes very resentful; but he was most sensible of, most tractable to, good-humor and civility. His nature—a stubborn one—was repelled by inflexibility in other natures; for which reason he had never been able to like his former master, Moore; and unconscious of that gentleman's good opinion of himself, and of the service he had secretly rendered him in recommending him as gardener to Mr. Yorke, and by this means to other families in the neighborhood, he continued to harbor a grudge against his austerity. Latterly he had often worked at Fieldhead. Miss Keeldar's frank, hospitable manners were perfectly charming to him. Caroline he had known from her childhood; unconsciously she was his ideal of a lady. Her gentle mien, step, gestures, her grace of person and attire, moved some artist-fibers about his peasant heart. He had a pleasure in looking at her, as he had in examining rare flowers or in seeing pleasant landscapes. Both the ladies liked William; it was their delight to lend him books, to give him plants; and they preferred his conversation far before that of many coarse, hard, pretentious people immeasurably higher in station.

"Who was speaking, William, when you came out?" asked Shirley.

"A gentleman ye set a deal of store on, Miss Shirley—Mr. Donne."

"You look knowing, William. How did you find out my regard for Mr. Donne?"

"Ay, Miss Shirley, there's a gleg light i' your een sometimes which betrays you. You look raight down scornful sometimes when Mr. Donne is by."

"Do you like him yourself, William?"

"Me? I'm stalled o' t' curates, and so is t' wife. They've no manners. They talk to poor folk fair as if they thought they were beneath them. They're allus magnifying their office. It is a pity but their office could magnify them; but it does nought o' t' soart. I fair hate pride."

"But you are proud in your own way yourself," interposed Caroline. "You are what you call house-proud: you like to have everything handsome about you. Sometimes you look as if you were almost too proud to take your wages. When you were out of work, you were too proud to get anything on credit. But for your children, I believe you would rather have starved than gone to the shops without money; and when I wanted to give you something, what a difficulty I had in making you take it!"

"It is partly true, Miss Caroline. Ony day I'd rather give than take, especially from sich as ye. Look at t' difference between us. Ye're a little, young, slender lass, and I'm a great strong man; I'm rather more nor twice your age. It is not _my_ part, then, I think, to tak fro' _ye_--to be under obligations (as they say) to _ye_. And that day ye came to our house, and called me to t' door, and offered me five shillings, which I doubt ye could ill spare--for ye've no fortin', I know--that day I war fair a rebel, a radical, an insurrectionist; and _ye_ made me so. I thought it shameful that, willing and able as I was to work, I suld be i' such a condition that a young cratur about the age o' my own eldest lass suld think it needful to come and offer me her bit o' brass."

"I suppose you were angry with me, William?"

"I almost was, in a way. But I forgave ye varry soon. Ye meant well. Ay, _I am_ proud, and so are _ye_; but your pride and mine is t' raight mak--what we call i' Yorkshire clean pride--such as Mr. Malone and Mr. Donne knows nought about. Theirs is mucky pride. Now, I shall teach my lasses to be as proud as Miss Shirley there, and my lads to be as proud as myseln; but I dare ony o' 'em to be like t' curates. I'd lick little Michael if I seed him show any signs o' that feeling."

"What is the difference, William?"

"Ye know t' difference weel enow, but ye want me to get a gate o' talking. Mr. Malone and Mr. Donne is almost too proud to do aught for theirseln; _we_ are almost too proud to let anybody do aught for us. T' curates can hardly bide to speak a civil word to them they think beneath them; _we_ can hardly bide to tak an uncivil word fro' them that thinks themseln aboon us."

"Now, William, be humble enough to tell me truly how you are getting on in the world.
