The road back to the rectory was empty; the two girls found no living soul to greet them. They slipped inside without a sound, ascending the stairs as silently as shadows, the pale grey light of the breaking dawn providing just enough illumination for their hurried retreat. Shirley threw herself onto her couch immediately. Though the room was unfamiliar—she had never slept in the rectory before—and though the events of the night were a spectacle of terror and excitement unlike anything she had ever witnessed, the moment her head touched the pillow, a deep, restorative sleep claimed her. It silenced her senses and smoothed her brow.

Perfect health was Shirley's fortune. Warm-hearted and sympathetic though she was, she possessed no nervous constitution; powerful emotions could stir her without draining her spirit. The storm had shaken her while it raged, but it had left her resilience unbroken and her freshness untouched. As each day brought her stimulating emotion, so each night yielded her renewing rest. Caroline watched her sleeping form, reading the profound serenity of Shirley's mind in the beauty of her peaceful face.

For herself, being of a different temperament, Caroline could not find rest. The mere commonplace excitement of the tea-drinking and the gathering at the school would have been enough to keep her awake; the effect of the terrible drama that had just unfolded before her eyes was unlikely to fade for days. It was futile even to try to lie down; she remained seated by Shirley's side, counting the slow minutes and watching the June sun climb higher in the heavens.

Life wasted quickly in such vigils as Caroline had kept of late—watching hours where the mind, lacking pleasant nourishment, no manna of hope, and no honey of joyful memories, tried to survive on the meagre diet of wishes. Finding neither delight nor support in these empty cravings, and feeling herself ready to perish from want, she turned to philosophy, to resolution, to resignation. She called upon these gods for aid, but they remained unheard, unhelped, leaving her to languish.

Caroline was a Christian; therefore, in her trouble, she framed prayers according to the Christian creed, offering them with deep earnestness, begging for patience, strength, and relief. Yet this world, as they all knew, was the scene of trial and probation. For any favourable result her petitions had wrought, it seemed to her that they were ignored and rejected. She believed, at times, that God had turned His face away from her. At other moments, she felt like a Calvinist, sinking into the gulf of religious despair, seeing the doom of reprobation darken over her.

Most people have periods in their lives when they feel thus forsaken—when, having long hoped against hope and still seeing the day of fruition deferred, their hearts truly sicken within them. This is a terrible hour, but it is often the darkest point that precedes the rising of the day—that turning of the year when the icy January wind carries over the waste both the dirge of departing winter and the prophecy of coming spring. The perishing birds, however, cannot understand the blast before which they shiver; and so little can the suffering soul recognize, in the climax of its affliction, the dawn of its deliverance. Yet, let whoever grieves still cling fast to love and faith in God. God will never deceive, never finally desert Him. "Whom He loveth, He chasteneth." These words are true, and should not be forgotten.

The household was finally stirring; the servants were up, and the shutters below were thrown open. Caroline, as she rose from the couch—which had felt like a thorny bed to her—felt that revival of spirits that the return of day and action gives to all but the wholly despairing or actually dying. She dressed herself, as usual, with care, arranging her hair and attire so meticulously that nothing of the forlornness she felt at heart should be visible externally. When both were dressed, she looked as fresh as Shirley, only that Miss Keeldar's eyes were lively, while Miss Helstone's were languid.

"To-day I shall have much to say to Moore," were Shirley's first words. You could see in her face that life was full of interest, expectation, and occupation for her. "He will have to undergo cross-examination," she added. "I dare say he thinks he has outwitted me cleverly. And this is the way men deal with women—still concealing danger from them, thinking, I suppose, to spare them pain. They imagined we little knew where we were to-night. We *know* they little conjectured where we were. Men, I believe, fancy women's minds something like those of children. Now, that is a mistake."

This was said as she stood before the glass, training her naturally waved hair into curls, twining it round her fingers. She took up the theme again five minutes later, as Caroline fastened her dress and clasped her girdle.

"If men could see us as we really are, they would be a little amazed; but the cleverest, the acutest men are often under an illusion about women. They do not read them in a true light; they misapprehend them, both for good and evil. Their good woman is a queer thing, half doll, half angel; their bad woman almost always a fiend. Then to hear them fall into ecstasies with each other's creations—worshipping the heroine of such a poem, novel, drama—thinking it fine, divine! Fine and divine it may be, but often quite artificial—false as the rose in my best bonnet there. If I spoke all I think on this point, if I gave my real opinion of some first-rate female characters in first-rate works, where should I be? Dead under a cairn of avenging stones in half an hour."

"Shirley, you chatter so, I can't fasten you. Be still. And, after all, authors' heroines are almost as good as authoresses' heroes."

"Not at all. Women read men more truly than men read women. I'll prove that in a magazine paper some day when I've time; only it will never be inserted. It will be 'declined with thanks,' and left for me at the publisher's."

"To be sure. You could not write cleverly enough. You don't know enough. You are not learned, Shirley."

"God knows I can't contradict you, Cary; I'm as ignorant as a stone. There's one comfort, however: you are not much better."

They descended to breakfast.

"I wonder how Mrs. Pryor and Hortense Moore have passed the night," said Caroline, as she made the coffee. "Selfish being that I am, I never thought of either of them till just now. They will have heard all the tumult; Fieldhead and the cottage are so near; and Hortense is timid in such matters—so, no doubt, is Mrs. Pryor."

"Take my word for it, Lina, Moore will have contrived to get his sister out of the way. She went home with Miss Mann. He will have quartered her there for the night. As to Mrs. Pryor, I own I am uneasy about her; but in another half-hour we will be with her."

By this time, the news of what had happened at the Hollow had spread all over the neighbourhood. Fanny, who had been to Fieldhead to fetch the milk, returned in panting haste with tidings that there had been a battle in the night at Mr. Moore's mill, and that some said twenty men were killed. Eliza, during Fanny's absence, had been apprised by the butcher's boy that the mill was burnt to the ground. Both women rushed into the parlour to announce these terrible facts to the ladies, terminating their clear and accurate narrative by the assertion that they were sure the master must have been involved all along. He and Thomas, the clerk, they were confident, must have gone last night to join Mr. Moore and the soldiers. Mr. Malone, too, had not been heard of at his lodgings since yesterday afternoon; and Joe Scott's wife and family were in the greatest distress, wondering what had become of their head.

Scarcely was this information imparted when a knock at the kitchen door announced the Fieldhead errand-boy, arrived in hot haste, bearing a billet from Mrs. Pryor. It was hurriedly written and urged Miss Keeldar to return directly, as the neighbourhood and the house seemed likely to be all in confusion, and orders would have to be given which the mistress of the hall alone could regulate. In a postscript, it was entreated that Miss Helstone might not be left alone at the rectory. She was suggested to accompany Miss Keeldar.

"There are not two opinions on that head," said Shirley, as she tied on her own bonnet, and then ran to fetch Caroline's.

"But what will Fanny and Eliza do? And if my uncle returns?"

"Your uncle will not return yet; he has other fish to fry. He will be galloping backwards and forwards from Briarfield to Stilbro' all day, rousing the magistrates in the court-house and the officers at the barracks; and Fanny and Eliza can have in Joe Scott's and the clerk's wives to bear them company. Besides, of course, there is no real danger to be apprehended now. Weeks will elapse before the rioters can again rally, or plan any other attempt; and I am much mistaken if Moore and Mr. Helstone will not take advantage of last night's outbreak to quell them altogether. They will frighten the authorities of Stilbro' into energetic measures. I only hope they will not be too severe—not pursue the discomfited too relentlessly."

"Robert will not be cruel. We saw that last night," said Caroline.

"But he will be hard," retorted Shirley; "and so will your uncle."

As they hurried along the meadow and plantation path to Fieldhead, they saw the distant highway already alive with an unwonted flow of equestrians and pedestrians, tending in the direction of the usually solitary Hollow. On reaching the hall, they found the backyard gates open, and the court and kitchen seemed crowded with excited milk-fetchers—men, women, and children—whom Mrs. Gill, the housekeeper, appeared vainly persuading to take their milk-cans and depart. (It *is*, or *was*, by-the-by, the custom in the north of England for the cottagers on a country squire's estate to receive their supplies of milk and butter from the dairy of the manor house, on whose pastures a herd of milch kine was usually fed for the convenience of the neighbourhood. Miss Keeldar owned such a herd—all deep-dewlapped, Craven cows, reared on the sweet herbage and clear waters of bonny Airedale; and very proud she was of their sleek aspect and high condition.) Seeing now the state of matters, and that it was desirable to effect a clearance of the premises, Shirley stepped in amongst the gossiping groups. She bade them good-morning with a certain frank, tranquil ease—the natural characteristic of her manner when she addressed numbers, especially if those numbers belonged to the working-class; she was cooler amongst her equals, and rather proud to those above her. She then asked them if they had all got their milk measured out; and understanding that they had, she further observed that she "wondered what they were waiting for, then."

"We're just talking a bit over this battle there has been at your mill, mistress," replied a man.

"Talking a bit! Just like you!" said Shirley. "It is a queer thing all the world is so fond of *talking* over events. You *talk* if anybody dies suddenly; you *talk* if a fire breaks out; you *talk* if a mill-owner fails; you *talk* if he's murdered. What good does your talking do?"

There is nothing the lower orders like better than a little downright good-humoured rating. Flattery they scorn very much; honest abuse they enjoy. They call it speaking plainly, and take a sincere delight in being the objects thereof. The homely harshness of Miss Keeldar's salutation won her the ear of the whole throng in a second.

"We're no war nor some 'at is aboon us, are we?" asked a man, smiling.

"Nor a whit better. You that should be models of industry are just as gossip-loving as the idle. Fine, rich people that have nothing to do may be partly excused for trifling their time away; you who have to earn your bread with the sweat of your brow are quite inexcusable."

"That's queer, mistress. Suld we never have a holiday because we work hard?"

"_Never_," was the prompt answer; "unless," added the "mistress," with a smile that half belied the severity of her speech—"unless you knew how to make a better use of it than to get together over rum and tea if you are women, or over beer and pipes if you are men, and *talk* scandal at your neighbours' expense. Come, friends," she added, changing at once from bluntness to courtesy, "oblige me by taking your cans and going home. I expect several persons to call to-day, and it will be inconvenient to have the avenues to the house crowded."

Yorkshire people are as yielding to persuasion as they are stubborn against compulsion. The yard was clear in five minutes.

"Thank you, and good-bye to you, friends," said Shirley, as she closed the gates on a quiet court.

Now, let me hear the most refined of cockneys presume to find fault with Yorkshire manners. Taken as they ought to be, the majority of the lads and lasses of the West Riding are gentlemen and ladies, every inch of them. It is only against the weak affectation and futile pomposity of a would-be aristocrat they turn mutinous.

Entering by the back way, the young ladies passed through the kitchen (or *house*, as the inner kitchen is called) to the hall. Mrs. Pryor came running down the oak staircase to meet them. She was all unnerved; her naturally sanguine complexion was pale; her usually placid, though timid, blue eye was wandering, unsettled, alarmed. She did not, however, break out into any exclamations, or hurried narrative of what
