While Shirley conversed with Moore, Caroline ascended the stairs to find Mrs. Pryor in a state of profound despondency. The lady refused to admit that Miss Keeldar's haste had wounded her pride, yet the visible ache within her betrayed a deep, internal bruising. To anyone lacking her specific temperament, Miss Helstone's quiet, tender efforts to offer solace might have seemed ineffective; but Caroline knew better. Though Mrs. Pryor appeared unmoved or only slightly stirred, she felt the kindness, valued it, and was slowly healed by it.

"I lack self-confidence and decision," Mrs. Pryor confessed finally. "I have always lacked these qualities. Yet, I believe Miss Keeldar should have known my character well enough to understand that I always feel a painful urgency to do right, to act for the best. The unusual nature of the demand on my judgment puzzled me, especially in the wake of the night's alarms. I could not venture to act promptly for another; but I trust no serious harm resulted from my lapse of firmness."

A gentle knock interrupted her. The door opened halfway.

"Caroline, come here," a low voice whispered.

Miss Helstone stepped out. Standing in the gallery was Shirley, looking contrite, ashamed, and sorrowful as a repentant child.

"How is Mrs. Pryor?" Shirley asked.

"Rather out of spirits," Caroline replied.

"I have behaved very shamefully, very ungenerously, very ungratefully to her," Shirley declared. "How insolent of me to turn on her for what, after all, was no fault—only an excess of conscientiousness on her part. But I regret my error most sincerely. Tell her so, and ask if she will forgive me."

Caroline delivered the message with heartfelt pleasure. Mrs. Pryor rose and approached the door. She disliked scenes; she dreaded them as all timid souls do. She spoke falteringly, "Come in, my dear."

Shirley entered with some impetuosity. She threw her arms around her governess, kissing her heartily. "You know you *must* forgive me, Mrs. Pryor. I could not function at all if there were a misunderstanding between us."

"I have nothing to forgive," Mrs. Pryor replied. "Let us pass it over now, if you please. The final result of the incident is that it proves more plainly than ever how unequal I am to certain crises."

That painful realization would remain on Mrs. Pryor's mind. No effort by Shirley or Caroline could erase it. She could forgive her offending pupil, but she could not forgive her own innocent inadequacy.

Soon, Miss Keeldar, destined to be in constant demand during the morning, was summoned downstairs again. The rector called first. A lively welcome and a livelier reprimand were at his disposal. He expected both, and, being in high spirits, accepted them equally well.

During his brief visit, he entirely forgot to inquire after his niece; the riot, the rioters, the mill, the magistrates, and the heiress absorbed all his thoughts to the exclusion of family ties. He alluded to the part he and the curate had taken in defending the Hollow.

"The vials of pharisaical wrath will be emptied on our heads for our share in this business," he said. "But I defy every calumniator. I was there only to support the law, to play my part as a man and a Briton; characters I deem quite compatible with those of the priest and Levite in their highest sense. Your tenant Moore," he continued, "has won my approbation. A cooler commander I would not wish to see, nor a more determined. Besides, the man has shown sound judgment and good sense—first, in being thoroughly prepared for the event which has taken place; and subsequently, when his well-concerted plans secured him success, in knowing how to use without abusing his victory. Some of the magistrates are now well frightened, and, like all cowards, show a tendency to be cruel. Moore restrains them with admirable prudence. He has hitherto been very unpopular in the neighbourhood; but mark my words, the tide of opinion will now take a turn in his favour. People will find out that they have not appreciated him, and will hasten to remedy their error; and he, when he perceives the public disposed to acknowledge his merits, will show a more gracious mien than that with which he has hitherto favoured us."

Mr. Helstone was about to add some half-jesting, half-serious warnings to Miss Keeldar regarding her rumored partiality for her talented tenant when a ring at the door announced another caller. This visitor appeared as a white-haired elderly gentleman with a truculent countenance and a disdainful eye—in short, their old acquaintance and the rector's old enemy, Mr. Yorke. The priest and Levite seized his hat, offered the briefest of adieus to Miss Keeldar, and nodded sternly to her guest before taking an abrupt leave.

Mr. Yorke was in no mild mood. He expressed his opinion on the night's transactions in no measured terms. Moore, the magistrates, the soldiers, and the mob leaders each received a share of his invectives, but he reserved his strongest epithets—and real, racy Yorkshire Doric adjectives—for the benefit of the fighting parsons, the "sanguinary, demoniac" rector and curate. According to him, the cup of ecclesiastical guilt was now full indeed.

"The church," he declared, "is in a bonny pickle now. It was time it came down when parsons took to swaggering among soldiers, blazing away with bullet and gunpowder, taking the lives of far honester men than themselves."

"What would Moore have done if nobody had helped him?" Shirley asked.

"Drunk as he'd brewed, eaten as he'd baked."

"Which means you would have left him by himself to face that mob. Good! He has plenty of courage, but the greatest amount of gallantry that ever garrisoned one human breast could scarce avail against two hundred."

"He had the soldiers, those poor slaves who hire out their own blood and spill other folk's for money."

"You abuse soldiers almost as much as you abuse clergymen. All who wear red coats are national refuse in your eyes, and all who wear black are national swindlers. Mr. Moore, according to you, did wrong to get military aid, and he did still worse to accept any other aid. Your way of talking amounts to this: he should have abandoned his mill and his life to the rage of a set of misguided madmen, and Mr. Helstone and every other gentleman in the parish should have looked on, seeing the building razed and its owner slaughtered, and never stirred a finger to save either."

"If Moore had behaved to his men from the beginning as a master ought to behave, they never would have entertained their present feelings towards him."

"Easy for you to talk," exclaimed Miss Keeldar, beginning to wax warm in her tenant's cause—"you, whose family has lived at Briarmains for six generations, to whose person the people have been accustomed for fifty years, who know all their ways, prejudices, and preferences. Easy, indeed, for *you* to act so as to avoid offending them. But Mr. Moore came a stranger into the district; he came here poor and friendless, with nothing but his own energies to back him, nothing but his honour, his talent, and his industry to make his way. A monstrous crime indeed that, under such circumstances, he could not popularize his naturally grave, quiet manners all at once; could not be jocular, free, and cordial with a strange peasantry, as you are with your fellow-townsmen! An unpardonable transgression that when he introduced improvements he did not go about the business in quite the most politic way, did not graduate his changes as delicately as a rich capitalist might have done! For errors of this sort is he to be the victim of mob outrage? Is he to be denied even the privilege of defending himself? Are those who have the hearts of men in their breasts (and Mr. Helstone, say what you will of him, has such a heart) to be reviled like malefactors because they stand by him, because they venture to espouse the cause of one against two hundred?"

"Come, come now, be cool," said Mr. Yorke, smiling at the earnestness with which Shirley multiplied her rapid questions.

"Cool! Must I listen coolly to downright nonsense—to dangerous nonsense? No. I like you very well, Mr. Yorke, as you know, but I thoroughly dislike some of your principles. All that cant—excuse me, but I repeat the word—all that *cant* about soldiers and parsons is most offensive in my ears. All ridiculous, irrational crying up of one class, whether the same be aristocrat or democrat—all howling down of another class, whether clerical or military—all exacting injustice to individuals, whether monarch or mendicant—is really sickening to me; all arraying of ranks against ranks, all party hatreds, all tyrannies disguised as liberties, I reject and wash my hands of. *You* think you are a philanthropist; *you* think you are an advocate of liberty; but I will tell you this—Mr. Hall, the parson of Nunnely, is a better friend both of man and freedom than Hiram Yorke, the reformer of Briarfield."

From a man, Mr. Yorke would not have borne this language very patiently, nor would he have endured it from some women; but he accounted Shirley both honest and pretty, and her plain-spoken ire amused him. Besides, he took a secret pleasure in hearing her defend her tenant, for we have already intimated he had Robert Moore's interest very much at heart. Moreover, if he wished to avenge himself for her severity, he knew the means lay in his power: a word, he believed, would suffice to tame and silence her, to cover her frank forehead with the rosy shadow of shame, and veil the glow of her eye under down-drooped lid and lash.

"What more hast thou to say?" he inquired, as she paused, rather, it appeared, to take breath than because her subject or her zeal was exhausted.

"Say, Mr. Yorke!" was the answer, the speaker meantime walking fast from wall to wall of the oak parlour—"say? I have a great deal to say, if I could get it out in lucid order, which I never *can* do. I have to say that your views, and those of most extreme politicians, are such as none but men in an irresponsible position *can* advocate; that they are purely opposition views, meant only to be talked about, and never intended to be acted on. Make you Prime Minister of England to-morrow, and you would have to abandon them. You abuse Moore for defending his mill. Had you been in Moore's place you could not with honour or sense have acted otherwise than he acted. You abuse Mr. Helstone for everything he does. Mr. Helstone has his faults; he sometimes does wrong, but oftener right. Were you ordained vicar of Briarfield, you would find it no easy task to sustain all the active schemes for the benefit of the parish planned and persevered in by your predecessor. I wonder people cannot judge more fairly of each other and themselves. When I hear Messrs. Malone and Donne chatter about the authority of the church, the dignity and claims of the priesthood, the deference due to them as clergymen; when I hear the outbreaks of their small spite against Dissenters; when I witness their silly, narrow jealousies and assumptions; when their palaver about forms, and traditions, and superstitions is sounding in my ear; when I behold their insolent carriage to the poor, their often base servility to the rich—I think the Establishment is indeed in a poor way, and both she and her sons appear in the utmost need of reformation. Turning away distressed from minster tower and village spire—ay, as distressed as a churchwarden who feels the exigence of white-wash and has not wherewithal to purchase lime—I recall your senseless sarcasms on the 'fat bishops,' the 'pampered parsons,' 'old mother church,' etc. I remember your strictures on all who differ from you, your sweeping condemnation of classes and individuals, without the slightest allowance made for circumstances or temptations; and then, Mr. Yorke, doubt clutches my inmost heart as to whether men exist clement, reasonable, and just enough to be entrusted with the task of reform. I don't believe *you* are of the number."

"You have an ill opinion of me, Miss Shirley. You never told me so much of your mind before."

"I never had an opening. But I have sat on Jessy's stool by your chair in the back-parlour at Briarmains, for evenings together, listening excitedly to your talk, half admiring what you said, and half rebelling against it. I think you a fine old Yorkshireman, sir. I am proud to have been born in the same county and parish as yourself. Truthful, upright, independent you are, as a rock based below seas; but also you are harsh, rude, narrow, and merciless."

"Not to the poor, lass, nor to the meek of the earth; only to the proud and high-minded."

"And what right have you, sir, to make such distinctions? A prouder, a higher-minded man than yourself does not exist. You find it easy to speak comfortably to your inferiors; you are too haughty, too ambitious, too jealous to be civil to those above you. But you are all alike. Helstone also is proud and prejudiced. Moore, though juster and more considerate than either you or the rector, is still haughty, stern, and, in a public sense, selfish. It is well there are such men as Mr. Hall to be found occasionally—men of large and kind hearts, who can love their whole race, who can forgive others for being richer, more prosperous, or more powerful than they are. Such men may have less originality, less force of character than you, but they are better friends to mankind."

"And when is it to be?" said Mr. Yorke,
