Sometimes the future whispers a low, trembling warning of the calamities it brings, like a distant storm gathering in the wind and clouds, announcing a blast strong enough to scatter wrecks across the sea. At other times, it bursts forth suddenly, as if a rock had cracked open to reveal a grave, releasing the sleeping dead. Before you realize it, you stand face-to-face with a shrouded disaster—a new Lazarus.

Caroline Helstone returned from Hollow's Cottage feeling perfectly well, as she believed. Yet, when she awoke the next morning, she was weighed down by an unfamiliar lethargy. By breakfast, and every meal thereafter, she had lost all sense of appetite; palatable food tasted only like ash and sawdust.

"Am I ill?" she asked, gazing into the mirror. Her eyes were bright, her pupils dilated, her cheeks rosy and fuller than usual. "I look well; why can I not eat?"

She felt a rapid pulse beating in her temples and a strange, frenzied activity in her brain. Her spirits were high; hundreds of brilliant, fragmented thoughts swirled through her mind, glowing with a warmth that tinged her skin.

What followed was a hot, parched, restless night. Toward dawn, a terrifying dream seized her like a tiger. When she woke, she knew with certainty that she was ill.

She could not recall how she had contracted the fever. Perhaps, during her late walk home, a sweet, poisoned breeze—laden with honey-dew and miasma—had drifted into her lungs. Finding there a pre-existing fever of mental excitement and the languor of long conflict, it had fanned the spark into a flame.

Yet, it seemed but a gentle fire. After two scorching days and worried nights, the symptoms showed no violence. Neither her uncle, Fanny, the doctor, nor Miss Keeldar, who visited her, harbored any fear. Everyone believed she would recover in a few days.

Those few days passed, and though it was thought she could not delay much longer, her revival had not begun. Mrs. Pryor, who had visited daily, watched her narrowly one morning, having been present in the chamber for a fortnight. She took Caroline's hand, checked her pulse, then quietly left to retreat to Mr. Helstone's study. She remained there, closeted with him, for nearly half the morning.

Upon returning to her sick young friend, Mrs. Pryor removed her shawl and bonnet. Standing by the bedside, she gently rocked herself, a movement habitual to her. Finally, she said, "I have sent Fanny to Fieldhead to fetch things I shall need for a short stay. It is my wish to remain with you until you are better. Your uncle kindly permits my attendance. Will it be acceptable to you, Caroline?"

"I am sorry you take such needless trouble. I do not feel very ill, but I cannot refuse. It will be such comfort to know you are in the house. But do not confine yourself on my account, dear Mrs. Pryor. Fanny nurses me very well."

Bending over the pale sufferer, Mrs. Pryor smoothed the hair beneath her cap and raised her pillow. As she performed these acts, Caroline, smiling, lifted her face to kiss her.

"Are you free from pain? Are you tolerably at ease?" Mrs. Pryor asked in a low, earnest voice.

"I think I am almost happy," Caroline replied.

"You wish to drink? Your lips are parched."

She offered a glass of cooling liquid.

"Have you eaten anything today?"

"I cannot eat."

"But soon your appetite will return; it *must* return—that is, I pray God it may."

As she laid Caroline back on the couch, she encircled her in her arms. In a movement that seemed scarcely voluntary, she drew the girl to her heart, holding her close for an instant.

"I shall hardly wish to get well, that I may keep you always," Caroline said.

Mrs. Pryor did not smile at this. A tremor ran over her features, which she struggled to suppress for several minutes.

"You are more used to Fanny than to me," she remarked. "I should think my attendance must seem strange, officious?"

"No; quite natural, and very soothing. You must have been accustomed to wait on sick people, ma'am. You move so softly, speak so quietly, and touch me so gently."

"I am dexterous in nothing, my dear. You will often find me awkward, but never negligent."

Negligent, indeed, she was not. From that hour, Fanny and Eliza became ciphers in the sick-room. Mrs. Pryor made it her domain; she performed all its duties, living there day and night. The patient remonstrated faintly at first, then not at all. Loneliness and gloom were banished; protection and solace took their place. She and her nurse coalesced in a wondrous union. Caroline, usually pained by excessive attendance, was now as willing to be cherished as the nurse was bent on cherishing. There was no sign of weariness in the latter that reminded the former she ought to be anxious.

With all this care, it seemed strange the sick girl did not recover. She wasted like a snow-wreath in thaw, faded like a flower in drought. Miss Keeldar, whose thoughts rarely dwelt on danger or death, had initially entertained no fears. But seeing her friend change and sink from time to time, alarm clutched her heart. She went to Mr. Helstone and expressed herself with such energy that he was obliged, however unwillingly, to admit his niece was ill of something more than a migraine. When Mrs. Pryor quietly demanded a physician, he said she might send for two if she liked. One came, an oracle of crushing authority. He delivered a dark saying whose mystery the future would solve, wrote prescriptions, pocketed his fee, and departed. Probably he knew he could do no good but disliked admitting it.

Still, no rumor of serious illness reached the neighborhood. At Hollow's Cottage, it was thought Caroline had only a severe cold; she had written a note to Hortense confirming this, and Mademoiselle contented herself with sending currant jam, a tisane recipe, and a note of advice.

Mrs. Yorke, told that a physician had been summoned, sneered at the hypochondriac fancies of the rich and idle, who, she claimed, having nothing but themselves to think about, must needs send for a doctor if only their little finger ached.

The "rich and idle," represented by Caroline, meanwhile fell fast into a condition of prostration, puzzling everyone except one, who reflected how liable an undermined structure is to sudden ruin.

Sick people often have fancies inscrutable to ordinary attendants, and Caroline had one even her tender nurse could not initially explain. On a certain day and hour, she would entreat to be taken up and dressed, to sit in her chair near the window. She retained this station until noon. Whatever exhaustion her wan aspect betrayed, she softly put off all persuasion to seek repose until the church clock tolled midday. At twelve strokes, she grew docile, meekly lying down. Returned to the couch, she usually buried her face deep in the pillow, drawing the coverlets close as if to shut out the world and sun, of which she was tired. More than once, as she lay thus, a slight convulsion shook the sick-bed, and a faint sob broke the silence. Mrs. Pryor noted these things.

One Tuesday morning, as usual, Caroline had asked to rise. Now she sat wrapped in her white dressing-gown, leaning forward in the easy-chair, gazing steadily from the lattice. Mrs. Pryor sat behind, knitting in appearance but watching in truth. A change crossed Caroline's pale, mournful brow, animating its languor; a light shot into her faded eyes, reviving their lustre. She half rose and looked earnestly out. Mrs. Pryor drew near, glanced over her shoulder. From this window was visible the churchyard, beyond it the road. There, riding sharply by, appeared a horseman. The figure was not yet too remote for recognition. Mrs. Pryor had long sight; she knew Mr. Moore. Just as an intercepting rising ground concealed him, the clock struck twelve.

"May I lie down again?" asked Caroline.

Her nurse assisted her to bed. Having laid her down and drawn the curtain, she stood listening near. The little couch trembled; a suppressed sob stirred the air. A contraction of anguish altered Mrs. Pryor's features; she wrung her hands; half a groan escaped her lips. She remembered that Tuesday was Whinbury market day. Mr. Moore must always pass the rectory on his way thither, just ere noon.

Caroline wore continually round her neck a slender braid of silk, attached to which was a trinket. Mrs. Pryor had seen the bit of gold glisten but had not yet obtained a fair view of it. Her patient never parted with it. When dressed, it was hidden in her bosom; as she lay in bed, she always held it in her hand. That Tuesday afternoon, the transient doze—more like lethargy than sleep—that sometimes abridged the long days had stolen over her. The weather was hot. While turning in febrile restlessness, she had pushed the coverlets aside. Mrs. Pryor bent to replace them. The small, wasted hand, lying nerveless on the sick girl's breast, clasped as usual her jealously-guarded treasure. Those fingers, whose attenuation it gave pain to see, were now relaxed in sleep. Mrs. Pryor gently disengaged the braid, drawing out a tiny locket—a slight thing, such as it suited her small purse to purchase. Under its crystal face appeared a curl of black hair, too short and crisp to have been severed from a female head.

Some agitated movement occasioned a twitch of the silken chain. The sleeper started and woke. Her thoughts were usually scattered on waking, her look wandering. Half rising, as if in terror, she exclaimed, "Don't take it from me, Robert! Don't! It is my last comfort; let me keep it. I never tell any one whose hair it is; I never show it."

Mrs. Pryor had already disappeared behind the curtain. Reclining far back in a deep arm-chair by the bedside, she was withdrawn from view. Caroline looked abroad into the chamber; she thought it empty. As her stray ideas returned slowly, each folding its weak wings on the mind's sad shore like exhausted birds beholding void, she believed herself alone. Collected she was not yet; perhaps healthy self-possession was to be hers no more; perhaps that world the strong and prosperous live in had already rolled from beneath her feet forever. So, at least, it often seemed to herself. In health she had never been accustomed to think aloud, but now words escaped her lips unawares.

"Oh, I *should* see him once more before all is over! Heaven *might* favour me thus far!" she cried. "God grant me a little comfort before I die!" was her humble petition.

"But he will not know I am ill till I am gone, and he will come when they have laid me out, and I am senseless, cold, and stiff.

"What can my departed soul feel then? Can it see or know what happens to the clay? Can spirits, through any medium, communicate with living flesh? Can the dead at all revisit those they leave? Can they come in the elements? Will wind, water, fire, lend me a path to Moore?

"Is it for nothing the wind sounds almost articulately sometimes—sings as I have lately heard it sing at night—or passes the casement sobbing, as if for sorrow to come? Does nothing, then, haunt it, nothing inspire it?

"Why, it suggested to me words one night; it poured a strain which I could have written down, only I was appalled, and dared not rise to seek pencil and paper by the dim watch-light.

"What is that electricity they speak of, whose changes make us well or ill, whose lack or excess blasts, whose even balance revives? What are all those influences that are about us in the atmosphere, that keep playing over our nerves like fingers on stringed instruments, calling forth now a sweet note, and now a wail—now an exultant swell, and anon the saddest cadence?

"_Where is_ the other world? In _what_ will another life consist? Why do I ask? Have I not cause to think that the hour is hasting but too fast when the veil must be rent for me? Do I not know the Grand Mystery is likely to burst prematurely on me? Great Spirit, in whose goodness I confide, whom, as my Father, I have petitioned night and morning from early infancy, help the weak creation of Thy hands! Sustain me through the ordeal I dread and must undergo! Give me strength! Give me patience! Give me—oh, _give me_ FAITH!"

She fell back on her pillow. Mrs. Pryor found means to steal quietly from the room. She re-entered soon after, appearing as composed as if she had not overheard this strange soliloquy.

The next day several callers came. It had become known that Miss Helstone was worse. Mr. Hall and his sister Margaret arrived. Both, after being in the sickroom, quitted it in tears; they had found the patient more altered than they expected. Hortense Moore came. Caroline seemed stimulated by her presence. She assured her, smiling, she was not dangerously ill; she talked to her in a low voice, but cheerfully. During her stay, excitement kept up the flush of her complexion; she looked better.

"How is Mr. Robert?" asked Mrs. Pryor, as Hortense prepared to take leave.

"He was very well when he left."

"Left! Is he gone from home?"

It was then explained that some police intelligence about the rioters of whom he was in pursuit had called him away to Birmingham that morning, and probably a fortnight might elapse ere he returned.

"He is not aware that Miss Helstone is very ill?"

"Oh no! He thought, like
