It had been roughly ten months since we last encountered him, yet that span of time had wrought an alteration equivalent to years upon his visage. He had wasted away; the cordial serenity that once defined his features had been supplanted by a heavy cloak of gloom and anxiety. His dark blue eyes, invariably piercing, now burned with a sterner, harder light beneath his shaggy grey brows. This was not the hollowing effect of ordinary grief alone; darker, angrier passions seemed to have carved their share of the damage.

We had not driven far when the General began to speak, employing his customary soldierly directness to address the bereavement he had endured following the death of his beloved niece and ward. Suddenly, he erupted in a tone of intense bitterness and fury, railing against the "hellish arts" to which she had succumbed. With more exasperation than piety, he voiced his astonishment that Heaven would tolerate such a monstrous indulgence of the lusts and malignity of hell.

My father, perceiving immediately that something extraordinary had befallen the man, asked him, if the recounting was not too painful, to detail the circumstances that warranted such vehement language.

"I should tell you all with pleasure," the General replied, "but you would not believe me."

"Why should I not?" my father pressed.

"Because," he answered testily, "you believe in nothing save what accords with your own prejudices and illusions. I remember when I was like you, but I have learned better."

"Try me," my father countered. "I am not such a dogmatist as you suppose. Furthermore, I know full well that you generally demand proof for your convictions; thus, I am strongly predisposed to respect your conclusions."

"You are correct in assuming I have not been led lightly into a belief in the marvelous—for what I have experienced *is* marvelous—and I have been compelled by extraordinary evidence to credit that which runs diametrically opposed to all my theories. I have been made the dupe of a preternatural conspiracy."

Notwithstanding his professions of confidence in the General's own insight, I observed my father cast a glance at him that, in my estimation, bore a marked suspicion of his sanity. Fortunately, the General failed to notice it. Instead, he stared gloomily and curiously into the glades and vistas of the woods unfolding before us.

"You are heading to the Ruins of Karnstein?" he asked.

"Yes, it is a fortunate coincidence; indeed, I was intending to request that you escort me there to inspect them. I possess a specific objective in this exploration. There is a ruined chapel, is there not, containing numerous tombs of that extinct family?"

"So there are—highly interesting," my father confirmed. "Do you intend to claim the title and estates?"

My father spoke this gaily, yet the General appeared oblivious to the laugh or the smile that courtesy demands of a friend's jest. On the contrary, he looked grave, even fierce, ruminating on a matter that stirred both his anger and his horror.

"Something very different," he growled. "I mean to unearth some of those fine people. I hope, by God's blessing, to accomplish a pious sacrilege here, thereby relieving our earth of certain monsters and enabling honest folk to sleep in their beds unassailed by murderers. I have strange tales to impart to you, my dear friend, stories that I myself would have scoffed at as incredible mere months ago."

My father regarded him again, but this time not with suspicion, but with an eye of keen intelligence and alarm.

"The house of Karnstein," he stated, "has been extinct for generations—at least a century. My dear wife was maternally descended from the Karnsteins. Yet the name and title have long ceased to exist. The castle stands in ruins; the very village is deserted. It has been fifty years since the smoke of a chimney was seen there; not a single roof remains standing."

"Quite true. I have heard much regarding that since our last meeting; much that will astonish you. However, I deem it best to relate everything in the chronological order of its occurrence," the General said.

"You saw my dear ward—my child, I may call her. No creature could have been more beautiful, and only three months prior, none more blooming."

"Yes, poor thing! When I saw her last, she was certainly quite lovely," my father agreed. "I was grieved and shocked beyond measure, my dear friend; I knew precisely how devastating a blow this was to you." He took the General's hand, and they exchanged a kind, firm pressure. Tears gathered in the old soldier's eyes, and he made no attempt to conceal them.

"We have been very old friends," he continued, his voice thick. "I knew you would feel for me, childless as I am. She had become an object of very near interest to me, and she repaid my care with an affection that cheered my home and made my life happy. All of that is gone. The years remaining to me on this earth may not be many; but by God's mercy, I hope to accomplish a service to mankind before I die, and to subserve the vengeance of Heaven upon the fiends who have murdered my poor child in the spring of her hopes and beauty!"

"You stated earlier that you intended to relate everything as it occurred," my father reminded him gently. "Please do; I assure you that it is not mere curiosity that prompts me."

By this juncture, we had reached the divergence where the Drunstall road, by which the General had arrived, split from the path we were traversing toward Karnstein.

"How far is it to the ruins?" the General inquired, peering anxiously ahead.

"Approximately half a league," my father answered.

"Then pray, let us hear the story you were so gracious as to promise."
