Preface

A couple of chums, after peering at these scribbles in manuscript, kindly remarked that they weren't exactly trash, while a few distant relatives have already signed blank checks promising to purchase the volume once it sees the light of day. Consequently, I feel morally obligated to stop stalling its publication. Without this manufactured "public demand," I likely would have been too terrified to serve these mere "idle thoughts" as mental sustenance to the English-speaking masses. After all, what does the modern reader crave? Improvement! Instruction! Elevation! This book, however, lacks the gravitational pull to lift a cow off the ground. I cannot, in good conscience, recommend it for any utilitarian purpose whatsoever. My only suggestion is this: when you've grown weary of devouring "the best hundred books," pick this one up for a fleeting thirty minutes. It offers a delightful change of pace.

***

Contents

The Idle Thoughts of an Idle Fellow

Now, this is a subject on which I flatter myself I am truly an expert. The gentleman who, when I was young, baptized me at the font of wisdom for nine guineas a term—no extras—used to claim he'd never known a boy capable of doing less work in more time. I also recall my poor grandmother, during a lesson on the Prayer-book, casually noting that it was highly improbable I'd ever do much I shouldn't, but she was convinced beyond a doubt that I'd leave undone pretty well everything I should.

I fear I've partially disproven the dear old lady's prophecy. Heaven help me! I've done quite a few things I shouldn't have, despite my laziness. But I've fully confirmed her judgment regarding neglecting much that I shouldn't have neglected. Idling has always been my forte. I take no credit for it—it's a gift. Few possess it. There are plenty of lazy people and plenty of slow-coaches, but a genuine idler is a rarity. He isn't a man who slouches about with his hands in his pockets. On the contrary, his most startling characteristic is that he is always intensely busy.

It's impossible to enjoy idling thoroughly unless one has plenty of work to do. There's no fun in doing nothing when you have nothing to do. Wasting time is merely an occupation then, and a most exhausting one. Idleness, like kisses, must be stolen to be sweet.

Many years ago, when I was a young man, I fell very ill—I never could quite see what was the matter with me, except that I had a beastly cold. But I suppose it was something serious, for the doctor said I should have come to him a month prior, and if it had gone on another week, he wouldn't have answered for the consequences. It's extraordinary, but I've never known a doctor called into a case yet without it turning out that another day's delay would have made cure hopeless. Our medical guide, philosopher, and friend is like the hero in a melodrama—he always arrives just, and only just, in the nick of time. It is Providence, that is what it is.

Well, as I was saying, I was very ill and ordered to Buxton for a month, with strict injunctions to do absolutely nothing while there. "Rest is what you require," said the doctor, "perfect rest."

It seemed a delightful prospect. "This man evidently understands my complaint," I thought, picturing a glorious four weeks of *dolce far niente* with a dash of illness. Not too much illness, but just enough to give it the flavor of suffering and make it poetical. I imagined getting up late, sipping chocolate, and having breakfast in slippers and a dressing-gown. I pictured lying in a garden hammock reading sentimental novels with melancholy endings until they fell from my listless hand, reclining there to gaze dreamily into the deep blue sky, watching fleecy clouds float like white-sailed ships across its depths, listening to the joyous song of birds and the rustling of trees. Or, if too weak to go out, sitting propped with pillows at the open window of the ground-floor front, looking wasted and interesting so that all the pretty girls would sigh as they passed.

Twice a day, I would descend in a Bath chair to the Colonnade to drink the waters. Oh, those waters! I knew nothing about them then and was rather taken with the idea. "Drinking the waters" sounded fashionable and Queen Anne-esque, and I thought I'd like them. But, ugh! After the first three or four mornings! Sam Weller's description of them as "having a taste of warm flat-irons" conveys only a faint idea of their hideous nauseousness. If anything could make a sick man get well quickly, it would be knowing he must drink a glassful every day until recovered. I drank them neat for six consecutive days, and they nearly killed me; but after that, I adopted the plan of taking a stiff glass of brandy-and-water immediately on top, finding much relief thereby. I've been informed since by various eminent medical gentlemen that the alcohol must have entirely counteracted the chalybeate properties of the water. I'm glad I was lucky enough to hit upon the right thing.

But "drinking the waters" was only a small portion of the torture I experienced during that memorable month—the most miserable I have ever spent. For the best part of it, I religiously followed the doctor's mandate and did nothing except moon about the house and garden and go out for two hours a day in a Bath chair. That broke the monotony to a certain extent. There is more excitement about Bath-chairing—especially if you aren't used to the exhilarating exercise—than might appear to the casual observer. A sense of danger, such as a mere outsider might not understand, is ever present to the mind of the occupant. He feels convinced every minute that the whole concern is going over, a conviction especially lively whenever a ditch or a stretch of newly macadamized road comes in sight. Every passing vehicle he expects will run him over; and he never ascends or descends a hill without immediately speculating on his chances, supposing—as seems extremely probable—that the weak-kneed controller of his destiny should let go.

But even this diversion failed to enliven after a while, and the *ennui* became perfectly unbearable. I felt my mind giving way under it. It's not a strong mind, and I thought it unwise to tax it too far. So, somewhere about the twentieth morning, I got up early, had a good breakfast, and walked straight off to Hayfield, at the foot of Kinder Scout—a pleasant, busy little town reached through a lovely valley, with two sweetly pretty women in it. At least they were sweetly pretty then; one passed me on the bridge and, I think, smiled; the other stood at an open door, making an unremunerative investment of kisses upon a red-faced baby. But it's years ago, and I dare say they've both grown stout and snappish since. Coming back, I saw an old man breaking stones, and it roused such a strong longing in me to use my arms that I offered him a drink to let me take his place. He was a kindly old man and humored me. I went for those stones with the accumulated energy of three weeks, doing more work in half an hour than he had done all day. But it didn't make him jealous.

Having taken the plunge, I went further into dissipation, going out for long walks every morning and listening to the band in the pavilion every evening. But the days still passed slowly notwithstanding, and I was heartily glad when the last one came and I was whirled away from gouty, consumptive Buxton to London with its stern work and life. I looked out of the carriage as we rushed through Hendon in the evening. The lurid glare overhanging the mighty city seemed to warm my heart, and when, later on, my cab rattled out of St. Pancras' station, the old familiar roar swelling around me sounded the sweetest music I had heard in many a long day.

I certainly did not enjoy that month's idling. I like idling when I ought not to be idling; not when it's the only thing I have to do. That is my pig-headed nature. The time I like best to stand with my back to the fire, calculating how much I owe, is when my desk is heaped highest with letters that must be answered by the next post. When I like to dawdle longest over my dinner is when I have a heavy evening's work before me. And if, for some urgent reason, I ought to be up particularly early, it is then, more than at any other time, that I love to lie an extra half-hour in bed.

Ah! How delicious it is to turn over and go to sleep again: "just for five minutes." Is there any human being, I wonder, besides the hero of a Sunday-school "tale for boys," who ever gets up willingly? There are some men to whom getting up at the proper time is an utter impossibility. If eight o'clock happens to be the time they should turn out, they lie till half-past. If circumstances change and half-past eight becomes early enough, then it's nine before they can rise. They are like the statesman of whom it was said he was always punctually half an hour late. They try all manner of schemes. They buy alarm-clocks (artful contrivances that go off at the wrong time and alarm the wrong people). They tell Sarah Jane to knock at the door and call them, and Sarah Jane does knock and does call, and they grunt back "awri" and then go comfortably to sleep again. I knew one man who would actually get out and have a cold bath; and even that was of no use, for afterward he'd jump into bed again to warm himself.

I think myself I could keep out of bed all right if I once got out. It's the wrenching away of the head from the pillow that I find so hard, and no amount of overnight determination makes it easier. I say to myself, after wasting the whole evening, "Well, I won't do any more work tonight; I'll get up early tomorrow morning;" and I am thoroughly resolved to do so—then. In the morning, however, I feel less enthusiastic about the idea, reflecting that it would have been much better if I had stopped up last night. And then there's the trouble of dressing, and the more one thinks about that, the more one wants to put it off.

It's a strange thing this bed, this mimic grave, where we stretch our tired limbs and sink quietly into silence and rest. "O bed, O bed, delicious bed, that heaven on earth to the weary head," as sang poor Hood. You are a kind old nurse to us fretful boys and girls. Clever and foolish, naughty and good, you take us all in your motherly lap and hush our wayward crying. The strong man full of care—the sick man full of pain—the little maiden sobbing for her faithless lover—like children, we lay our aching heads on your white bosom, and you gently soothe us off to by-by.

Our trouble is sore indeed when you turn away and will not comfort us. How long the dawn seems coming when we cannot sleep! Oh! Those hideous nights when we toss and turn in fever and pain, when we lie, like living men among the dead, staring out into the dark hours drifting slowly between us and the light. And oh! Those still more hideous nights when we sit by another in pain, when the low fire startles us every now and then with a falling cinder, and the tick of the clock seems a hammer beating out the life we are watching.

But enough of beds and bedrooms. I've kept to them too long, even for an idle fellow. Let us come out and have a smoke. That wastes time just as well and doesn't look so bad. Tobacco has been a blessing to us idlers. What the civil-service clerk before Sir Walter's time found to occupy their minds with it is hard to imagine. I attribute the quarrelsome nature of Middle Ages young men entirely to the want of the soothing weed. They had no work to do and could not smoke, and the consequence was they were forever fighting and rowing. If, by any extraordinary chance, there was no war going, they got up a deadly family feud with the next-door neighbor, and if, in spite of this, they still had spare moments, they occupied them with discussions as to whose sweetheart was the best-looking, the arguments employed on both sides being battle-axes, clubs, etc. Questions of taste were soon decided in those days. When a twelfth-century youth fell in love, he didn't take three steps backward, gaze into her eyes, and tell her she was too beautiful to live. He said he'd step outside and see about it. And if, when he got out, he met a man and broke his head—the other man's head, I mean—then that proved his girl was pretty. But if the other fellow broke *his* head—not his own, you know, but the other fellow's—then the other fellow's girl was pretty. That was their method of conducting art criticism.

Nowadays we light a pipe and let the girls fight it out among themselves.

They do it very well. They're getting to do all our work. They're doctors, barristers, and artists. They manage theaters, promote swindles, and edit newspapers. I'm looking forward to the time when we men shall have nothing to do but lie in bed till twelve, read two novels a day, have nice little five-o'clock teas all to ourselves, and tax our brains with nothing more trying than discussions upon the latest patterns in trousers and arguments as to what Mr. Jones' coat was made of and whether it fitted him. It's a glorious prospect—for idle fellows.

You've certainly been in love, haven't you? Or if not, it's coming. Love is like the measles; we all have to catch it eventually. Like the measles, too, we only get it once. Once you've had it, you're immune. You can wander through shady woods, picnic in leafy aisles, and stare at sunsets without fear. You can join a family trip down the Rhine or sneak into a wedding ceremony just to see a friend off. You can dance a waltz until your feet ache and then nap in a dark conservatory, catching nothing worse than a sniffle. You can walk under the moonlight or through the rushes without tripping. You can look into sunny eyes without getting dazzled. You can listen to the siren song of romance and sail on with your helm tight. You can hold a white hand, but no electric shock binds you to it.

No, we never fall in love twice. Cupid fires only one arrow per heart. Love's attendants—respect, admiration, affection—are welcome guests who stay forever, but the Great Master himself makes only one royal visit and then leaves. We like, we cherish, we are very fond of—but we never love again. A man's heart is a firework that flashes once toward heaven. Like a meteor, it blazes brightly for a moment, lighting up the world below, and then the night of our mundane life closes in. The burnt-out shell falls back to earth, useless and ignored, slowly turning to ash. Once, breaking free from our chains, we dared, like old Prometheus, to climb Olympus and steal fire from the gods. Happy those who, before the flame dies, can use it to warm their hearths.

Love is too pure a light to survive long among the dirty air we breathe, but before it's choked out, we can use it to start a cozy fire of affection.

After all, that warm glow suits our small, cold parlor of a world better than the burning spirit of love. Love belongs in a mighty temple, where the organ plays the music of the spheres. Affection burns cheerfully when love's white flame flickers out. Affection is a fire you can feed daily, piling higher as winter approaches. Old men and women can sit by it with thin hands clasped; children can nestle in front; friends and neighbors can find a corner by its side; even shaggy dogs and sleek cats can toast their noses at the bars.

Let us heap kindness upon that fire. Throw in your pleasant words, your gentle hand-holds, your thoughtful deeds. Fan it with humor, patience, and forbearance. Let the wind blow and rain fall; your hearth will remain warm, and the faces around it will shine brighter than the sun outside.

I'm afraid, dear Edwin and Angelina, you expect too much from love. You think your little hearts have enough fuel for this fierce passion to last your entire lives. Ah, young fools! Don't rely on that unsteady flicker. It will dwindle as the months pass, and there is no refilling the tank. You will watch it die in anger and disappointment. To each, it will seem the other is growing cold. Edwin sees bitterly that Angelina no longer runs to the gate smiling and blushing; when he coughs, she doesn't cry and hug him, saying she can't live without him. At best, she suggests a lozenge, implying she'd rather get rid of the noise.

Poor Angelina, too, sheds silent tears because Edwin has stopped carrying her old handkerchief in his waistcoat pocket.

Both are shocked by the other's change, but neither sees their own. If they did, they wouldn't suffer so much. They would blame the right place—the smallness of human nature—hold hands over their shared flaw, and rebuild their home on a more earthly, lasting foundation. But we are so blind to our own faults and so alert to others'. Everything that goes wrong is always someone else's fault. Angelina would love Edwin forever if only he hadn't changed. Edwin would adore Angelina forever if only she hadn't changed.

It is a bleak hour when the lamp of love goes out and the fire of affection isn't lit yet, forcing you to grope in the cold dawn of life to start it again. May it catch before the day is done. Many sit shivering by dead coals until night falls.

But why preach? Who feels the rush of young love in their veins can believe it will ever slow down? To a twenty-year-old, it seems impossible he won't love as wildly at sixty as he does now. He can't recall any middle-aged man acting frantically attached, so he believes his own love will never fade. Nobody loves as he does, so the rest of the world's experience doesn't count. Alas! By thirty, he joins the ranks of the sneerers. It's not his fault. Our passions, good and bad, end with our blushes. We don't hate, grieve, rejoice, or despair in our thirties like we did in our teens. Disappointment doesn't suggest suicide, and success doesn't intoxicate us.

As we age, we play everything in a minor key. There are few majestic passages in the later acts of life's opera. Ambition aims lower. Honor becomes reasonable and adapts to circumstances. And love—love dies. "Irreverence for the dreams of youth" creeps like a killing frost upon our hearts. Tender shoots and expanding flowers are nipped and withered. Of a vine that yearned to wrap around the world, there remains only a sapless stump.

My fair friends will call this rank heresy. Far from men not loving after boyhood, it's not until they have gray hair that they think their protestations worthy of attention. Young ladies form their ideas of men from novels written by their own sex. Compared to the monsters masquerading as men in that nightmare literature, Pythagoras' plucked bird and Frankenstein's demon were average specimens of humanity.

In these so-called books, the chief lover, or Greek god (they don't specify which one; it might be hump-backed Vulcan, double-faced Janus, or driveling Silenus), resembles the whole family in being a blackguard. This elderly party in the stories has no claim to even the little manliness his classical prototypes had. He is a listless, effeminate noodle past forty. Yet, oh! the depth and strength of his emotion for some bread-and-butter schoolgirl! Hide your heads, ye young Romeos and Leanders! This *blase* old beau loves with hysterical fervor requiring four adjectives for every noun.

It is well, dear ladies, that you study only books. Did you read mankind, you would know that a boy's shy stammer tells a truer tale than a man's bold eloquence. A boy's love comes from a full heart; a man's is often the result of a full stomach. Indeed, a man's sluggish current isn't love compared to the rushing fountain that wells up when a boy's heart is struck by the heavenly rod. If you want to taste love, drink the pure stream youth pours at your feet. Don't wait until it becomes a muddy river before stooping to catch its waves.

Or is it that you like its bitter flavor? That the clear, limpid water is insipid to your palate, and the pollution of its after-course gives it a relish? Must we believe those who tell us a hand foul with the filth of a shameful life is the only one a young girl wants to be caressed by?

That is the teaching bawled out day and night from between those yellow covers. Do they ever pause to think, those devil's lady-helps, what mischief they are doing crawling in God's garden, telling childish Eves and silly Adams that sin is sweet and decency is ridiculous? How many innocent girls do they not degrade into evil-minded women? To how many weak lads do they not point out the dirty by-path as the shortcut to a maiden's heart? They don't write of life as it really is. Speak truth, and right will take care of itself. But their pictures are coarse daubs painted from the sickly fancies of their own diseased imaginations.

We want to think of women not—as their own sex shows them—as Lorelei luring us to destruction, but as good angels beckoning us upward. They have more power for good or evil than they dream. It is just at the age when a man's character forms that he falls in love, and then the lass he loves makes or mars him. Unconsciously, he molds himself to what she wants, good or bad. I'm sorry to be ungallant enough to say I don't think they always use their influence for the best. Too often the female world is bounded hard within the limits of the commonplace. Their ideal hero is a prince of littleness, and to become that, many a powerful mind enchanted by love is "lost to life and use and name and fame."

And yet, women, you could make us so much better if you would. It rests with you, more than with all the preachers, to roll this world a little nearer heaven. Chivalry is not dead; it only sleeps for lack of work. You must wake it to noble deeds. You must be worthy of knightly worship.

You must be higher than ourselves. It was for Una that the Red Cross Knight did war. No painted, mincing court dame could have the dragon slain. Oh, ladies fair, be fair in mind and soul as well as face, so brave knights may win glory in your service! Oh, woman, throw off your disguising cloaks of selfishness, effrontery, and affectation! Stand forth once more a queen in your royal robe of simple purity. A thousand swords, now rusting in ignoble sloth, shall leap from their scabbards to fight for your honor against wrong. A thousand Sir Rolands shall lay lance in rest, and Fear, Avarice, Pleasure, and Ambition shall go down in the dust before your colors.

What noble deeds were we not ready for in the days when we loved? What noble lives could we not have lived for her sake? Our love was a religion we could have died for. It was no mere human creature like ourselves that we adored. It was a queen we paid homage to, a goddess we worshiped.

And how madly we did worship! And how sweet it was to worship! Ah, lad, cherish love's young dream while it lasts! You will know too soon how truly little Tom Moore sang when he said there was nothing half so sweet in life. Even when it brings misery, it is a wild, romantic misery, unlike the dull, worldly pain of after-sorrows. When you have lost her—when the light goes out from your life and the world stretches before you as a long, dark horror—even then a half-enchantment mingles with your despair.

And who wouldn't risk its terrors to gain its raptures? Ah, what raptures they were! The mere recollection thrills you. How delicious it was to tell her you loved her, that you lived for her, that you would die for her! How you raved, what floods of extravagant nonsense you poured forth, and oh, how cruel it was of her to pretend not to believe you! In what awe you stood of her! How miserable you were when you offended her! And yet, how pleasant to be bullied by her and to sue for pardon without knowing what your fault was! How dark the world was when she snubbed you, the little rogue, just to see you look wretched; how sunny when she smiled! How jealous you were of everyone around her! How you hated every man she shook hands with, every woman she kissed—the maid who did her hair, the boy who cleaned her shoes, the dog she nursed—though you had to be respectful to the last! How you looked forward to seeing her, how stupid you were when you did see her, staring without speaking! How impossible it was to go out without eventually ending up opposite her windows! You didn't have the pluck to go in, but you hung about the corner and gazed. Oh, if the house had caught fire—it was insured, so it wouldn't matter—and you could have rushed in to save her at the risk of your life, terribly burned and injured! Anything to serve her. Even in little things, it was so sweet. How you watched her, spaniel-like, to anticipate her slightest wish! How proud you were to do her bidding! How delightful it was to be ordered about by her! To devote your whole life to her and never think of yourself seemed so simple. You would skip a holiday to lay a humble offering at her shrine and feel more than repaid if she only deigned to accept it. How precious everything was that she had hallowed with her touch—her little glove, the ribbon she wore, the rose that nestled in her hair, whose withered leaves still mark the poems you never look at now.

And oh, how beautiful she was, how wondrous beautiful! It was as some angel entering the room, and all else became plain and earthly. She was too sacred to be touched. It seemed almost presumption to gaze at her. You would as soon have thought of kissing her as singing comic songs in a cathedral. It was desecration enough to kneel and timidly raise the gracious little hand to your lips.

Ah, those foolish days, those foolish days when we were unselfish and pure-minded; those foolish days when our simple hearts were full of truth, faith, and reverence! Ah, those foolish days of noble longings and noble strivings! And oh, these wise, clever days when we know money is the only prize worth striving for, when we believe in nothing else but meanness and lies, when we care for no living creature but ourselves!

There is a peculiar kind of satisfaction in enjoying one's own misery, a genuine delight in being thoroughly wretched; yet, nobody actually wants a fit of the blues. Still, everyone gets them, and nobody can explain why. It's a mystery that defies accounting. You might find yourself plunged into this gloom the very day you inherit a fortune, just as easily as the day you leave your new silk umbrella behind on a train. The effect is akin to suffering from a simultaneous attack of toothache, indigestion, and a severe cold. Suddenly, you are stupid, restless, and irritable; rude to strangers and potentially dangerous to friends; clumsy, maudlin, and quarrelsome—a nuisance to yourself and everyone within a mile radius.

While the blues are upon you, you are paralyzed by the urge to act. You feel bound to do something, yet you can do nothing. You can't sit still, so you grab your hat and stride out for a walk. But before you reach the corner of the street, you wish you'd stayed home, turn around, and head back. You open a book to read, only to find Shakespeare trite, Dickens dull, Thackeray boring, and Carlyle overly sentimental. You toss the book aside and mutter curses at the authors. Then you shoo the cat out of the room and kick the door shut after her. You resolve to write your letters, but after staring at "Dearest Auntie: I find I have five minutes to spare..." for fifteen minutes without conjuring another sentence, you crumple the paper, fling the wet pen onto the tablecloth, and declare you must visit the Thompsons. As you pull on your gloves, however, it hits you: the Thompsons are idiots, they don't have supper, and you'll be expected to jump the baby. You curse them, decide against the visit, and feel completely crushed.

You bury your face in your hands, wishing for death and heaven. You visualize your own sickbed, surrounded by weeping friends and relations. You bless them all, especially the young and pretty ones, convinced they will value you only when you're gone. You learn too late what they've lost, bitterly contrasting their presumed future regard with their current lack of veneration. These thoughts bring a fleeting cheer, only to vanish instantly. Now you realize how foolish you were to think anyone would care if you blew up, were hanged, married, or drowned. Nobody cares for you. You've never been properly appreciated. You review your entire life and conclude you've been ill-treated from the cradle.

Half an hour of this contemplation builds a savage fury against everyone and everything, especially yourself, whom anatomy alone prevents you from kicking. Finally, bedtime arrives to stop you from doing something rash. You spring upstairs, strip off your clothes—leaving them strewn across the floor—blow out the candle, and jump into bed as if you'd backed yourself into a heavy wager to finish the routine against the clock. For hours you toss and tumble, occasionally jerking the covers off to get out and dress again just to vary the monotony. Eventually, you drift into an uneasy, fitful slumber, plagued by bad dreams, and wake up late the next morning.

This, at least, is what poor single men can do under the circumstances. Married men, meanwhile, bully their wives, grumble at the dinner, and insist the children go to bed. This domestic chaos creates a disturbance that must be a great relief to a man in the blues, since rows are the only form of amusement he can take an interest in.

The symptoms are much the same in every case, though the affliction goes by different names. The poet speaks of "a feeling of sadness coming o'er him." 'Arry tells Jimee he has "got the blooming hump." Your sister feels "out of sorts" and fears nothing terrible is happening. The everyday young man says, "I'm so awful glad to meet you, old fellow, for I feel so jolly miserable this evening." As for me, I usually claim, "I have a strange, unsettled feeling tonight," and "think I'll go out."

By the way, it never happens except in the evening. During the day, when the world bounds forward full of life, we cannot afford to sigh and sulk. The roar of the working day drowns out the elfin sprites singing their low-toned *miserere* in our ears. In the daylight, we are angry, disappointed, or indignant, but never "in the blues" and never truly melancholy. If things go wrong at ten in the morning, we swear and knock furniture about; but if the misfortune strikes at ten at night, we retreat to poetry or sit in the dark pondering how hollow the world is.

Usually, it isn't trouble that makes us melancholy. Reality is too stern a thing for sentiment. We linger to weep over a picture, but turn our eyes away from the original. There is no pathos in real misery; no luxury in real grief. We don't toy with sharp swords or hug a gnawing fox to our breast for pleasure. When a person loves to brood over a sorrow and keeps it fresh in their memory, you can be sure it is no longer a pain. They may have suffered initially, but the recollection has become a pleasure. Many dear old ladies who daily gaze at tiny shoes in lavender-scented drawers, weeping for the tiny feet whose toddling march is done, or sweet-faced young ones placing locks of hair beneath their pillows—locks once curled on a boyish head kissed to death by salt waves—will call me a nasty cynical brute. But if they asked themselves truthfully whether dwelling on such sorrow is unpleasant, they would be compelled to answer "No." Tears are as sweet as laughter to some natures. The proverbial Englishman, as the chronicler Froissart noted, takes his pleasures sadly, and the Englishwoman goes a step further, taking her pleasures in sadness itself.

I am not sneering. I would never sneer at anything that helps keep hearts tender in this hard old world. We men are cold and common-sensed enough; we wouldn't want women to be the same. No, ladies dear, remain sentimental and soft-hearted—be the soothing butter to our coarse, dry bread. Besides, sentiment is to women what fun is to us. They don't care for our humor, surely it would be unfair to deny them their grief. Who can say their mode of enjoyment isn't as sensible as ours? Why assume that a doubled-up body, a contorted purple face, and a gaping mouth emitting ear-splitting shrieks indicate a state of more intelligent happiness than a pensive face resting on a little white hand, with gentle, tear-dimmed eyes looking back through Time's dark avenue at a fading past?

I am glad when I see Regret walked with as a friend. I know the saltness has been washed from the tears, and the sting plucked from the beautiful face of Sorrow before we dare press her pale lips to ours. Time has laid his healing hand upon the wound. We can look back upon the pain we once fainted under without bitterness or despair rising in our hearts. The burden is no longer heavy when our past troubles are mixed with the same sweet blend of pleasure and pity we feel when old, knight-hearted Colonel Newcome answers "*adsum*" to the great roll-call, or when Tom and Maggie Tulliver, clasping hands through the mists that have divided them, go down, locked in each other's arms, beneath the swollen waters of the Floss.

Thinking of poor Tom and Maggie brings to mind a saying of George Eliot regarding this subject of melancholy. She spoke somewhere of the "sadness of a summer's evening." How wonderfully true—like everything from that wonderful pen—the observation is! Who hasn't felt the sorrowful enchantment of those lingering sunsets? The world belongs to Melancholy then, a thoughtful, deep-eyed maiden who loves not the glare of day. It is not until "light thickens and the crow wings to the rocky wood" that she steals forth from her groves. Her palace is in twilight land. It is there she meets us. At her shadowy gate, she takes our hand and walks beside us through her mystic realm. We see no form, but seem to hear the rustling of her wings.

Even in the toiling, hum-drum city, her spirit comes to us. There is a somber presence in each long, dull street; the dark river creeps ghostlike under the black arches, as if bearing some hidden secret beneath its muddy waves.

In the silent country, when trees and hedges loom dim and blurred against the rising night, and a bat's wing flutters in our face, and the land-rail's cry sounds drearily across the fields, the spell sinks deeper into our hearts. We seem to stand by some unseen death-bed, hearing the sigh of the dying day in the swaying of the elms.

A solemn sadness reigns. A great peace surrounds us. In its light, our working-day cares grow small and trivial. Bread and cheese—yes, and even kisses—do not seem the only things worth striving for. Thoughts we cannot speak but only listen to flood in upon us. Standing in the stillness under Earth's darkening dome, we feel that we are greater than our petty lives. Hung round with those dusky curtains, the world is no longer a mere dingy workshop, but a stately temple wherein man may worship, and where, at times in the dimness, his groping hands touch God's.

It is a truly remarkable phenomenon. I sat down with the solemn, grand intention of composing something witty and entirely original; yet, for the love of all that is sane, my brain is currently blank. The only thought that refuses to leave my mind is the sheer, unadulterated misery of being hard up. I suspect it is the physical act of keeping my hands deep in my trousers pockets that has triggered this specific train of thought. I am a man of habit; I sit with my hands buried in my pockets unless I am in the presence of my sisters, my cousins, or my aunts. These ladies, bless their hearts, throw up such a ruckus—though I prefer to say they expostulate with such eloquent fervor—that I am forced to surrender and extract my hands. Their chorus of objection is always the same: it is simply not "gentlemanly." I am hanged if I can see the logic. I could perhaps understand it being ungentlemanly to put your hands in *other* people's pockets (especially if done by the owners of said pockets), but how, O ye fastidious sticklers for appearances, can placing one's hands in one's *own* pockets render a man less gentle? Perhaps you are right, though. Upon reflection, I have heard some individuals grumble most savagely about it. But they were mostly elderly gentlemen. We young fellows, as a rule, are never quite at ease unless our hands are tucked away. We are awkward, shifty, and resemble what a music-hall Lion Comique would look like without his opera hat—if such a creature could even be imagined. However, if we stuff our pockets with a few coins in the right hand and a bunch of keys in the left, we can face a female post-office clerk with confidence.

It is rather difficult to know what to do with your hands, even when they are safely inside your pockets, if there is nothing else there to hold. Years ago, when my entire capital would occasionally dwindle to "what the townsfolk call a bob," I would recklessly spend a single penny, merely for the sake of having the change, all in copper, to jingle around. You do not feel nearly so destitute with eleven pence in your pocket as you do with a solitary shilling. Had I been "La-di-da," that impecunious youth about whom we superior folk are so sarcastic, I would have changed my penny for two ha'pennies immediately.

I can speak with absolute authority on the subject of being hard up. I have been a provincial actor. If further evidence is required—which I doubt anyone will demand—I can add that I have also been a "gentleman connected with the press." I have lived on fifteen shillings a week. I have managed a week on ten, owing the remaining five. I have even lived for a fortnight on a great-coat.

It is wonderful what an insight into domestic economy true hardship provides. If you wish to discover the true value of money, live on fifteen shillings a week and see how much you can save for clothes and recreation. You will learn that it is worthwhile to wait for a farthing's change, that walking a mile to save a penny is a noble endeavor, that a glass of beer is a luxury reserved for rare intervals, and that a collar can be worn for four days straight.

Try it just before you get married. It will be excellent practice. Let your son and heir attempt it before sending him to college; he won't grumble at a hundred a year pocket-money then. There are some people to whom this experience would do a world of good. There is that delicate blossom who cannot drink any claret under ninety-four degrees and would sooner dine on cat's meat than plain roast mutton. You do come across these poor wretches now and then, though, to the credit of humanity, they are principally confined to that fearful and wonderful society known only to lady novelists. I never hear of one of these creatures discussing a _menu_ card without feeling a mad desire to drag him off to the bar of some common east-end public-house and cram a sixpenny dinner down his throat—beefsteak pudding for fourpence, potatoes for a penny, and half a pint of porter for another penny. The recollection of it (along with the mingled fragrance of beer, tobacco, and roast pork) might induce him to turn up his nose a little less frequently in the future at everything placed before him. Then there is that generous party, the cadger's delight, who is so free with his small change but never thinks of paying his debts. It might teach even him a little common sense. "I always give the waiter a shilling. One can't give the fellow less, you know," explained a young government clerk with whom I was lunching the other day in Regent Street. I agreed with him regarding the utter impossibility of making it elevenpence ha'penny; but at the same time, I resolved to one day decoy him to an eating-house I remembered near Covent Garden, where the waiter, for the better discharge of his duties, goes about in his shirt-sleeves—and very dirty sleeves they are, too, when it gets near the end of the month. I know that waiter. If my friend gives him anything beyond a penny, the man will insist on shaking hands with him then and there as a mark of his esteem; of that, I feel sure.

There have been many funny things said and written about hardupishness, but the reality is not funny, for all that. It is not funny to have to haggle over pennies. It isn't funny to be thought mean and stingy. It isn't funny to be shabby and ashamed of your address. No, there is nothing at all funny in poverty—to the poor. It is hell upon earth to a sensitive man; and many a brave gentleman who would have faced the labors of Hercules has had his heart broken by its petty miseries.

It is not the actual discomforts themselves that are hard to bear. Who would mind roughing it a bit if that were all it meant? What cared Robinson Crusoe for a patch on his trousers? Did he wear trousers? I forget; or did he go about as he does in the pantomimes? What did it matter to him if his toes stuck out of his boots? And what if his umbrella was made of cotton, so long as it kept the rain off? His shabbiness did not trouble him; there were none of his friends around to sneer at him.

Being poor is a mere trifle. It is being *known* to be poor that is the sting. It is not the cold that makes a man without a great-coat hurry along so quickly. It is not all the shame at telling lies—which he knows will not be believed—that makes him turn so red when he informs you that he considers great-coats unhealthy and never carries an umbrella on principle. It is easy enough to say that poverty is no crime. No; if it were, men wouldn't be ashamed of it. It's a blunder, though, and is punished as such. A poor man is despised the whole world over; despised as much by a Christian as by a lord, as much by a demagogue as by a footman, and not all the copy-book maxims ever set for ink-stained youth will make him respected. Appearances are everything, so far as human opinion goes. The man who will walk down Piccadilly arm in arm with the most notorious scamp in London, provided he is well-dressed, will slink up a back street to say a couple of words to a seedy-looking gentleman. And the seedy-looking gentleman knows this—no one better—and will go a mile round to avoid meeting an acquaintance. Those who knew him in his prosperity need never trouble themselves to look the other way. He is a thousand times more anxious that they should not see him than they can be; and as to their assistance, there is nothing he dreads more than the offer of it. All he wants is to be forgotten; and in this respect, he is generally fortunate enough to get what he wants.

One becomes used to being hard up, as one becomes used to everything else, by the help of that wonderful old homeopathic doctor, Time. You can tell at a glance the difference between the old hand and the novice; between the case-hardened man who has been used to shifting and struggling for years and the poor devil of a beginner striving to hide his misery, in a constant agony of fear lest he should be found out. Nothing shows this difference more clearly than the way in which each will pawn his watch. As the poet says somewhere: "True ease in pawning comes from art, not chance." The one goes into his "uncle's" with as much composure as he would into his tailor's—very likely with more. The assistant is even civil and attends to him at once, to the great indignation of the lady in the next box, who, however, sarcastically observes that she doesn't mind being kept waiting "if it is a regular customer." Why, from the pleasant and businesslike manner in which the transaction is carried out, it might be a large purchase in the three per cents. Yet what a piece of work a man makes of his first "pop." A boy popping his first question is confidence itself compared with him. He hangs about outside the shop until he has succeeded in attracting the attention of all the loafers in the neighborhood and has aroused strong suspicions in the mind of the policeman on the beat. At last, after a careful examination of the contents of the windows, made for the purpose of impressing the bystanders with the notion that he is going in to purchase a diamond bracelet or some such trifle, he enters, trying to do so with a careless swagger, and giving himself really the air of a member of the swell mob. When inside, he speaks in so low a voice as to be perfectly inaudible, and has to say it all over again. When, in the course of his rambling conversation about a "friend" of his, the word "lend" is reached, he is promptly told to go up the court on the right and take the first door round the corner. He comes out of the shop with a face that you could easily light a cigarette at, and firmly under the impression that the whole population of the district is watching him. When he does get to the right place, he has forgotten his name and address and is in a general condition of hopeless imbecility. Asked in a severe tone how he came by "this," he stammers and contradicts himself, and it is only a miracle if he does not confess to having stolen it that very day. He is thereupon informed that they don't want anything to do with his sort, and that he had better get out of this as quickly as possible, which he does, recollecting nothing more until he finds himself three miles off, without the slightest knowledge of how he got there.

By the way, how awkward it is, though, having to depend on public-houses and churches for the time. The former are generally too fast, and the latter too slow. Besides which, your efforts to get a glimpse of the public house clock from the outside are attended with great difficulties. If you gently push the swing-door ajar and peer in, you draw upon yourself the contemptuous looks of the barmaid, who at once puts you down in the same category with area sneaks and cadgers. You also create a certain amount of agitation among the married portion of the customers. You don't see the clock because it is behind the door; and in trying to withdraw quietly, you jam your head. The only other method is to jump up and down outside the window. After this latter proceeding, however, if you do not bring out a banjo and commence to sing, the youthful inhabitants of the neighborhood, who have gathered round in expectation, become disappointed.

I should like to know, too, by what mysterious law of nature it is that before you have left your watch "to be repaired" half an hour, someone is sure to stop you in the street and conspicuously ask you the time. Nobody even feels the slightest curiosity on the subject when you've got it on.

Dear old ladies and gentlemen who know nothing about being hard up—and may they never, bless their gray old heads, look upon the pawn-shop as the last stage of degradation—but those who know it better (and my readers have no doubt noticed this themselves) are often surprised, like the little boy who dreamed he went to heaven, at meeting so many people there that they never expected to see. For my part, I think it a much more independent course than borrowing from friends, and I always try to impress this upon those of my acquaintance who incline toward "wanting a couple of pounds till the day after tomorrow." But they won't all see it. One of them once remarked that he objected to the principle of the thing. I fancy if he had said it was the interest that he objected to, he would have been nearer the truth: twenty-five per cent. certainly does come heavy.

There are degrees in being hard up. We are all hard up, more or less—most of us more. Some are hard up for a thousand pounds; some for a shilling. Just at this moment, I am hard up myself for a fiver. I only want it for a day or two. I should be certain of paying it back within a week at the outside, and if any lady or gentleman among my readers would kindly lend it me, I should be very much obliged indeed. They could send it to me under cover to Messrs. Field & Tuer; only, in such a case, please let the envelope be carefully sealed. I would give you my I.O.U. as security.

It seems the entire human race is hopelessly vain, and women, in particular, seem to have taken it as their life's mission. Men are hardly behind them, and children? Children are the undisputed champions of the vanity game. Right now, one of these little tyrants is hammering on my legs, demanding my verdict on her latest footwear. To be honest, I see little merit in them; they lack symmetry, curve, and dignity, possessing a lumpy, indefinable quality that suggests they might be on the wrong feet entirely. But honesty is not what she desires. She wants adoration. So, I pour out a torrent of praise so excessive it feels like a crime, just to keep this self-important cherub satisfied. I once tried the "conscientious friend" approach, hoping to offer some gentle guidance on her behavior. She asked, "Wot oo tink of me? Oo peased wi' me?" Seizing the moment, I replied, "No, I am not pleased with you." I reminded her of her morning's exploits: waking the house at five, knocking over a water jug at seven, attempting to bathe the cat at eight, and sitting on her father's hat at nine-thirty-five.

Did she take this to heart? Did she resolve to become a better person? Not a bit of it. She immediately erupted into a howl of abuse, declaring me a "bad unkie" and threatening to tell her mother. Since that fiasco, I have learned my lesson. When asked for my opinion, I now reserve my true thoughts for my diary and offer boundless, ridiculous admiration for everything she does, regardless of its merit. She approves, nods sagely, and trots off to broadcast my praise to the household, using it as currency to negotiate for extra biscuits. There she goes now, staring rapturously at her toes, murmuring "pittie"—a towering monument of two-foot-ten inches of pure conceit.

They are all alike. I recall sitting in a London garden when a shrill voice from a top-floor window cried out to a neighbor, "Gamma, me dood boy... me dot on Bob's knickiebockies." Even animals are guilty. I once saw a Newfoundland dog in Regent's Circus gazing into a shop window mirror with a smug satisfaction that would make a vestry meeting jealous. At a farmhouse during a festival, they placed a flower garland on a cow's head. That beast strutted around all day like a schoolgirl in a new dress; when they removed the wreath, she became sulky and refused to be milked until it was replaced.

Cats are nearly as vain as humans. I have known one walk out of a room simply because a visitor made a slight remark about felines, yet purr for an hour over a neat compliment. Dogs, conversely, are "Hail, fellow, well met" to everyone. You can slap a dog's head and roll him over, and he'll lie there gaping, utterly unbothered. Try that with a cat, and she will never speak to you again. To win a cat's affection, you must start with "Poor pussy," add a tone of feigned sympathy, and wait for her to rub her nose against you. Only then can you venture to tickle her head, at which point she will likely scratch your legs, and suddenly, friendship is achieved.

The poem says, "I love little pussy... And if I don't tease her she'll do me no harm." The last two lines reveal the cat's true philosophy: goodness is defined solely by stroking, patting, and feeding. This narrow view of virtue is shared by everyone. A good man is simply one who is good to *us*; a bad man is one who doesn't do what we want. Deep down, we all believe the universe was created as an appendage to ourselves. We are the center of our own cosmos. You were born to read my books and pay for them; I was born to write them for you. The stars exist merely to make the night sky interesting for our stargazing, and the moon is a convenient backdrop for our romantic flirts.

We are all like Mrs. Poyser's bantam cock, convinced the sun rises specifically to hear us crow. Vanity is the engine of the world. I doubt a single man has ever existed without it; a man devoid of vanity would be a fascinating but utterly unlovable specimen, a hero to be admired from a distance but never embraced as a brother. We connect not through our noble virtues, which often isolate us, but through our follies. In our vanity, we find common ground. From the Indian hunter proud of his scalps to the European general swollen with medals; from the Chinese gleeful at his pigtail to the "professional beauty" enduring torture to shrink her waist; from the ragged girl strutting with a tattered parasol to the princess with a four-yard train; from the country lad winning laughs with cheap jokes to the statesman savoring polite applause; from the African trader exchanging ivory for glass beads to the Christian maiden selling herself for a title—all march and fight beneath the banner of vanity.

Yes, vanity is the motive power of humanity, and flattery is the grease that keeps the wheels turning. To succeed, you must flatter everyone, high and low, rich and poor. Praise a man's virtues and another's vices; compliment everyone on everything, especially what they lack. Admire the handsome for their looks, the foolish for their wit, and the boorish for their breeding. Your discernment will be hailed as genius.

Everyone can be swayed by flattery. The "belted earl"—whatever that strange creature may be—is easily won over, just as is the duchess, the poet, or the plowboy. Though butter sinks better into wheaten bread than oaten cakes, making the poet easier to please than the farmer. Love itself is fueled by flattery. As a witty Frenchman once noted (though I can't recall his name, a tragedy for a writer), filling someone with love for themselves causes that love to overflow into yours. Tell a girl she is more angelic than an angel, more graceful than a goddess, more fairy-like than Titania, and more beautiful than Venus. Her trusting heart will believe every word.

These dear little souls claim to hate flattery, yet when you tell them, without exaggeration, that they are the most beautiful, good, and divine creature on earth, they will smile approvingly and lean against your shoulder, calling you a "dear good fellow." Imagine, however, a man attempting love based on strict truth! Gazing into a mistress's eyes and whispering that she is merely "not bad-looking," holding up her hand to note its "light drab color shot with red," and telling her her nose is "rather pretty for a turned-up one." What a hopeless case he would be compared to the man who calls her face a "fresh blush rose" and her eyes "evening stars."

Flattery comes in many forms. Some like it thick and heavy, applied with a trowel. Others require delicate suggestion. Many prefer it wrapped in an insult—"Oh, you are a perfect fool, you'd give your last sixpence to a beggar." Still others only accept it through a third party, where Friend B tells Person A that C thinks A is splendid, begging B not to mention it directly. And those stubborn John Bulls who claim to "hate flattery"? Simply flatter them on their lack of vanity, and they are yours to command.

Ultimately, vanity is as much a virtue as a vice. While copybooks condemn it, it is a passion capable of driving us to greatness. Ambition is merely ennobled vanity. We seek fame and praise, leading us to write great books, paint masterpieces, and toil in laboratories. We strive for wealth not just for comfort, but to have bigger houses, finer horses, and more servants, to dress our families in absurdly expensive clothes, and to host lavish dinners we never eat. In doing so, we aid the world's progress, spreading commerce and civilization.

Do not despise vanity. Honor it. It is the highest form of self-respect. It is not limited to the fashionable; the peacock and the eagle are vain, as are snobs and heroes. Come, my young brothers, let us be vain together. Let us be vain of brave hearts and working hands, of truth and purity. Let us be too vain to stoop to meanness, too vain for petty envy, too vain to speak unkindly. Let us pride ourselves on being upright gentlemen in a world of knaves. Let us be vain of our high thoughts and noble deeds.

Now, I admit it: this isn't exactly the kind of deep, soul-crushing philosophy an idle fellow usually broods over. But then again, the best view of the game is often from the sidelines, isn't it? Picture me, tucked away in my private arbor by the roadside, puffing away on my hookah of pure contentment and nibbling on sweet lotus-leaves of indolence. From this lofty perch, I get a front-row seat to the absolute circus unfolding on the Great High-Road of Life.

And what a circus it is! The procession never ends. Day and night, you can hear the frantic *thump-thump-thump* of millions of feet—some sprinting, some shuffling, some limping like broken toys—but all of them moving with a feverish urgency. It's a race where everyone is straining every muscle, every nerve, every drop of blood just to catch up with a horizon that keeps running away faster than they can jog.

Take a look at the crowd as they surge forward. It's a riot of humanity: men and women, ancient and young, kings and clowns, the rich and the ragged, the cheerful and the miserable. They are all hustling, busting, scrambling. The strong shove the weak out of the way; the clever ones sneak past the slow ones; those in the back elbow those in front; and those in front are so desperate they're actually kicking the people behind them as they run.

Peep closely at the show. There's an old man gasping for air, looking like he's seen a ghost; there's a shy young lady being dragged along by a hard-faced matron who looks like she'd rather be anywhere else; there's a studious youth clutching a book titled *How to Get On in the World*, stumbling blindly while everyone else zooms past him; there's a bored-looking chap with a fashionably dressed woman bumping his elbow; there's a boy staring wistfully back at the sunny village he'll never see again; and there, striding with a confident swagger, is a broad-shouldered giant. Right next to him, a thin, stooped fellow tiptoes stealthily, dodging and shuffling like a cat in a room full of rocking chairs. Then there's the artful rogue, eyes glued to the dirt, weaving side-to-side, pretending he's making progress; and right there, a noble-looking youth stands frozen, torn between the distant dream and the sticky mud under his boots.

Suddenly, a pretty girl appears, her face already lined with worry; then a weary man; then a hopeful lad.

It's a motley mess—a motley mess! Princes and beggars, saints and sinners, butchers and bakers and candlestick makers, tinkers and tailors, plowboys and sailors—all jostling shoulder to shoulder. Here comes the lawyer in his wig and gown; here's the old Jewish clothes-man under his dusty cap; here's the soldier in his bright red coat; here's the undertaker's mute in his streaming hatband and threadbare gloves; here's the musty scholar fumbling with his faded books; and here's the scented actor dangling his flashy seals.

Here's the slick politician shouting his magic cures for the world's problems, and right beside him, the traveling huckster holding up his fake remedies for human misery. Here's the fat capitalist and there's the wiry laborer; here's the scientist and there's the shoe-shiner; here's the poet and there's the water-rate collector; here's the cabinet minister and there's the ballet dancer. Here's a red-nosed publican bragging about his beer vats, and right next to him, a temperance lecturer charging fifty pounds a night to tell you not to drink. Here's a judge and there's a swindler; here's a priest and there's a gambler. Here's a jeweled duchess, smiling like an angel; and right next to her, a thin lodging-house keeper, irritable and hungry; and there, wobbling and strutting, is a creature covered in tawdry paint and finery.

Cheek by jowl, they struggle onward. Screaming, cursing, and praying, laughing, singing, and moaning, they rush past each other in a blur. Their speed never slows, the race never stops. There is no rest stop, no cool fountain, no shady tree to pause under. On, on, on—through the heat, the crush, and the dust. On, or they'll be trampled flat and forgotten. On, with throbbing brains and shaking legs—on, until the heart turns sick, the vision blurs, and a gurgling groan tells the folks behind that someone else has finally dropped out of the race.

And yet, despite the killer pace and the rocky road, who but a lazybones or a complete idiot stays away? Who, like the late traveler who watches a fairy party, drinks a goblin cup, and suddenly finds himself spinning in the middle of the whirlwind, can watch this mad chaos and not get sucked right in? Not me, for one. I have to admit, my arbor, my pipe, and my lotus leaves sound lovely and philosophical on paper, but I'm afraid I'm not the type to sit in a garden smoking when there's actual fun happening outside. I think I'm more like the Irishman who saw a crowd gathering and sent his little girl out to ask, "Is there going to be a row?" because, as he said, "If there is, Father would like to be in it."

I love the fierce fight. I love watching it. I love hearing stories of people battling their way up—bravely and fairly, meaning they didn't just slip through by luck or cheating. It stirs up that old Saxon fighting blood inside us, just like the tales of knights fighting against impossible odds used to thrill us when we were schoolboys.

And fighting the battle of life? That's fighting against truly terrifying odds. There are giants and dragons in this nineteenth century, and the golden treasure chest they guard isn't as easy to steal as the storybooks make it seem. In those books, Algernon takes one last look at the ancestral hall, wipes a tear from his eye, and heads off—to return three years later, rolling in riches. The authors never tell us *how* he did it, which is a shame, because it would surely be thrilling.

But then, not one novelist in a thousand ever tells the real story of their hero. They spend twelve pages describing a tea party, then summarize a whole lifetime with a line like, "He had become one of our merchant princes," or "He was now a great artist, with the world at his feet." Come on, there's more real life in one of Gilbert's patter-songs than in half the biographical novels ever written. He tells us every single step by which his office boy rose to become the "ruler of the queen's navy," and explains exactly how a lawyer with no cases managed to become a great and good judge, "ready to try this breach of promise of marriage."

The real interest of existence lies in the petty details, not the big results. What we really want is a novel that shows us the hidden under-current of an ambitious man's career—his struggles, his failures, his hopes, his disappointments, and his victories. It would be a massive hit. I'm sure the story of wooing Fortune would be just as fascinating as the story of wooing any flesh-and-blood maiden, though, by the way, it would read almost exactly the same; for Fortune is, indeed, as the ancients painted her, very much like a woman—not quite so unreasonable and inconsistent, but nearly so—and the pursuit is much the same in both cases.

Ben Jonson nailed it in his couplet:

"Court a mistress, she denies you;
Let her alone, she will court you."

It puts both situations in a nutshell. A woman never truly cares for her lover until he stops caring for her; and it's not until you snap your fingers in Fortune's face and turn on your heel that she starts smiling at you.

But by that time, you don't really care if she smiles or frowns. Why couldn't she have smiled when her smiles would have filled you with ecstasy? Everything comes too late in this world.

The good people say it's perfectly right and proper that it should be this way, and that it proves ambition is wicked.

Nonsense! The good people are completely wrong. (They always are, in my opinion. We never agree on anything.) What would the world do without ambitious people, I should like to know? Why, it would be as flabby as a Norfolk dumpling. Ambitious people are the yeast that raises it into wholesome bread. Without them, the world would never get out of bed. They are the busybodies who are up early in the morning, hammering, shouting, and rattling the fire-irons, making it generally impossible for the rest of the house to stay in bed.

Wrong to be ambitious, forsooth! The men are wrong who, with bent backs and sweating brows, cut the smooth road over which humanity marches forward from generation to generation! They are wrong for using the talents that their Master has entrusted to them—for toiling while others play!

Of course, they are seeking their reward. Man is not given that godlike unselfishness that thinks only of others' good. But in working for themselves, they are working for us all. We are so bound together that no man can labor for himself alone. Each blow he strikes in his own behalf helps to mold the universe. The stream, struggling onward, turns the mill-wheel; the coral insect, fashioning its tiny cell, joins continents together; and the ambitious man, building a pedestal for himself, leaves a monument to posterity. Alexander and Caesar fought for their own ends, but in doing so, they put a belt of civilization half around the earth. Stephenson, to win a fortune, invented the steam-engine; and Shakespeare wrote his plays in order to keep a comfortable home for Mrs. Shakespeare and the little Shakespeares.

Contented, unambitious people are all very well in their way. They form a neat, useful background for great portraits to be painted against, and they make a respectable, if not particularly intelligent, audience for the active spirits of the age to play before. I have not a word to say against contented people so long as they keep quiet. But do not, for goodness' sake, let them go strutting about, as they are so fond of doing, crying out that they are the true models for the whole species. Why, they are the deadheads, the drones in the great hive, the street crowds that lounge about, gaping at those who are working.

And let them not imagine, either—as they are also fond of doing—that they are very wise and philosophical and that it is a very artful thing to be contented. It may be true that "a contented mind is happy anywhere," but so is a Jerusalem pony, and the consequence is that both are put anywhere and are treated anyhow. "Oh, you need not bother about him," is what is said; "he is very contented as he is, and it would be a pity to disturb him." And so your contented party is passed over, and the discontented man gets his place.

If you are foolish enough to be contented, don't show it, but grumble with the rest; and if you can do with a little, ask for a great deal. Because if you don't, you won't get any. In this world, it is necessary to adopt the principle pursued by the plaintiff in an action for damages, and to demand ten times more than you are ready to accept. If you can feel satisfied with a hundred, begin by insisting on a thousand; if you start by suggesting a hundred, you will only get ten.

It was by not following this simple plan that poor Jean Jacques Rousseau came to such grief. He fixed the summit of his earthly bliss at living in an orchard with an amiable woman and a cow, and he never attained even that. He did get as far as the orchard, but the woman was not amiable, and she brought her mother with her, and there was no cow. Now, if he had made up his mind for a large country estate, a houseful of angels, and a cattle-show, he might have lived to possess his kitchen garden and one head of live-stock, and even possibly have come across that *rara-avis*—a really amiable woman.

What a terribly dull affair, too, life must be for contented people! How heavy the time must hang upon their hands, and what on earth do they occupy their thoughts with, supposing that they have any? Reading the paper and smoking seems to be the intellectual food of the majority of them, to which the more energetic add playing the flute and talking about the affairs of the next-door neighbor.

They never knew the excitement of expectation nor the stern delight of accomplished effort, such as stir the pulse of the man who has objects, and hopes, and plans. To the ambitious man, life is a brilliant game—a game that calls forth all his tact and energy and nerve—a game to be won, in the long run, by the quick eye and the steady hand, and yet having sufficient chance about its working out to give it all the glorious zest of uncertainty. He exults in it as the strong swimmer in the heaving billows, as the athlete in the wrestle, the soldier in the battle.

And if he be defeated, he wins the grim joy of fighting; if he loses the race, he, at least, has had a run. Better to work and fail than to sleep one's life away.

So, walk up, walk up, walk up. Walk up, ladies and gentlemen! Walk up, boys and girls! Show your skill and try your strength; brave your luck and prove your pluck. Walk up! The show is never closed and the game is always going. The only genuine sport in all the fair, gentlemen—highly respectable and strictly moral—patronized by the nobility, clergy, and gentry. Established in the year one, gentlemen, and been flourishing ever since—walk up! Walk up, ladies and gentlemen, and take a hand. There are prizes for all and all can play. There is gold

Life has a habit of conspiring against my best-laid plans, doesn't it? I had resolved to tackle a subject so utterly novel, so delightfully obscure, that it would leave the literary world gasping in awe. "I shall write a piece on something entirely new," I declared to myself with the confidence of a genius; "something no human soul has ever conceived; something that will be mine alone." For days, I paced my room, my brain churning like a wet sponge, searching for this golden nugget of originality. Nothing. Zip. Nada.

Then came Mrs. Cutting, our charwoman, yesterday. I won't mention her name in print; she'd likely faint if she saw this book. She reads nothing but the Bible and *Lloyd's Weekly News*, considering all other literature a sin and a waste of time.

"Lor', sir," she observed, eyeing my furrowed brow, "you do look worried."

"I am, Mrs. Cutting," I explained, adopting a tone of profound seriousness. "I am attempting to conceive a subject so startling, so revolutionary, that it will shock the world into a new era of thought—a topic on which no previous mortal has ever spoken a word."

She let out a guffaw that shook the tea-tray in her hands. "A funny gentleman, you are, sir."

My luck, it seems, is to be misunderstood. My earnestness is mistaken for eccentricity, and my jokes land flat on their faces. Last week, I concocted a masterpiece of wit. I had been discussing Shakespeare's stance on the Reformation at a dinner party, and I dropped a line that I was certain would bring the house down. "Ah," I said, "that reminds me; a terribly funny thing happened recently in Whitechapel."

"Oh," they murmured, "what was that?"

"Oh, it was hilarious," I replied, suppressing a giggle. "It'll make you roar!" And I launched into my tale.

Silence. Absolute, suffocating silence. Finally, someone asked, "And that was the joke?"

I insisted it was, and they politely accepted my word. Except for one elderly gentleman at the far end of the table, who demanded to know exactly what the punchline was—what was said to whom—and we ended up arguing for twenty minutes.

Some people are just the opposite. I knew a chap once whose laugh was so reflexive that if you wanted to discuss serious matters, you had to preface your speech with a warning that it wouldn't be amusing. Otherwise, he'd burst into hysterics over the most mundane statements. I've seen him stop mid-stride on the road, slap his knee, and erupt into laughter simply because someone asked him the time. You couldn't say anything truly funny to that man without risking his life; a good joke would have killed him instantly.

Back to Mrs. Cutting. I vigorously denied being frivolous and pressed her for a genuine idea. After a long pause, during which she stared into the middle distance with a tea-tray balanced precariously, she suggested "samplers." She claimed they were all the rage when she was a girl.

I waved that away. Samplers? Boring. Please, think harder. She pondered for another eternity, and then, with a shrug, she suggested the weather. She noted it had been particularly trying lately.

And there I am, stuck. Ever since that idiotic suggestion, I haven't been able to think of anything else.

It is, admittedly, wretched weather. At least, it is right now, and if it doesn't improve by the time you read this, it soon will.

To us city dwellers, the weather is like the government: perpetually in the wrong. In summer, it's stifling; in winter, it's lethal; in spring and autumn, it's indecisive and annoying. If it's fine, we complain the crops are suffering; if it rains, we beg for sunshine. If December passes without snow, we act as though we've been cheated out of a purchased commodity, demanding to know where our "good old-fashioned winters" have gone. And when snow finally arrives, our language becomes a disgrace to civilization. We will never be satisfied until everyone controls their own personal climate.

If that's impossible, we'd prefer to live without weather altogether.

Yet, I suspect this dissatisfaction is unique to us urbanites. Out in the countryside, Nature is delightful in every mood. Who can resist the beauty of snow falling in silent softness, blanketing the fields in white like a fairy wedding dress? Or the thrill of walking on frozen ground that rings beneath your boots, the sharp air making your blood sing, while sheepdogs bark and children laugh like Alpine bells across the hills? And skating! Gliding across the swaying ice, making whirring music. And spring! Nature at eighteen, fresh and green, like young lives peeking shyly into the world. Fruit trees blossoming like village maidens in Sunday frocks, hiding cottages in clouds of fragrant splendor, while cuckoos call through the woods. Summer, with its deep greens and drowsy hums, where raindrops whisper secrets to the leaves. And autumn! Oh, the sad beauty of it—the golden glow, the blood-red sunsets, the ghostly mists, the harvest festivals.

Even the rain, sleet, and hail seem like useful servants when they are doing their jobs in the country. Even the East Wind is just a boisterous friend between the hedgerows.

But in the city? Where painted stucco blisters under the smoky sun, and sooty rain turns the streets into slurry, and snow piles up in dirty heaps, Nature offers no charm. Weather in towns is like a skylark trapped in a counting-house—out of place and in the way. Cities should be sealed tight, heated by pipes, and lit by electricity. The weather is a country lass who looks terrible in town. We liked flirting with her in the hayfields, but she's not so fascinating when we meet her in Pall Mall. There's too much of her. Her frank laugh jars against the artificiality of city life; her ways are exhausting.

Lately, she's been favoring us with relentless rain for three weeks. As Mr. Mantalini put it, I am a "demned damp, moist, unpleasant body."

Our neighbor pops into his back garden occasionally to claim the weather is doing the country a world of good. He doesn't understand it, but since he started a cucumber frame last summer, he considers himself an agriculturist and tries to impress the terrace with this absurd notion. I only hope he's right this time, because the weather is doing me considerable damage. It's ruining my clothes and my temper. I have plenty of temper to spare, but seeing my dear old hats and trousers sink prematurely under the cold blasts is a wound to the quick.

Take my new spring suit. It was beautiful. Now it hangs there, a bespattered mess I can't bear to look at.

That was Jim's fault. I should never have worn it that night if he hadn't interfered. I was trying it on when he burst in, threw up his arms, and yelled, "Got 'em again!"

"Does it fit all right behind?" I asked.

"Spiffin, old man," he replied. Then he asked if I was going out.

"No," I said.

He overruled me. "A man with a suit like that has no right to stay indoors," he declared. "Every citizen owes a duty to the public. Come out and give the girls a treat."

Jim speaks in slang I don't know where he gets it. Certainly not from me.

"Do you think it will really please them?" I asked.

"It'll be like a day in the country for them," he said.

That decided me. It was a lovely evening, so I went.

When I got home, I undressed, rubbed myself down with whisky, soaked my feet in hot water, applied a mustard plaster to my chest, ate gruel, drank brandy-and-water, tallow my nose, and crawled into bed.

These vigorous measures, aided by a strong constitution, saved my life. But as for the suit? Well, it's no longer a suit; it's a splashboard.

I did fancy that suit. But that's just how it is. I never get attached to anything unless something dreadful happens to it. When I was a boy, I had a tame rat I loved dearly. One day it fell into a large dish of gooseberry fool cooling in the kitchen, and nobody knew what happened to it until the second helping arrived.

I hate wet weather in town. Actually, it's less the wet and more the mud. I seem to have an irresistible attraction to it. I only have to step onto a muddy street to be half-smothered by it. An old lady once said I was struck by lightning because of my attractiveness; I suppose that explains it. Others can walk for hours on dirty days without a speck, but if I cross the road, I return a disgrace. If there were even one dab of mud in all of London, I'm convinced I'd carry it off from every competitor.

I wish I could return the affection, but I fear I never will. I have a horror of the "London particular." I feel miserable and muggy all day, and it's a relief to strip off and get into bed, escaping the filth. Everything goes wrong in wet weather. There seem to be more people, dogs, prams, cabs, and carts, and they all get in your way more. Everyone is disagreeable—except me, apparently. And I always find myself carrying more things when it rains. You have a bag, three parcels, a newspaper, and then the rain starts, and you can't open your umbrella.

Which reminds me of another phase I can't stand: April weather (so-called because it always arrives in May). Poets think it's lovely. Since it changes its mind every five minutes, they compare it to a woman, claiming it's charming. I don't appreciate it. Such lightning changes might be agreeable in a girl, but in the weather, the disadvantages are glaring. A woman's tears don't soak you; rain does. Her coldness doesn't cause asthma and rheumatism; the east wind does. I can handle a consistently bad day, but these "ha'porth-of-all-sorts" days drive me mad. It aggravates me to see a bright blue sky above me while I walk through, soaking wet. There's something exasperating about the sun smiling after a drenching shower, as if to say, "Lord love you, you don't mean to say you're wet? Well, I'm surprised. Why, it was only my fun."

You don't get time to open or shut your umbrella in an English April, especially if you have an "automaton"—the umbrella, not the month.

I bought one once in April and had a nightmare. I wanted an umbrella that kept the rain off and didn't get left behind in a train.

"Try an 'automaton,'" the shopman suggested.

"What's an 'automaton'?" I asked.

"Oh, it's beautiful," he enthused. "It opens and shuts itself."

I bought one and found he was right. It opened and shut itself. I had no control whatsoever. When it rained—which it did every alternate five minutes—that season—I tried to make the machine open, but it wouldn't budge. I'd stand there shaking it and swearing while the rain poured down. Then, the moment the rain stopped, the absurd thing would jerk upward and refuse to close. I'd have to walk under a bright blue sky with an umbrella over my head, wishing it would rain again just so I wouldn't look insane.

When it did close, it did so unexpectedly, knocking my hat off.

I don't know why, but losing your hat makes a man look supremely ridiculous. The feeling of helpless misery that shoots down your back when you realize your head is bare is one of the bitterest ills of life. Then there's the wild chase, accompanied by an excited small dog thinking it's a game, during which you inevitably upset three or four innocent children (and their mothers), butt a fat old gentleman onto a pram, and carom off a ladies' seminary into the arms of a wet sweep.

After that, the idiotic hilarity of the crowd and the disreputable appearance of the recovered hat seem like minor details.

All in all, with March winds, April showers, and the total absence of May flowers, spring is a failure in cities. It's fine in the country, as I've said, but in towns with populations over ten thousand, it should be abolished. In the world's grim workshops, it's like children—out of place. Neither shows to advantage amid the dust and din. It's sad to see little dirt-grimed brats trying to play in noisy courts and muddy streets. They aren't children. Children are bright-eyed, chubby, and shy. These are dingy, screeching elves, their faces seared and withered, their laughter cracked and hoarse.

The spring of life and the spring of the year were meant to be cradled in nature's green lap. For us in the town, spring brings only cold winds and drizzle. We must seek it among leafless woods, brambly lanes, heathy moors, and great still hills if we want to feel its joyous breath. There is a glorious freshness there. The scurrying clouds, the open bleakness, the rushing wind, and the clear air thrill one with vague energies and hopes. Life, like the landscape, seems bigger, wider, freer—a rainbow road to unknown ends. Through the silvery rents in the sky, we glimpse the great hope and grandeur surrounding this little throbbing world, and a breath of its scent is wafted to us on the wings of the wild March wind.

Strange thoughts stir in our hearts that we don't understand. Voices call us to great efforts, to mighty works. But we don't comprehend their meaning yet, and the hidden echoes within us that would reply are struggling, inarticulate and dumb.

We stretch our hands like children to the light, seeking to grasp what we know not what. Our thoughts, like the boys' thoughts in the Danish song,

The morning has been a trial of endurance that no tongue could adequately describe. It commenced with Gustavus Adolphus. Downstairs, they shorten his name to "Gusty," a moniker that suits a creature who is a paragon of canine virtue only when confined to the vast expanse of a field or a sprawling common. Indoors, however, he is a disaster waiting to happen. His intentions are noble, but this residence is simply too small for his ambitions. With a single stretch, he topples two chairs and a what-not; with a wag of his tail, the room resembles the aftermath of a military invasion; with a simple breath, he extinguishes the fire.

At dinner, he executes his signature maneuver: creeping under the table, lying still, and then erupting into motion. Our only warning is the table itself, which suddenly acquires a violent desire to perform somersaults. We scramble to hold it upright, only for Gusty to interpret our efforts as a sinister conspiracy. His struggle escalates until the scene concludes with an overturned table and a ruined meal trapped between two layers of furious humanity.

This morning, he arrived with the ferocity of an American cyclone. His first act was to sweep my coffee cup across the table with his tail, drenching my waistcoat in the process. I rose hastily, shouting a curse, and charged him. He pre-empted me, fleeing toward the door. There, he intercepted Eliza, who was carrying eggs. She uttered a sharp "Ugh!" and collapsed onto the floor. The eggs scattered across the carpet, and Gusty vanished. I chased him down the stairs, sternly advising him to remain below for at least an hour, which he accepted by dodging a coal-scoop and departing. Ten minutes later, however, he was perched at the top of the stairs. I ordered him down; he merely barked and jumped. I descended to investigate.

It was Tittums. She sat on the step below, blocking his path, her back arched and her voice rising in a torrent of oaths.

Tittums is our kitten, roughly the size of a penny roll. She was swearing with the intensity of a medical student.

She is a formidable linguist. I admit to swearing occasionally myself, though I am but an amateur compared to her. To be honest—strictly between us, I beg you not to tell your wife—I find that swearing benefits a man. It acts as a safety valve, releasing the internal pressure of bad temper before it causes mental damage. When a man expresses his frustration in colorful language, he feels lighter. Swearing soothes the soul just as smashing furniture does, only without the cost. It clears a man out like gunpowder clears a chimney. A man who never swears, nor kicks a footstool, nor pokes the fire with unnecessary violence, is suspicious to me. Without an outlet, life's annoyances fester, turning petty offenses into deep-seated hatred.

I explained this theory to my aunt once, but she dismissed it, claiming I had no business harboring such feelings. That is precisely what I told Tittums. I lectured her on her upbringing in a Christian household and the shame of her behavior. While I tolerate an old cat's vulgarity, a kitten doing it seems tragically premature.

I shoved Tittums into my pocket and returned to my desk. Moments later, she had wriggled out onto the table, attempting to swallow a pen, dipped her leg in the inkpot, spilled the ink, licked her leg, and then swore directly at me.

I placed her on the floor, where Tim immediately began wrestling with her. I wish Tim would mind his own business; it was none of his affair. Besides, he is hardly a saint. At two years old, he acts like a grumpy, gray-headed Scotch collie, interfering with everything. Tittums' mother arrived, and Tim received a scratch on the nose—a development I welcomed. I banished all three to the passage, where they are currently engaged in a fierce battle. I am covered in ink and in a foul temper; if any more cats or dogs decide to visit this morning, they should bring their own undertakers.

Yet, in general, I hold cats and dogs in high regard. They are delightful companions, far superior to humans. They do not quarrel or argue. They never boast of themselves but listen attentively to your ramblings, feigning interest without making stupid remarks. They never misunderstand relationships, mistaking your wife's cousin for her husband, nor do they question a struggling author about his lack of productivity. They offer no unsolicited critiques of our faults or sarcastic reminders of our past errors. They never tell us we are not as charming as we used to be.

They are always glad to see us, mirroring our moods perfectly. If we are cheerful, they are merry; if we are solemn, they are sober; if we are sad, they are sorrowful.

"Halloo! Want a lark? Right you are! I'm your man. Frisking round, leaping, barking, ready for mischief. Shall we romp in the drawing-room, ignoring the furniture, or scamper across the fields to scare old Gaffer Goggles' geese? Come along!"

Or, if you wish to think quietly, Pussy can purr on the armchair while Montmorency curls on the rug, blinking at the fire but keeping one eye on you for any sign of rats.

When we bury our faces in our hands, wishing we were never born, they do not judge us. They do not offer platitudes about self-inflicted misery. Instead, they come softly, pressing their heads against us. A cat stands on your shoulder, ruffling your hair and saying, "Lor, I am sorry for you, old man"; a dog looks up with big, true eyes and says, "We'll go through the world together, won't we?"

Dogs are imprudent. They do not inquire if you are right or wrong, rich or poor, wise or foolish. You are their pal, and that is sufficient. Whether luck or misfortune strikes, they stick by you, guarding and comforting you, ready to give their lives if needed. Foolish, brainless, soulless dogs!

Ah, old friend, with your deep eyes that comprehend everything before you speak it, do you realize you are merely an animal? Do you know that the drunken lout leaning against the post is your intellectual superior? Do you know that every petty, selfish scoundrel who cheats, lies, and acts with base motives is infinitely superior to you? These crawling skunks are MEN, and men are the greatest, noblest, and wisest beings in the universe. Any man will tell you that.

Yes, poor doggie, you are very stupid compared to us clever men who understand politics and philosophy, knowing everything except our own origins and destinies.

Never mind, pussy and doggie; we like you all the better for your stupidity. We all love stupid things. Men cannot bear clever women, and a woman's ideal man is someone she can call a "dear old stupid." It is pleasant to encounter those less intelligent than ourselves. We love them instantly. The world is rough for the clever; ordinary folk dislike them, and they hate each other.

But since the clever are such a tiny minority, their unhappiness matters little. As long as the foolish can be comforted, the world functions adequately.

Cats are credited with worldly wisdom, prioritizing their own interests over blind devotion. We are naturally shocked by such selfishness. Cats certainly prefer families with carpets in the kitchen and avoid households with many children. Yet, overall, cats are libeled. Make a friend of one, and she sticks to you through thick and thin. Every cat I have owned has been a firm comrade. One followed me everywhere until I begged her to stop, and another would wait up for me late at night, meeting me in the passage, making me feel like a married man, except she never asked where I had been and disbelieved my excuses.

Another cat drank regularly, lurking outside the cellar to lap up beer drippings. I mention this not to praise the species but to illustrate their humanity. If transmigration of souls exists, this cat was rapidly qualifying for Christianity; her vanity rivaled her love of drink. When she caught a large rat, she would drag it into the room, lay it in the center, and wait for praise. The girls would scream.

Poor rats! They seem to exist solely so cats and dogs can gain credit for killing them, and chemists can profit from poisons. Yet, there is something fascinating about them. They possess a weird, uncanny quality. Cunning, strong, numerous, cruel, and secretive, they swarm in deserted houses, whispering of doom in their hiding places. They know when a ship sinks and vanish into the unknown. They haunt tales of horror, scampering through ghostly rooms, their teeth gnawing behind wainscots, their eyes gleaming through tapestries.

Dying prisoners in dark dungeons see their small red eyes like glowing coals and hear the rush of their clawed feet, shrieking in the silence.

I love tales of rats. The story of Bishop Hatto is particularly lovely. The wicked bishop hoarded corn, refusing to feed the starving, then burned them in his barn. The next day, thousands of rats arrived to judge him. He fled to his tower on the Rhine, thinking himself safe, but the rats swam the river, gnawed through the stone walls, and ate him alive.

"There have whetted their teeth against the stones, And now they pick the bishop's bones..."

Then there is the Pied Piper of Hamelin. First he piped the rats away, then, when the mayor broke his promise, he led the children into the mountains. What a curious legend! I wonder what it means. There is something deep beneath the rhyme. The image of the piper playing through the narrow streets, children following with dancing feet and eager faces, haunting me. The old folks try to stop them, but the children ignore them, drawn by the witching music. Games are abandoned, toys dropped, and they wander away, heedless of where they are going.

Sometimes I wonder if the Pied Piper is still alive, roaming our streets softly so only children hear him. Why do their faces look so grave when they pause? They shake their heads and laugh when questioned, but I suspect they have heard the magic music and perhaps glimpsed his odd figure. Even we adults hear his piping now and then, though the noisy world drowns it out. One day, the sweet strains will sound clear, and we too will abandon our playthings and follow, knowing the song's meaning.

I wish people could love animals without becoming maudlin. Women are the worst offenders, but even men degrade pets through absurd idolatry. Young ladies who have read "David Copperfield" seek out nondescript dogs with irritating habits, talking sweet prattle to them and kissing their noses, especially when young men are around. Old ladies worship fat, flea-ridden poodles, washing their faces and feeding them mutton cutlets. Some families center their entire lives on the dog.

Cats rarely suffer from excess adulation; they possess a sense of the ridiculous and will firmly put their paw down on nonsense. Dogs, however, encourage it. Consequently, in certain circles, the dog's every action becomes the topic of conversation from morning till night. The family sits in a row, watching him, recounting anecdotes, recalling how he was once rescued from the butcher-boy by the scruff of his neck. After recovering from these memories, they admire the brute until someone swoops down in a frenzy of affection, clutching the dog and slobbering over it, while the others rise in envy to seize whatever remains.

With these people, everything revolves around the dog. To make love to the eldest daughter, borrow the garden roller, or get the mother to subscribe to the Society for the Suppression of Solo-Cornet Players, you must first gain the dog's approval. If the animal, warped by unnatural treatment, snaps at you, your cause is lost forever.

"If Fido won't take to any one," the father remarks thoughtfully, "I say that man is not to be trusted. Ah! he knows, bless him."

Drat him!

To think that the surly brute was once an innocent puppy, full of fun and ambition to bark like his mother. Ah me! Life changes us all. The world is a vast grinding machine that turns fresh, bright things into old, crabbed ones.

Look at Pussy Sobersides, with her dull, sleepy glance and dignified airs. Who could imagine she was once the blue-eyed, whirling firework of a kitten?

What marvelous vitality a kitten possesses! Life bubbles over in them. They rush, mew, spring, dance on hind legs, embrace everything, roll over, and kick. They are so full of life they don't know what to do with themselves.

Can you remember, reader, those glorious days of fresh young manhood? When walking home on a moonlit road, you felt too full of life for sober walking, skipping and shouting until belated farmers' wives thought you mad? Oh, that magnificent young LIFE! That crowned us kings of the earth, rushing through our veins, thrilling our brains, and urging us to conquer the world. It welled up in our hearts, making us long to embrace all mankind. Those were grand days, when our blood cried out like a war-horse for battle. Now our pulse beats slowly, our joints ache, and we love our easy-chairs and pipes, sneering at boys' enthusiasm. But oh, for one brief moment of that god-like life again!

It is a universally accepted truth among the literary elite that all great writers are shy. I, too, am shy, though my acquaintances insist it is hardly noticeable. I am relieved it isn't; in my youth, it was a glaring defect that caused me immense misery and drove everyone around me—particularly my female companions—to bitter complaints.

The lot of the shy man is hardly enviable. Men dislike him, women despise him, and he despises himself. Time is the only cure, though I once stumbled upon a delightful recipe in a small weekly journal's "answers to correspondents" section: "Adopt an easy and pleasing manner, especially toward ladies."

Poor fool! I can barely imagine the grin on his face reading that advice. "Adopt an easy and pleasing manner," indeed! Do not try to pretend to be someone else, my dear young friend. Any attempt to suppress your true nature will inevitably result in you becoming ridiculously gushing and offensively familiar. Be your own natural self; at least then you will only be considered surly and stupid.

Yet, the shy man does exact a small revenge on society for the torture he endures. He communicates his misery so effectively that he frightens others just as much as they frighten him. He acts as a dampener on the entire room, causing even the most jovial spirits to become depressed and nervous in his presence.

Much of this stems from misunderstanding. Society mistakes the shy man's timidity for overbearing arrogance and is awed—or insulted—by it. His awkwardness is resented as insolent carelessness. When, terrified by the first word addressed to him, blood rushes to his head and speech fails completely, he is viewed as a terrible example of giving way to passion.

To be misunderstood is the shy man's fate; whatever impression he tries to create, he conveys its opposite. A joke is taken as a pretended fact and his honesty condemned. Sarcasm is accepted as literal opinion, earning him the reputation of an ass. If he attempts flattery to ingratiate himself, it is taken as satire, and he is hated forever after.

These troubles are endlessly amusing to others and have provided material for comic writing since time immemorial. But look deeper, and you will find a pathetic, almost tragic side. A shy man is a lonely man—a man cut off from all companionship. He moves through the world but does not mix with it. An impassable, invisible wall separates him from his fellow-men. He sees pleasant faces and hears pleasant voices on the other side, but he cannot stretch his hand across to grasp another. He watches merry groups, longing to speak and claim kinship, but they pass him by, chatting gayly, while he remains trapped. His prison walls move with him, hemming him in. In the busy street, the crowded room, the grind of work, or the whirl of pleasure, wherever men congregate, the shy man stands apart, shunned and solitary like a leper. His soul is full of love and longing, but the world knows it not. The iron mask of shyness is riveted before his face; genial words rise to his lips only to die away in unheard whispers behind steel clamps. His heart aches for the weary brother, but his sympathy is dumb. Contempt and indignation choke his throat, finding no safety valve to release them, so they turn inward and harm him. All the hate, scorn, and love of a deep nature fester and corrupt within, souring him into a misanthrope and cynic.

Yes, shy men, like ugly women, have a hard time in this world. To endure it with any comfort requires the hide of a rhinoceros. Thick skin is our moral clothing; without it, we are unfit for civilized society. A poor, gasping, blushing creature with trembling knees and twitching hands is a painful sight to everyone, and if it cannot cure itself, the sooner it hangs itself the better.

However, the disease can be cured. For the comfort of the shy, I can assure them of this from personal experience. Though I dislike speaking of myself, in the cause of humanity I will confess that at one time I was, as the young man in the *Bab Ballad* says, "the shyest of the shy," and "whenever I was introduced to any pretty maid, my knees they knocked together just as if I was afraid." Now, I did the deed. Alone and entirely by myself (as the schoolboy said in translating the *Bellum Gallicum*) did I beard a railway refreshment-room young lady in her own lair. I rebuked her in terms of mingled bitterness and sorrow for her callousness and lack of condescension. I insisted, courteously but firmly, on being accorded that deference and attention that was the right of the traveling Briton, and at the end, I looked her full in the face. Need I say more?

True, immediately after doing so, I left the room with what may have appeared to be precipitation and without waiting for any refreshment. But that was because I had changed my mind, not because I was frightened, you understand.

One consolation shy folk can take is that shyness is certainly no sign of stupidity. It is easy for bull-headed clowns to sneer at nerves, but the highest natures are not necessarily those containing the greatest amount of moral brass. The horse is not inferior to the cock-sparrow, nor the forest deer to the pig. Shyness simply means extreme sensibility and has nothing to do with self-consciousness or conceit, though the "poll-parrot school of philosophy" insists otherwise.

Conceit is indeed the quickest cure. When it dawns on you that you are cleverer than anyone else in this world, bashfulness becomes shocked and leaves you. When you can look around a roomful of people and think each is a mere child in intellect compared to yourself, you feel no more shy of them than you would of a select company of magpies or orang-outangs.

Conceit is the finest armor a man can wear. Upon its smooth, impenetrable surface, the puny dagger-thrusts of spite and envy glance harmlessly aside. Without that breastplate, the sword of talent cannot force its way through the battle of life, for blows have to be borne as well as dealt. I do not speak of the conceit that displays itself in an elevated nose and a falsetto voice. That is not real conceit—that is only playing at being conceited, like children playing at being kings and queens, strutting about with feathers and long trains. Genuine conceit does not make a man objectionable. On the contrary, it tends to make him genial, kind-hearted, and simple. He has no need of affectation—he is far too well satisfied with his own character; his pride is too deep-seated to appear on the outside. Careless alike of praise or blame, he can afford to be truthful. Too far, in fancy, above the rest of mankind to trouble about their petty distinctions, he is equally at home with a duke or a costermonger. Valuing no one's standard but his own, he is never tempted to practice that miserable pretense that less self-reliant people offer as an hourly sacrifice to the god of their neighbor's opinion.

The shy man, on the other hand, is humble—modest of his own judgment and over-anxious concerning that of others. But this is surely right enough for a young man. His character is unformed, slowly evolving itself out of a chaos of doubt and disbelief. Before growing insight and experience, the diffidence recedes. A man rarely carries his shyness past the hobbledehoy period. Even if his own inward strength does not throw it off, the rubbings of the world generally smooth it down. You scarcely ever meet a really shy man—except in novels or on the stage, where, by the bye, he is much admired, especially by the women.

There, in that supernatural land, he appears as a fair-haired and saintlike young man—fair hair and goodness always go together on the stage. No respectable audience would believe in one without the other. I knew an actor who mislaid his wig once and had to rush on to play the hero in his own hair, which was jet-black, and the gallery howled at all his noble sentiments under the impression that he was the villain. He—the shy young man—loves the heroine, oh so devotedly (but only in asides, for he dare not tell her of it), and he is so noble and unselfish, speaks in such a low voice, and is so good to his mother. The bad people in the play laugh at him and jeer at him, but he takes it all so gently. In the end, it transpires that he is such a clever man, though nobody knew it, and then the heroine tells him she loves him, and he is so surprised, and oh, so happy! Everybody loves him and asks him to forgive them, which he does in a few well-chosen and sarcastic words, and blesses them. He seems to have such a good time that all the young fellows who are not shy long to be shy. But the really shy man knows better. He knows it is not quite so pleasant in reality. He is not quite so interesting there as in fiction. He is a little more clumsy and stupid, a little less devoted and gentle, and his hair is much darker, which, taken altogether, considerably alters the aspect of the case.

The point where he resembles his ideal is in his faithfulness. I am fully prepared to allow the shy young man that virtue: he is constant in his love. But the reason is not far to seek. The fact is, it exhausts all his stock of courage to look one woman in the face, and it would be simply impossible for him to go through the ordeal with a second. He stands in far too much dread of the whole female sex to want to go gadding about with many of them. One is quite enough for him.

Now, it is different with the young man who is not shy. He has temptations his bashful brother never encounters. He looks around and everywhere sees roguish eyes and laughing lips. What is more natural than that, amid so many roguish eyes and laughing lips, he should become confused and, forgetting for the moment which particular pair belongs to him, go off making love to the wrong set? The shy man, who never looks at anything but his own boots, sees not and is not tempted. Happy shy man!

Not but what the shy man himself would much rather not be happy in that way. He longs to "go it" with the others and curses himself every day for not being able to. He will now and again, screwing up his courage by a tremendous effort, plunge into roguishness. But it is always a terrible *fiasco*, and after one or two feeble flounders, he crawls out again, limp and pitiable.

I say "pitiable," though I am afraid he never is pitied. There are certain misfortunes which, while inflicting vast amounts of suffering upon their victims, gain them no sympathy. Losing an umbrella, falling in love, toothache, black eyes, and having your hat sat upon may be mentioned as examples, but the chief of them all is shyness. The shy man is regarded as an animate joke. His tortures are the sport of the drawing-room arena, pointed out and discussed with much gusto.

"Look," cry his tittering audience to each other; "he's blushing!"

"Just watch his legs," says one.

"Do you notice how he is sitting?" adds another; "right on the edge of the chair."

"Seems to have plenty of color," sneers a military-looking gentleman.

"Pity he's got so many hands," murmurs an elderly lady, with her own calmly folded on her lap. "They quite confuse him."

"A yard or two off his feet wouldn't be a disadvantage," chimes in the comic man, "especially as he seems so anxious to hide them."

And then another suggests that with such a voice he ought to have been a sea-captain. Some draw attention to the desperate way in which he is grasping his hat. Some comment upon his limited powers of conversation. Others remark upon the troublesome nature of his cough. And so on, until his peculiarities and the company are both thoroughly exhausted.

His friends and relations make matters still more unpleasant for the poor boy (friends and relations are privileged to be more disagreeable than other people). Not content with making fun of him among themselves, they insist on his seeing the joke. They mimic and caricature him for his own edification. One, pretending to imitate him, goes outside and comes in again in a ludicrously nervous manner, explaining afterward that that is the way he—meaning the shy fellow—walks into a room; or, turning to him with "This is the way you shake hands," proceeds to go through a comic pantomime with the rest of the room, taking hold of every one's hand as if it were a hot plate and flabbily dropping it again. And then they ask him why he blushes, why he stammers, and why he always speaks in an almost inaudible tone, as if they thought he did it on purpose. Then one of them, sticking out his chest and strutting about the room like a pouter-pigeon, suggests quite seriously that that is the style he should adopt. The old man slaps him on the back and says: "Be bold, my boy. Don't be afraid of any one." The mother says, "Never do anything that you need be ashamed of, Algernon, and then you never need be ashamed of anything you do," and, beaming mildly at him, seems surprised at the clearness of her own logic. The boys tell him that he's "worse than a girl," and the girls repudiate the implied slur upon their sex by indignantly exclaiming that they are sure no girl would be half as bad.

They are quite right; no girl would be. There is no such thing as a shy woman, or, at all events, I have never come across one, and until I do I shall not believe in them. I know that the generally accepted belief is quite the reverse. All women are supposed to be like timid, startled fawns, blushing and casting down their gentle eyes when looked

Oh, yes, I do—I know a lot about 'em. I was one myself once, though not long—certainly not so long as my clothes. They were very long, I recollect, and always in my way when I wanted to kick. Why do babies have such yards of unnecessary clothing? It is not a riddle. I really want to know. I never could understand it. Is it that the parents are ashamed of the size of the child and wish to make believe that it is longer than it actually is? I asked a nurse once why it was. She said:

"Lor', sir, they always have long clothes, bless their little hearts."

And when I explained that her answer, although doing credit to her feelings, hardly disposed of my difficulty, she replied:

"Lor', sir, you wouldn't have 'em in short clothes, poor little dears?"

She said it in a tone that seemed to imply I had suggested some unmanly outrage. Since then I have felt shy at making inquiries on the subject, and the reason—if reason there be—is still a mystery to me. But indeed, putting them in any clothes at all seems absurd to my mind. Goodness knows there is enough of dressing and undressing to be gone through in life without beginning it before we need; and one would think that people who live in bed might at all events be spared the torture. Why wake the poor little wretches up in the morning to take one lot of clothes off, fix another lot on, and put them to bed again, and then at night haul them out once more, merely to change everything back? And when all is done, what difference is there, I should like to know, between a baby's night-shirt and the thing it wears in the day-time?

Very likely, however, I am only making myself ridiculous—I often do, so I am informed—and I will therefore say no more upon this matter of clothes, except only that it would be of great convenience if some fashion were adopted enabling you to tell a boy from a girl.

At present it is most awkward. Neither hair, dress, nor conversation affords the slightest clew, and you are left to guess. By some mysterious law of nature you invariably guess wrong, and are thereupon regarded by all the relatives and friends as a mixture of fool and knave, the enormity of alluding to a male babe as "she" being only equaled by the atrocity of referring to a female infant as "he". Whichever sex the particular child in question happens not to belong to is considered as beneath contempt, and any mention of it is taken as a personal insult to the family.

And as you value your fair name do not attempt to get out of the difficulty by talking of "it."

There are various methods by which you may achieve ignominy and shame. By murdering a large and respected family in cold blood and afterward depositing their bodies in the water companies' reservoir, you will gain much unpopularity in the neighborhood of your crime, and even robbing a church will get you cordially disliked, especially by the vicar. But if you desire to drain to the dregs the fullest cup of scorn and hatred that a fellow human creature can pour out for you, let a young mother hear you call dear baby "it."

Your best plan is to address the article as "little angel." The noun "angel" being of common gender suits the case admirably, and the epithet is sure of being favorably received. "Pet" or "beauty" are useful for variety's sake, but "angel" is the term that brings you the greatest credit for sense and good-feeling. The word should be preceded by a short giggle and accompanied by as much smile as possible. And whatever you do, don't forget to say that the child has got its father's nose. This "fetches" the parents (if I may be allowed a vulgarism) more than anything. They will pretend to laugh at the idea at first and will say, "Oh, nonsense!" You must then get excited and insist that it is a fact. You need have no conscientious scruples on the subject, because the thing's nose really does resemble its father's—at all events quite as much as it does anything else in nature—being, as it is, a mere smudge.

Do not despise these hints, my friends. There may come a time when, with mamma on one side and grand mamma on the other, a group of admiring young ladies (not admiring you, though) behind, and a bald-headed dab of humanity in front, you will be extremely thankful for some idea of what to say. A man—an unmarried man, that is—is never seen to such disadvantage as when undergoing the ordeal of "seeing baby." A cold shudder runs down his back at the bare proposal, and the sickly smile with which he says how delighted he shall be ought surely to move even a mother's heart, unless, as I am inclined to believe, the whole proceeding is a mere device adopted by wives to discourage the visits of bachelor friends.

It is a cruel trick, though, whatever its excuse may be. The bell is rung and somebody sent to tell nurse to bring baby down. This is the signal for all the females present to commence talking "baby," during which time you are left to your own sad thoughts and the speculations upon the practicability of suddenly recollecting an important engagement, and the likelihood of your being believed if you do. Just when you have concocted an absurdly implausible tale about a man outside, the door opens, and a tall, severe-looking woman enters, carrying what at first sight appears to be a particularly skinny bolster, with the feathers all at one end. Instinct, however, tells you that this is the baby, and you rise with a miserable attempt at appearing eager. When the first gush of feminine enthusiasm with which the object in question is received has died out, and the number of ladies talking at once has been reduced to the ordinary four or five, the circle of fluttering petticoats divides, and room is made for you to step forward. This you do with much the same air that you would walk into the dock at Bow Street, and then, feeling unutterably miserable, you stand solemnly staring at the child. There is dead silence, and you know that every one is waiting for you to speak. You try to think of something to say, but find, to your horror, that your reasoning faculties have left you. It is a moment of despair, and your evil genius, seizing the opportunity, suggests to you some of the most idiotic remarks that it is possible for a human being to perpetrate. Glancing round with an imbecile smile, you sniggeringly observe that "it hasn't got much hair has it?" Nobody answers you for a minute, but at last the stately nurse says with much gravity:

"It is not customary for children five weeks old to have long hair."

Another silence follows this, and you feel you are being given a second chance, which you avail yourself of by inquiring if it can walk yet, or what they feed it on.

By this time you have got to be regarded as not quite right in your head, and pity is the only thing felt for you. The nurse, however, is determined that, insane or not, there shall be no shirking and that you shall go through your task to the end. In the tones of a high priestess directing some religious mystery she says, holding the bundle toward you:

"Take her in your arms, sir." You are too crushed to offer any resistance and so meekly accept the burden. "Put your arm more down her middle, sir," says the high-priestess, and then all step back and watch you intently as though you were going to do a trick with it.

What to do you know no more than you did what to say. It is certain something must be done, and the only thing that occurs to you is to heave the unhappy infant up and down to the accompaniment of "oopsee-daisy," or some remark of equal intelligence. "I wouldn't jig her, sir, if I were you," says the nurse; "a very little upsets her." You promptly decide not to jig her and sincerely hope that you have not gone too far already.

At this point the child itself, who has hitherto been regarding you with an expression of mingled horror and disgust, puts an end to the nonsense by beginning to yell at the top of its voice, at which the priestess rushes forward and snatches it from you with "There! there! there! What did ums do to ums?" "How very extraordinary!" you say pleasantly. "Whatever made it go off like that?" "Oh, why, you must have done something to her!" says the mother indignantly; "the child wouldn't scream like that for nothing." It is evident they think you have been running pins into it.

The brat is calmed at last, and would no doubt remain quiet enough, only some mischievous busybody points you out again with "Who's this, baby?" and the intelligent child, recognizing you, howls louder than ever.

Whereupon some fat old lady remarks that "it's strange how children take a dislike to any one." "Oh, they know," replies another mysteriously. "It's a wonderful thing," adds a third; and then everybody looks sideways at you, convinced you are a scoundrel of the blackest dye; and they glory in the beautiful idea that your true character, unguessed by your fellow-men, has been discovered by the untaught instinct of a little child.

Babies, though, with all their crimes and errors, are not without their use—not without use, surely, when they fill an empty heart; not without use when, at their call, sunbeams of love break through care-clouded faces; not without use when their little fingers press wrinkles into smiles.

Odd little people! They are the unconscious comedians of the world's great stage. They supply the humor in life's all-too-heavy drama. Each one, a small but determined opposition to the order of things in general, is forever doing the wrong thing at the wrong time, in the wrong place and in the wrong way. The nurse-girl who sent Jenny to see what Tommy and Totty were doing and "tell 'em they mustn't" knew infantile nature. Give an average baby a fair chance, and if it doesn't do something it oughtn't to a doctor should be called in at once.

They have a genius for doing the most ridiculous things, and they do them in a grave, stoical manner that is irresistible. The business-like air with which two of them will join hands and proceed due east at a break-neck toddle, while an excitable big sister is roaring for them to follow her in a westerly direction, is most amusing—except, perhaps, for the big sister. They walk round a soldier, staring at his legs with the greatest curiosity, and poke him to see if he is real. They stoutly maintain, against all argument and much to the discomfort of the victim, that the bashful young man at the end of the 'bus is "dadda." A crowded street-corner suggests itself to their minds as a favorable spot for the discussion of family affairs at a shrill treble. When in the middle of crossing the road they are seized with a sudden impulse to dance, and the doorstep of a busy shop is the place they always select for sitting down and taking off their shoes.

When at home they find the biggest walking-stick in the house or an umbrella—open preferred—of much assistance in getting upstairs. They discover that they love Mary Ann at the precise moment when that faithful domestic is blackleading the stove, and nothing will relieve their feelings but to embrace her then and there. With regard to food, their favorite dishes are coke and cat's meat. They nurse pussy upside down, and they show their affection for the dog by pulling his tail.

They are a deal of trouble, and they make a place untidy and they cost a lot of money to keep; but still you would not have the house without them. It would not be home without their noisy tongues and their mischief-making hands. Would not the rooms seem silent without their pattering feet, and might not you stray apart if no prattling voices called you together?

It should be so, and yet I have sometimes thought the tiny hand seemed as a wedge, dividing. It is a bearish task to quarrel with that purest of all human affections—that perfecting touch to a woman's life—a mother's love. It is a holy love, that we coarser-fibered men can hardly understand, and I would not be deemed to lack reverence for it when I say that surely it need not swallow up all other affection. The baby need not take your whole heart, like the rich man who walled up the desert well. Is there not another thirsty traveler standing by?

In your desire to be a good mother, do not forget to be a good wife. No need for all the thought and care to be only for one. Do not, whenever poor Edwin wants you to come out, answer indignantly, "What, and leave baby!" Do not spend all your evenings upstairs, and do not confine your conversation exclusively to whooping-cough and measles. My dear little woman, the child is not going to die every time it sneezes, the house is not bound to get burned down and the nurse run away with a soldier every time you go outside the front door; nor the cat sure to come and sit on the precious child's chest the moment you leave the bedside. You worry yourself a good deal too much about that solitary chick, and you worry everybody else too. Try and think of your other duties, and your pretty face will not be always puckered into wrinkles, and there will be cheerfulness in the parlor as well as in the nursery. Think of your big baby a little. Dance him about a bit; call him pretty names; laugh at him now and then. It is only the first baby that takes up the whole of a woman's time. Five or six do not require nearly so much attention as one. But before then the mischief has been done. A house where there seems no room for him and a wife too busy to think of him have lost their hold on that so unreasonable husband of yours, and he has learned to look elsewhere for comfort and companionship.

But there, there, there! I shall get myself the character of a baby-hater if

I have always possessed a profound affection for the arts of eating and drinking, though in my youth, my devotion leaned heavily toward the former. I possessed an appetite then, robust and unyielding, matched by a digestion that seemed to operate on a separate, more efficient clockwork. I recall a specific evening when a gentleman of dull eyes and a complexion the color of a bruised plum descended upon our household for dinner. He observed me consuming my meal for approximately five minutes, his gaze fixed with an intensity that bordered on the hypnotic. Finally, he turned to my father, his expression grave.

"Does your boy ever suffer from dyspepsia?" he asked.

"My father replied, "I have never heard him complain of such a malady. Do you, Colly Wobbles?" (Note: 'Colly Wobbles' was my nickname, though my actual name remains a secret to history.)

"No, sir," I answered promptly. Immediately following this declaration of health, I added, with genuine curiosity, "What exactly is dyspepsia, sir?"

The livid gentleman regarded me with a mixture of astonishment and profound envy. Then, in a tone dripping with infinite pity, he slowly intoned, "You will know... some day."

My late mother, a woman of simple tastes, often expressed her delight in watching me consume my food. It remains a source of pleasant reflection to me that I must have provided her with considerable satisfaction in this regard. A growing, healthy lad, who exercises sufficiently and restrains himself from excessive study, can generally satisfy even the most exacting expectations regarding his feeding capabilities.

It is genuinely amusing to observe boys eating when one is not required to pay for the privilege. Their concept of a "square meal" involves a staggering array of provisions: a pound and a half of roast beef accompanied by five or six substantial potatoes (preferably soapy ones, as they offer greater substance), an abundance of greens, four thick slices of Yorkshire pudding, followed by a couple of currant dumplings, several green apples, a pen'orth of nuts, half a dozen jumbles, and a bottle of ginger-beer. Upon completion of this gastronomic marathon, they proceed to play at horses.

One cannot help but wonder how they must despise us men, who are forced to sit quietly for a couple of hours after dining on a mere spoonful of clear soup and the wing of a chicken!

However, the boys do not possess all the advantages on their side. A boy never enjoys the luxury of being truly satisfied. A boy never feels full. He can never stretch out his legs, place his hands behind his head, close his eyes, and sink into the ethereal blissfulness that encompasses the well-dined man. A dinner makes no difference whatsoever to a boy. To a man, however, it is akin to a good fairy's potion; thereafter, the world appears brighter and better. A man who has dined satisfactorily experiences a yearning love toward all his fellow creatures. He strokes the cat quite gently, calling it "poor pussy" in tones full of tender emotion. He sympathizes with the members of the German band outside, wondering if they are cold; and for a fleeting moment, he does not even hate his wife's relations.

A good dinner brings out all the softer sides of a man. Under its genial influence, the gloomy and morose become jovial and chatty. Sour, starchy individuals, who spend the rest of the day looking as though they subsist solely on vinegar and Epsom salts, break out into wreathed smiles after dinner, exhibiting a sudden tendency to pat small children on the head and talk to them vaguely about sixpences. Serious men thaw and become mildly cheerful, while snobbish young men of the heavy-mustache type forget to make themselves objectionable.

I always feel sentimental myself after dinner. It is the only time I can properly appreciate love stories. Then, when the hero clasps "her" to his heart in one last wild embrace and stifles a sob, I feel as sad as though I had dealt at whist and turned up only a deuce; and when the heroine dies in the end, I weep. If I read the same tale early in the morning, I should sneer at it. Digestion—or rather, indigestion—has a marvelous effect upon the heart. If I wish to write anything very pathetic, I eat a large plateful of hot buttered muffins about an hour beforehand. By the time I sit down to my work, a feeling of unutterable melancholy has taken hold of me. I picture heartbroken lovers parting forever at lonely wayside stiles, while the sad twilight deepens around them, broken only by the tinkling of a distant sheep-bell. Old men sit and gaze at withered flowers until their sight is dimmed by the mist of tears. Little dainty maidens wait and watch at open casements; but "he cometh not," and the heavy years roll by, turning sunny gold tresses white and thin. The babies they dandled have become grown men and women with podgy torments of their own, and the playmates they laughed with lie very silent under the waving grass. Yet still they wait and watch, until the dark shadows of the unknown night steal up and gather round them, and the world with its childish troubles fades from their aching eyes.

I see pale corpses tossed on white-foamed waves, and death-beds stained with bitter tears, and graves in trackless deserts. I hear the wild wailing of women, the low moaning of little children, the dry sobbing of strong men. It is all the muffins. I could not conjure up a single melancholy fancy upon a mutton chop and a glass of champagne.

A full stomach is a great aid to poetry, and indeed, no sentiment of any kind can stand upon an empty one. We lack the time or inclination to indulge in fanciful troubles until we have rid ourselves of our real misfortunes. We do not sigh over dead dicky-birds with the bailiff in the house, and when we do not know where on earth to get our next shilling, we do not worry as to whether our mistress's smiles are cold, hot, lukewarm, or anything else.

Foolish people—when I say "foolish people" in this contemptuous manner, I mean those who entertain opinions differing from mine. If there is one person I despise more than another, it is the man who does not think exactly as I do on all topics. Foolish people, therefore, who have never experienced much of either, will tell you that mental distress is far more agonizing than bodily pain. What a romantic and touching theory! So comforting to the love-sick young sprig who looks down patronizingly at some poor devil with a white-starved face, thinking to himself, "Ah, how happy you are compared with me!" So soothing to fat old gentlemen who cackle about the superiority of poverty over riches. But it is all nonsense—all cant. An aching head soon makes one forget an aching heart. A broken finger will drive away all recollections of an empty chair. And when a man feels really hungry, he feels nothing else.

We sleek, well-fed folk can hardly realize what it feels like to be hungry. We know what it is to have no appetite and not care for the dainties placed before us, but we do not understand what it means to sicken for food—to die for bread while others waste it—to gaze with famished eyes upon coarse fare steaming behind dingy windows, longing for a pen'orth of pea pudding and lacking the penny to buy it—to feel that a crust would be delicious and that a bone would be a banquet.

Hunger is a luxury to us, a piquant, flavor-giving sauce. It is well worth while to get hungry and thirsty merely to discover how much gratification can be obtained from eating and drinking. If you wish to thoroughly enjoy your dinner, take a thirty-mile country walk after breakfast and do not touch anything until you return. How your eyes will glisten at the sight of the white tablecloth and steaming dishes then! With what a sigh of content you will put down the empty beer tankard and take up your knife and fork! And how comfortable you will feel afterward as you push back your chair, light a cigar, and beam round upon everybody.

Make sure, however, when adopting this plan, that the good dinner is actually to be had at the end, or the disappointment is trying. I remember once a friend and I—dear old Joe, it was. Ah! how we lose one another in life's mist. It must be eight years since I last saw Joseph Taboys. How pleasant it would be to meet his jovial face again, to clasp his strong hand, and to hear his cheery laugh once more! He owes me fourteen shillings, too. Well, we were on holiday together, and one morning we had breakfast early and started for a tremendous long walk. We had ordered a duck for dinner the previous night. We said, "Get a big one, because we shall come home awfully hungry;" and as we were going out, our landlady came up in great spirits. She said, "I have got you gentlemen a duck, if you like. If you get through that, you'll do well;" and she held up a bird about the size of a door-mat. We chuckled at the sight and said we would try. We spoke with self-conscious pride, like men who know their own power. Then we started.

We lost our way, of course. I always do in the country, and it makes me so wild, because it is no use asking directions of anyone you meet. One might as well inquire of a lodging-house slavey the way to make beds as expect a country bumpkin to know the road to the next village. You have to shout the question about three times before the sound of your voice penetrates his skull. At the third time, he slowly raises his head and stares blankly at you. You yell it at him then for a fourth time, and he repeats it after you. He ponders while you count a couple of hundred, after which, speaking at the rate of three words a minute, he fancies you "couldn't do better than—" Here he catches sight of another idiot coming down the road and bawls out to him the particulars, requesting his advice. The two then argue the case for a quarter of an hour or so, and finally agree that you had better go straight down the lane, round to the right, and cross by the third stile, keeping to the left by old Jimmy Milcher's cow-shed, across the seven-acre field, and through the gate by Squire Grubbin's haystack, keeping the bridle-path for a while until you come opposite the hill where the windmill used to be—but it's gone now—and round to the right, leaving Stiggin's plantation behind you; and you say "Thank you" and go away with a splitting headache, but without the faintest notion of your way, the only clear idea you have being that somewhere or other there is a stile which has to be got over; and at the next turn, you come upon four stiles, all leading in different directions!

We had undergone this ordeal two or three times. We had tramped over fields, waded through brooks, scrambled over hedges and walls. We had had a row as to whose fault it was that we had first lost our way. We had become thoroughly disagreeable, footsore, and weary. But throughout it all, the hope of that duck kept us up. A fairy-like vision, it floated before our tired eyes and drew us onward. The thought of it was as a trumpet-call to the fainting. We talked of it and cheered each other with our recollections. "Come along," we said; "the duck will be spoiled."

We felt a strong temptation, at one point, to turn into a village inn as we passed and have a cheese and a few loaves between us, but we heroically restrained ourselves: we should enjoy the duck all the better for being famished.

We fancied we smelled it when we entered the town and did the last quarter of a mile in three minutes. We rushed upstairs, washed ourselves, changed our clothes, came down, pulled our chairs up to the table, and sat rubbing our hands while the landlady removed the covers. When I seized the knife and fork and started to carve, it seemed to require a lot of attention. I struggled with it for about five minutes without making the slightest impression. Then Joe, who had been eating potatoes, wanted to know if it wouldn't be better for someone to do the job that understood carving. I took no notice of his foolish remark but attacked the bird again; so vigorously this time that the animal left the dish and took refuge in the fender.

We soon had it out of that, though, and I was prepared to make another effort. But Joe was getting unpleasant. He said that if he had thought we were to have a game of blind hockey with the dinner, he would have gotten a bit of bread and cheese outside.

I was too exhausted to argue. I laid down the knife and fork with dignity and took a side seat, while Joe went for the wretched creature. He worked away in silence for a while, and then he muttered "Damn the duck" and took his coat off.

We did break the thing up at length with the aid of a chisel, but it was perfectly impossible to eat, and we had to make a dinner off the vegetables and an apple tart. We tried a mouthful of the duck, but it was like eating India-rubber.

It was a wicked sin to kill that drake. But there! There is no respect for old institutions in this country.

I started this paper with the idea of writing about eating and drinking, but I seem to have confined my remarks entirely to eating as yet. Well, you see, drinking is one of those subjects with which it is inadvisable to appear too well acquainted. The days are gone by when it was considered manly to go to bed intoxicated every night, and a clear head and a firm hand no longer draw down upon their owner the reproach of effeminacy. On the contrary, in these sadly degenerate days, an evil-smelling breath, a blotchy face, a reeling gait, and a husky voice are regarded as the hallmarks of the cad rather than the gentleman

Oh, you have some rooms to let.

"Mother!"

"Well, what is it?"

"'Ere's a gentleman about the rooms."

"Ask 'im in. I'll be up in a minute."

"Will yer step inside, sir? Mother'll be up in a minute."

So you step inside. After a minute, "mother" ascends the kitchen stairs with the deliberate slowness of a glacier, untying her apron as she climbs while shouting instructions to someone below regarding the potatoes.

"Good-morning, sir," says "mother," offering a smile that has been washed out by too many years of dishwater. "Will you step this way, please?"

"Oh, it's hardly worth while my coming up," you say, trying to sound casual. "What sort of rooms are they, and how much?"

"Well," says the landlady, "if you'll step upstairs I'll show them to you."

With a protesting murmur—intended to imply that any future complaints about wasted time must not be laid at your door—you follow "mother" upstairs.

At the first landing, you run straight into a pail and a broom. Whereupon "mother" launches into a lecture on the unreliability of servant-girls and bawls over the balusters for Sarah to come and remove the debris immediately. When you finally emerge outside the rooms, she pauses, hand on the door, to explain that they are rather untidy just now because the last lodger left only yesterday. She adds, with a shrug, that this is their cleaning day—it always is.

With this understanding, you enter, and both of you stand solemnly feasting your eyes upon the scene. The rooms cannot be said to appear inviting. Even "mother's" face betrays no admiration. Untenanted furnished apartments viewed in the morning sunlight do not inspire cheery sensations; there is a lifeless air about them. It is a very different thing when you have settled down and are actually living in them. With your old familiar household gods to greet your gaze, and all your little knick-knacks spread around you—with the photos of all the girls you have loved and lost ranged upon the mantelpiece, and half a dozen disreputable-looking pipes scattered about in painfully prominent positions—with one carpet slipper peeping from beneath the coal-box and the other perched on top of the piano—with the well-known pictures to hide the dingy walls, and these dear old friends, your books, higgledy-piggledy all over the place—with the bits of old blue china that your mother prized, and the screen she worked in those far-bygone days, when the sweet old face was laughing and young, and the white soft hair tumbled in gold-brown curls from under the coal-scuttle bonnet—

Ah, old screen, what a gorgeous personage you must have been in your young days, when the tulips and roses and lilies (all growing from one stem) were fresh in their glistening sheen! Many a summer and winter have come and gone since then, my friend, and you have played with the dancing firelight until you have grown sad and gray. Your brilliant colors are fast fading now, and the envious moths have gnawed your silken threads. You are withering away like the dead hands that wove you. Do you ever think of those dead hands? You seem so grave and thoughtful sometimes that I almost think you do. Come, you and I and the deep-glowing embers, let us talk together. Tell me in your silent language what you remember of those young days, when you lay on my little mother's lap and her girlish fingers played with your rainbow tresses. Was there never a lad near sometimes—never a lad who would seize one of those little hands to smother it with kisses, and who would persist in holding it, thereby sadly interfering with the progress of your making? Was not your frail existence often put in jeopardy by this same clumsy, headstrong lad, who would toss you disrespectfully aside that he—not satisfied with one—might hold both hands and gaze up into the loved eyes? I can see that lad now through the haze of the flickering twilight. He is an eager bright-eyed boy, with pinching, dandy shoes and tight-fitting smalls, snowy shirt frill and stock, and—oh! such curly hair. A wild, light-hearted boy! Can he be the great, grave gentleman upon whose stick I used to ride cross-legged, the care-worn man into whose thoughtful face I used to gaze with childish reverence and whom I used to call "father"? You say "yes," old screen; but are you quite sure? It is a serious charge you are bringing. Can it be possible? Did he have to kneel down in those wonderful smalls and pick you up and rearrange you before he was forgiven and his curly head smoothed by my mother's little hand? Ah! old screen, and did the lads and the lassies go making love fifty years ago just as they do now? Are men and women so unchanged? Did little maidens' hearts beat the same under pearl-embroidered bodices as they do under Mother Hubbard cloaks? Have steel casques and chimney-pot hats made no difference to the brains that work beneath them? Oh, Time! great Chronos! and is this your power? Have you dried up seas and leveled mountains and left the tiny human heart-strings to defy you? Ah, yes! they were spun by a Mightier than thou, and they stretch beyond your narrow ken, for their ends are made fast in eternity. Ay, you may mow down the leaves and the blossoms, but the roots of life lie too deep for your sickle to sever. You refashion Nature's garments, but you cannot vary by a jot the throbbings of her pulse. The world rolls round obedient to your laws, but the heart of man is not of your kingdom, for in its birthplace "a thousand years are but as yesterday."

I am getting away, though, I fear, from my "furnished apartments," and I hardly know how to get back. But I have some excuse for my meanderings this time. It is a piece of old furniture that has led me astray, and fancies gather, somehow, round old furniture, like moss around old stones. One's chairs and tables get to be almost part of one's life and to seem like quiet friends. What strange tales the wooden-headed old fellows could tell did they but choose to speak! At what unsuspected comedies and tragedies have they not assisted! What bitter tears have been sobbed into that old sofa cushion! What passionate whisperings the settee must have overheard!

New furniture has no charms for me compared with old. It is the old things that we love—the old faces, the old books, the old jokes. New furniture can make a palace, but it takes old furniture to make a home. Not merely old in itself—lodging-house furniture generally is that—but it must be old to us, old in associations and recollections. The furniture of furnished apartments, however ancient it may be in reality, is new to our eyes, and we feel as though we could never get on with it. As, too, in the case of all fresh acquaintances, whether wooden or human (and there is very little difference between the two species sometimes), everything impresses you with its worst aspect. The knobby wood-work and shiny horse-hair covering of the easy-chair suggest anything but ease. The mirror is smoky. The curtains want washing. The carpet is frayed. The table looks as if it would go over the instant anything was rested on it. The grate is cheerless, the wall-paper hideous. The ceiling appears to have had coffee spilt all over it, and the ornaments—well, they are worse than the wallpaper.

There must surely be some special and secret manufactory for the production of lodging-house ornaments. Precisely the same articles are to be found at every lodging-house all over the kingdom, and they are never seen anywhere else. There are the two—what do you call them?—that stand one at each end of the mantelpiece, where they are never safe, and they are hung round with long triangular slips of glass that clank against one another and make you nervous. In the commoner class of rooms these works of art are supplemented by a couple of pieces of china which might each be meant to represent a cow sitting upon its hind legs, or a model of the temple of Diana at Ephesus, or a dog, or anything else you like to fancy. Somewhere about the room you come across a bilious-looking object, which at first you take to be a lump of dough left about by one of the children, but which on scrutiny seems to resemble an underdone cupid. This thing the landlady calls a statue. Then there is a "sampler" worked by some idiot related to the family, a picture of the "Huguenots," two or three Scripture texts, and a highly framed and glazed certificate to the effect that the father has been vaccinated, or is an Odd Fellow, or something of that sort.

You examine these various attractions and then dismally ask what the rent is.

"That's rather a good deal," you say on hearing the figure.

"Well, to tell you the truth," answers the landlady with a sudden burst of candor, "I've always had" (mentioning a sum a good deal in excess of the first-named amount), "and before that I used to have" (a still higher figure).

What the rent of apartments must have been twenty years ago makes one shudder to think of. Every landlady makes you feel thoroughly ashamed of yourself by informing you, whenever the subject crops up, that she used to get twice as much for her rooms as you are paying. Young men lodgers of the last generation must have been of a wealthier class than they are now, or they must have ruined themselves. I should have had to live in an attic.

Curious, that in lodgings the rule of life is reversed. The higher you get up in the world the lower you come down in your lodgings. On the lodging-house ladder the poor man is at the top, the rich man underneath. You start in the attic and work your way down to the first floor.

A good many great men have lived in attics and some have died there. Attics, says the dictionary, are "places where lumber is stored," and the world has used them to store a good deal of its lumber in at one time or another. Its preachers and painters and poets, its deep-browed men who will find out things, its fire-eyed men who will tell truths that no one wants to hear—these are the lumber that the world hides away in its attics. Haydn grew up in an attic and Chatterton starved in one. Addison and Goldsmith wrote in garrets. Faraday and De Quincey knew them well. Dr. Johnson camped cheerfully in them, sleeping soundly—too soundly sometimes—upon their trundle-beds, like the sturdy old soldier of fortune that he was, inured to hardship and all careless of himself. Dickens spent his youth among them, Morland his old age—alas! a drunken, premature old age. Hans Andersen, the fairy king, dreamed his sweet fancies beneath their sloping roofs. Poor, wayward-hearted Collins leaned his head upon their crazy tables; priggish Benjamin Franklin; Savage, the wrong-headed, much troubled when he could afford any softer bed than a doorstep; young Bloomfield, "Bobby" Burns, Hogarth, Watts the engineer—the roll is endless. Ever since the habitations of men were reared two stories high has the garret been the nursery of genius.

No one who honors the aristocracy of mind can feel ashamed of acquaintance with them. Their damp-stained walls are sacred to the memory of noble names. If all the wisdom of the world and all its art—all the spoils that it has won from nature, all the fire that it has snatched from heaven—were gathered together and divided into heaps, and we could point and say, for instance, these mighty truths were flashed forth in the brilliant salon amid the ripple of light laughter and the sparkle of bright eyes; and this deep knowledge was dug up in the quiet study, where the bust of Pallas looks serenely down on the leather-scented shelves; and this heap belongs to the crowded street; and that to the daisied field—the heap that would tower up high above the rest as a mountain above hills would be the one at which we should look up and say: this noblest pile of all—these glorious paintings and this wondrous music, these trumpet words, these solemn thoughts, these daring deeds, they were forged and fashioned amid misery and pain in the sordid squalor of the city garret. There, from their eyries, while the world heaved and throbbed below, the kings of men sent forth their eagle thoughts to wing their flight through the ages. There, where the sunlight streaming through the broken panes fell on rotting boards and crumbling walls; there, from their lofty thrones, those rag-clothed Joves have hurled their thunderbolts and shaken, before now, the earth to its foundations.

Huddle them up in your lumber-rooms, oh, world! Shut them fast in and turn the key of poverty upon them. Weld close the bars, and let them fret their hero lives away within the narrow cage. Leave them there to starve, and rot, and die. Laugh at the frenzied beatings of their hands against the door. Roll onward in your dust and noise and pass them by, forgotten.

But take care lest they turn and sting you. All do not, like the fabled phoenix, warble sweet melodies in their agony; sometimes they spit venom—venom you must breathe whether you will or no, for you cannot seal their mouths, though you may fetter their limbs. You can lock the door upon them, but they burst open their shaky lattices and call out over the house-tops so that men cannot but hear. You hounded wild Rousseau into the meanest garret of the Rue St. Jacques and jeered at his angry shrieks. But the thin, piping tones swelled a hundred years later into the sullen roar of the French Revolution, and civilization to this day is quivering to the reverberations of his voice.

As for myself, however, I like an attic. Not

They say—people who ought to be ashamed of themselves do—that the consciousness of being well-dressed imparts a blissfulness to the human heart that religion is powerless to bestow. I am afraid these cynical persons are sometimes correct. I know that when I was a very young man (many, many years ago, as the story-books say) and wanted cheering up, I used to go and dress myself in all my best clothes. If I had been annoyed in any manner—if my washerwoman had discharged me, for instance; or my blank-verse poem had been returned for the tenth time, with the editor's compliments "and regrets that owing to want of space he is unable to avail himself of kind offer;" or I had been snubbed by the woman I loved as man never loved before—by the way, it's really extraordinary what a variety of ways of loving there must be. We all do it as it was never done before. I don't know how our great-grandchildren will manage. They will have to do it on their heads by their time if they persist in not clashing with any previous method.

Well, as I was saying, when these unpleasant sort of things happened and I felt crushed, I put on all my best clothes and went out. It brought back my vanishing self-esteem. In a glossy new hat and a pair of trousers with a fold down the front (carefully preserved by keeping them under the bed—I don't mean on the floor, you know, but between the bed and the mattress), I felt I was somebody and that there were other washerwomen: ay, and even other girls to love, and who would perhaps appreciate a clever, good-looking young fellow. I didn't care; that was my reckless way. I would make love to other maidens. I felt that in those clothes I could do it.

They have a wonderful deal to do with courting, clothes have. It is half the battle. At all events, the young man thinks so, and it generally takes him a couple of hours to get himself up for the occasion. His first half-hour is occupied in trying to decide whether to wear his light suit with a cane and drab billycock, or his black tails with a chimney-pot hat and his new umbrella. He is sure to be unfortunate in either decision. If he wears his light suit and takes the stick it comes on to rain, and he reaches the house in a damp and muddy condition and spends the evening trying to hide his boots. If, on the other hand, he decides in favor of the top hat and umbrella—nobody would ever dream of going out in a top hat without an umbrella; it would be like letting baby (bless it!) toddle out without its nurse. How I do hate a top hat! One lasts me a very long while, I can tell you. I only wear it when—well, never mind when I wear it. It lasts me a very long while. I've had my present one five years. It was rather old-fashioned last summer, but the shape has come round again now and I look quite stylish.

But to return to our young man and his courting. If he starts off with the top hat and umbrella the afternoon turns out fearfully hot, and the perspiration takes all the soap out of his mustache and converts the beautifully arranged curl over his forehead into a limp wisp resembling a lump of seaweed. The Fates are never favorable to the poor wretch. If he does by any chance reach the door in proper condition, she has gone out with her cousin and won't be back till late.

How a young lover made ridiculous by the gawkiness of modern costume must envy the picturesque gallants of seventy years ago! Look at them (on the Christmas cards), with their curly hair and natty hats, their well-shaped legs incased in smalls, their dainty Hessian boots, their ruffling frills, their canes and dangling seals. No wonder the little maiden in the big poke-bonnet and the light-blue sash casts down her eyes and is completely won. Men could win hearts in clothes like that. But what can you expect from baggy trousers and a monkeyjacket?

Clothes have more effect upon us than we imagine. Our deportment depends upon our dress. Make a man get into seedy, worn-out rags, and he will skulk along with his head hanging down, like a man going out to fetch his own supper beer. But deck out the same article in gorgeous raiment and fine linen, and he will strut down the main thoroughfare, swinging his cane and looking at the girls as perky as a bantam cock.

Clothes alter our very nature. A man could not help being fierce and daring with a plume in his bonnet, a dagger in his belt, and a lot of puffy white things all down his sleeves. But in an ulster he wants to get behind a lamp-post and call police.

I am quite ready to admit that you can find sterling merit, honest worth, deep affection, and all such like virtues of the roast-beef-and-plum-pudding school as much, and perhaps more, under broadcloth and tweed as ever existed beneath silk and velvet; but the spirit of that knightly chivalry that "rode a tilt for lady's love" and "fought for lady's smiles" needs the clatter of steel and the rustle of plumes to summon it from its grave between the dusty folds of tapestry and underneath the musty leaves of moldering chronicles.

The world must be getting old, I think; it dresses so very soberly now. We have been through the infant period of humanity, when we used to run about with nothing on but a long, loose robe, and liked to have our feet bare. And then came the rough, barbaric age, the boyhood of our race. We didn't care what we wore then, but thought it nice to tattoo ourselves all over, and we never did our hair. And after that the world grew into a young man and became foppish. It decked itself in flowing curls and scarlet doublets, and went courting, and bragging, and bouncing—making a brave show.

But all those merry, foolish days of youth are gone, and we are very sober, very solemn—and very stupid, some say—now. The world is a grave, middle-aged gentleman in this nineteenth century, and would be shocked to see itself with a bit of finery on. So it dresses in black coats and trousers, and black hats, and black boots, and, dear me, it is such a very respectable gentleman—to think it could ever have gone gadding about as a troubadour or a knight-errant, dressed in all those fancy colors! Ah, well! we are more sensible in this age.

Or at least we think ourselves so. It is a general theory nowadays that sense and dullness go together.

Goodness is another quality that always goes with blackness. Very good people indeed, you will notice, dress altogether in black, even to gloves and neckties, and they will probably take to black shirts before long. Medium goods indulge in light trousers on week-days, and some of them even go so far as to wear fancy waistcoats. On the other hand, people who care nothing for a future state go about in light suits; and there have been known wretches so abandoned as to wear a white hat. Such people, however, are never spoken of in genteel society, and perhaps I ought not to have referred to them here.

By the way, talking of light suits, have you ever noticed how people stare at you the first time you go out in a new light suit? They do not notice it so much afterward. The population of London have got accustomed to it by the third time you wear it. I say "you," because I am not speaking from my own experience. I do not wear such things at all myself. As I said, only sinful people do so.

I wish, though, it were not so, and that one could be good, and respectable, and sensible without making one's self a guy. I look in the glass sometimes at my two long, cylindrical bags (so picturesquely rugged about the knees), my stand-up collar and billycock hat, and wonder what right I have to go about making God's world hideous. Then wild and wicked thoughts come into my heart. I don't want to be good and respectable. (I never can be sensible, I'm told; so that don't matter.) I want to put on lavender-colored tights, with red velvet breeches and a green doublet slashed with yellow; to have a light-blue silk cloak on my shoulder, and a black eagle's plume waving from my hat, and a big sword, and a falcon, and a lance, and a prancing horse, so that I might go about and gladden the eyes of the people. Why should we all try to look like ants crawling over a dust-heap? Why shouldn't we dress a little gayly? I am sure if we did we should be happier. True, it is a little thing, but we are a little race, and what is the use of our pretending otherwise and spoiling fun? Let philosophers get themselves up like old crows if they like. But let me be a butterfly.

Women, at all events, ought to dress prettily. It is their duty. They are the flowers of the earth and were meant to show it up. We abuse them a good deal, we men; but, goodness knows, the old world would be dull enough without their dresses and fair faces. How they brighten up every place they come into! What a sunny commotion they—relations, of course—make in our dingy bachelor chambers! and what a delightful litter their ribbons and laces, and gloves and hats, and parasols and 'kerchiefs make! It is as if a wandering rainbow had dropped in to pay us a visit.

It is one of the chief charms of the summer, to my mind, the way our little maids come out in pretty colors. I like to see the pink and blue and white glancing between the trees, dotting the green fields, and flashing back the sunlight. You can see the bright colors such a long way off. There are four white dresses climbing a hill in front of my window now. I can see them distinctly, though it is three miles away. I thought at first they were mile-stones out for a lark. It's so nice to be able to see the darlings a long way off. Especially if they happen to be your wife and your mother-in-law.

Talking of fields and mile-stones reminds me that I want to say, in all seriousness, a few words about women's boots. The women of these islands all wear boots too big for them. They can never get a boot to fit. The bootmakers do not keep sizes small enough.

Over and over again have I known women sit down on the top rail of a stile and declare they could not go a step further because their boots hurt them so; and it has always been the same complaint—too big.

It is time this state of things was altered. In the name of the husbands and fathers of England, I call upon the bootmakers to reform. Our wives, our daughters, and our cousins are not to be lamed and tortured with impunity. Why cannot "narrow twos" be kept more in stock? That is the size I find most women take.

The waist-band is another item of feminine apparel that is always too big. The dressmakers make these things so loose that the hooks and eyes by which they are fastened burst off, every now and then, with a report like thunder.

Why women suffer these wrongs—why they do not insist in having their clothes made small enough for them I cannot conceive. It can hardly be that they are disinclined to trouble themselves about matters of mere dress, for dress is the one subject that they really do think about. It is the only topic they ever get thoroughly interested in, and they talk about it all day long. If you see two women together, you may bet your bottom dollar they are discussing their own or their friends' clothes. You notice a couple of child-like beings conversing by a window, and you wonder what sweet, helpful words are falling from their sainted lips. So you move nearer and then you hear one say:

"So I took in the waist-band and let out a seam, and it fits beautifully now."

"Well," says the other, "I shall wear my plum-colored body to the Jones', with a yellow plastron; and they've got some lovely gloves at Puttick's, only one and eleven pence."

I went for a drive through a part of Derbyshire once with a couple of ladies. It was a beautiful bit of country, and they enjoyed themselves immensely. They talked dressmaking the whole time.

"Pretty view, that," I would say, waving my umbrella round. "Look at those blue distant hills! That little white speck, nestling in the woods, is Chatsworth, and over there—"

"Yes, very pretty indeed," one would reply. "Well, why not get a yard of sarsenet?"

"What, and leave the skirt exactly as it is?"

"Certainly. What place d'ye call this?"

Then I would draw their attention to the fresh beauties that kept sweeping into view, and they would glance round and say "charming," "sweetly pretty," and immediately go off into raptures over each other's pocket-handkerchiefs, and mourn with one another over the decadence of cambric frilling.

I believe if two women were cast together upon a desert island, they would spend each day arguing the respective merits of sea-shells and birds' eggs considered as trimmings, and would have a new fashion in fig-leaves every month.

Very young men think a good deal about clothes, but they don't talk about them to each other. They would not find much encouragement. A fop is not a favorite with his own sex. Indeed, he gets a good deal more abuse from them than is necessary. His is a harmless failing and it soon wears out. Besides, a man who has no foppery at twenty will be a slatternly, dirty-collar, unbrushed-coat man at forty. A little foppishness in a young man is good; it is human. I like to see a young cock ruffle his feathers

"I remember, I remember,
In the days of chill November,
How the blackbird on the—"

I forget the rest. It is the opening line of the very first poem I ever memorized. By contrast, "Hey, diddle diddle, the cat and the fiddle" holds no sway over me; it lacks the gravitas of true verse and is merely frivolous nonsense. I once earned fourpence by reciting "I remember, I remember." I knew the sum was fourpence because the instructor explained that saving it until I accumulated two pence more would yield a sixpence. This logic, undeniable as a mathematical theorem, failed to move me. Consequently, the money was squandered, to the best of my recollection, on the very next morning, although the specific details of that expenditure remain a blank in my mind.

Such is the nature of Memory. She delivers nothing complete. She is a willful child whose toys are perpetually broken. I recall tumbling into a massive dust-hole when I was a toddler, yet I possess not the faintest recollection of ever escaping it. If I relied solely on memory, I would be compelled to believe I am still trapped inside.

At another time—some years later—I was witnessing an exceedingly dramatic love scene. However, the only distinct detail I retain is that at the climax, someone abruptly opened the door and announced, "Emily, you're wanted," in a sepulchral tone that suggested the police had arrived to arrest her. All the tender words she whispered to me and all the beautiful sentiments I expressed to her have vanished into thin air.

Life, when viewed from behind, resembles a crumbling ruin: a shattered column where a grand portal once stood; the broken shaft of a window marking my lady's bower; and a moldering heap of blackened stones where roaring flames once danced, now covered in tinted lichen and clinging ivy.

Yet, everything looms pleasantly through the softening haze of time. Even past sadness tastes sweet. Our boyish days appear incredibly merry now, filled with nutting, hoops, and gingerbread. The snubbings, toothaches, and Latin verbs are all forgotten—the Latin verbs, especially. We imagine ourselves to have been profoundly happy when we were hobbledehoys and in love, wishing desperately to love again. We never consider the heartaches, the sleepless nights, or the parched throats of rejection, as if any man truly desires more sisters!

Indeed, it is the brightness, not the darkness, that we perceive when looking back. The sunshine casts no shadows on the past. The road we have traversed stretches beautifully behind us; we do not see the sharp stones. We dwell only on the roses by the wayside, while the strong briers that once stung us appear, to our distant gaze, as gentle tendrils waving in the wind. Thank God it is so—that the ever-lengthening chain of memory consists only of pleasant links, allowing the bitterness and sorrow of today to be smiled at by tomorrow.

It seems the brightest side of everything is also its highest and best. As our brief lives sink back into the dark sea of forgetfulness, the lightest and most gladsome moments are the last to submerge, standing above the waters long after the angry thoughts and smarting pains are buried deep below the waves.

Perhaps this glamour of the past explains why elderly folks talk such nonsense about their youth. The world seemed a superior place then, functioning exactly as it ought. Boys were boys, girls were different, winters were authentic, and summers were not the wretched affairs we endure today. The wonderful deeds performed and extraordinary events witnessed in those times require three strong men to believe half of them.

I enjoy hearing an old boy recount these tales to a group of youngsters who cannot contradict him. It is peculiar if, after a while, he does not swear that the moon shone every night during his boyhood and that tossing mad bulls in a blanket was the favorite sport at his school.

It has always been and always will be the same. The elders of our grandfathers' youth sang songs with identical burdens; the youth of today will drone out similar nonsense to aggravate the next generation. "Oh, give me back the good old days of fifty years ago" has been the cry since Adam's fifty-first birthday. Consult the literature of 1835, and you will find poets and novelists demanding the same impossible gift as the German Minnesingers and old Norse Saga writers did centuries prior. Even the early prophets and philosophers of ancient Greece sighed for the same thing. From all accounts, the world has been deteriorating ever since its creation. I can only say it must have been a remarkably delightful place when first opened to the public, for it remains pleasant enough if one keeps as much as possible in the sunshine and accepts the rain with good temper.

Nevertheless, it must have been sweeter in that dewy morning of creation, when the world was young and fresh, before the feet of tramping millions trod its grass to dust or the din of myriad cities chased silence forever away. Life must have been noble and solemn for those free-footed, loose-robed fathers of the human race, walking hand in hand with God under the great sky. They lived in sun-kissed tents among lowing herds, taking their simple wants from Nature's loving hand. They toiled, talked, and thought while the great earth rolled on in stillness, unladen with trouble and wrong.

Those days are gone. The quiet childhood of Humanity, spent in far-off forest glades and by murmuring rivers, is lost forever. Human life is now deepening into manhood amidst tumult, doubt, and hope. Its age of restful peace has passed; it has work to finish and must hasten on. What that work may be, or what this world's share is in the great design, we do not know, though our unconscious hands help accomplish it. Like tiny coral insects working deep under dark waters, we strive and struggle for our own little ends, dreaming of the vast fabric we are building for God.

Let us cease our vain regrets and longings for days that will never return. Our work lies ahead, not behind us; "Forward!" is our motto. Let us not sit with folded hands, gazing upon the past as if it were the building; it is but the foundation. Let us not waste heart and life pondering what might have been, forgetting the "may be" that lies before us. Opportunities fly by while we sit regretting lost chances, and the happiness that comes to us goes unnoticed because of the happiness that has gone.

Years ago, when I wandered from the fireside to the pleasant land of fairy-tales, I met a doughty knight and true. He had overcome many dangers in many lands, known by all as a brave and well-tried warrior who knew no fear—except, perhaps, on those rare seasons when even a brave man might feel afraid yet not be ashamed. One day, as this knight pricked wearily along a toilsome road, his heart misgave him, sore within him due to the trouble of the way. Rocks, dark and monstrous, hung high above his head, threatening to crush him. Chasms lay on either side, and darksome caves housed fierce robbers and dragons whose jaws dripped blood. A darkness as of night hung over the road. Overcome, the knight decided to seek another path, less grievously beset with difficulty for his gentle steed. But when he hastily turned to look behind, he marveled greatly: of all the way he had ridden, there was naught for the eye to see. Yet, at his horse's heels, a mighty gulf yawned, so deep that no man could spy its bottom. Seeing that returning was impossible, Sir Ghelent prayed to Saint Cuthbert, spurred his steed, and rode forward bravely and joyously. Naught harmed him.

There is no returning on the road of life. The frail bridge of time on which we tread sinks back into eternity with every step. The past is gone forever, gathered in and garnered. It belongs to us no more. No single word can ever be unspoken; no single step retraced. Therefore, it becomes us, as true knights, to prick on bravely, rather than idly weeping because we cannot recall.

A new life begins for us with every second. Let us go forward joyously to meet it. We must press on whether we will or no, and we shall walk better with our eyes before us than with them cast behind.

A friend visited me recently and urged me very eloquently to learn a wonderful system by which one never forgets anything. I do not know why he was so eager, unless it is because I occasionally borrow an umbrella and have a knack of emerging, in the middle of a game of whist, with a mild, "Lor! I've been thinking all along that clubs were trumps." I declined his suggestion, despite the attractive advantages he set forth. I have no wish to remember everything. There are many things in most men's lives that had better be forgotten. There is that time, many years ago, when we did not act quite as honorably or uprightly as we perhaps should have—an unfortunate deviation from the path of strict probity, in which, more unfortunately still, we were found out. That act of folly, meanness, and wrong. Ah, well! We paid the penalty, suffered the maddening hours of vain remorse, the hot agony of shame, and perhaps the scorn of those we loved. Let us forget. Oh, Father Time, lift with your kindly hands those bitter memories from our overburdened hearts, for griefs are ever coming with the coming hours, and our little strength is only as the day.

Not that the past should be buried. The music of life would be mute if the chords of memory were snapped asunder. It is but the poisonous weeds, not the flowers, that we should root out from the garden of Mnemosyne. Do you remember Dickens' "Haunted Man"? How he prayed for forgetfulness, and when his prayer was answered, he prayed for memory once more? We do not want all the ghosts laid. It is only the haggard, cruel-eyed specters we flee from. Let the gentle, kindly phantoms haunt us as they will; we are not afraid of them.

Ah me! The world grows very full of ghosts as we grow older. We need not seek dismal churchyards or sleep in moated granges to see shadowy faces or hear rustling garments at night. Every house, every room, every creaking chair has its own particular ghost. They haunt the empty chambers of our lives, thronging around us like dead leaves whirled in an autumn wind. Some are living, some are dead. We know not. We clasped their hands once, loved them, quarreled with them, laughed with them, told them our thoughts and hopes and aims, as they told us theirs, till it seemed our very hearts had joined in a grip defying the puny power of Death. They are gone now, lost to us forever. Their eyes will never look into ours again, nor their voices heard. Only their ghosts come to us and talk. We see them, dim and shadowy, through our tears. We stretch our yearning hands to them, but they are air.

Ghosts! They are with us night and day. They walk beside us in the busy street under the glare of the sun. They sit by us in the twilight at home. We see their little faces looking from the windows of the old schoolhouse. We meet them in the woods and lanes where we shouted and played as boys. Hark! Cannot you hear their low laughter from behind the blackberry bushes and their distant whoops along the grassy glades? Down here, through the quiet fields and by the wood, where evening shadows lurk, winds the path where we used to watch for her at sunset. Look, she is there now, in the dainty white frock we knew so well, with the big bonnet dangling from her little hands and sunny brown hair all tangled. Five thousand miles away! Dead for all we know! What of that? She is beside us now, and we can look into her laughing eyes and hear her voice. She will vanish at the stile by the wood, and we shall be alone; the shadows will creep out across the fields, and the night wind will sweep past moaning. Ghosts! They are always with us and always will be while the sad old world echoes to the sob of long good-byes, while cruel ships sail away across the great seas, and the cold green earth lies heavy on the hearts of those we loved.

But, oh, ghosts, the world would be sadder still without you. Come to us and speak, oh, ghosts of our old loves! Ghosts of playmates, sweethearts, and old friends, of all you laughing boys and girls, oh, come to us and be with us, for the world is very lonely, and new friends and faces are not like the old. We cannot love them, nay, nor laugh with them as we have loved and laughed with you. And when we walked together, oh, ghosts of our youth, the world was very gay and bright; but now it has grown old, and we are growing weary, and only you can bring the brightness and freshness back to us.

Memory is a rare ghost-raiser. Like a haunted house, its walls echo to unseen feet. Through broken casements, we watch the flitting shadows of the dead, and the saddest shadows of them all are the shadows of our own dead selves.

Oh, those young bright faces, so full of truth and honor, of pure, good thoughts, of noble longings! How reproachfully they look upon us with their deep, clear eyes!

I fear they have good cause for their sorrow, poor lads. Lies, cunning, and disbelief have crept into our hearts since those pre-saving days—and we meant to be so great and good.

It is well we cannot see into the future. There are few boys of fourteen who would not feel ashamed of themselves at forty.

I like to sit and have a talk sometimes with that odd little chap that was myself long ago. I think he likes it too, for he comes so often in the evenings when I am alone with my pipe, listening to the whispering of the flames. I see his solemn little face looking at me through the scented smoke as it floats upward, and I smile
