Fifth Avenue opens its shutters on the fifteenth of October. Carpets unroll. Curtains hang in triple layers. A household ritual begins, mechanical and precise, designed to mask the slow erosion beneath the varnish. By November first, the ritual ends. Society looks about. It takes stock. By the fifteenth, the season is in full blast. Operas open. Theatres present new attractions. Dinner engagements accumulate. Dates for dances are fixed.

Punctually at this hour, Mrs. Archer declares that New York has changed.

She observes from the lofty standpoint of a non-participant. With Mr. Sillerton Jackson and Miss Sophy, she traces each new crack in the surface. She identifies the strange weeds pushing up between the ordered rows of social vegetables. It was once an amusement for Archer's youth to wait for this annual pronouncement, to hear her enumerate the minute signs of disintegration that his careless gaze had overlooked. To Mrs. Archer, New York never changes without changing for the worse. Miss Sophy Jackson concurs.

Mr. Sillerton Jackson suspends his judgment. As a man of the world, he listens with amused impartiality to the lamentations of the ladies. Yet even he never denies that New York has changed. Newland Archer, in the winter of the second year of his marriage, is obliged to admit that if it has not actually changed, it is certainly changing.

These points are raised at Mrs. Archer's Thanksgiving dinner. On the date when she is officially enjoined to give thanks for the blessings of the year, she takes a mournful stock of her world. She wonders what there is to be thankful for. Not the state of society. If society exists, it is a spectacle on which to call down Biblical imprecations. Everyone knows what the Reverend Dr. Ashmore means when he chooses a text from Jeremiah for his Thanksgiving sermon. Dr. Ashmore, the new Rector of St. Matthew's, was chosen because he is advanced. His sermons are bold in thought and novel in language. When he fulminates against fashionable society, he speaks of its "trend." To Mrs. Archer, it is terrifying and fascinating to feel herself part of a community that is trending.

"There's no doubt that Dr. Ashmore is right: there is a marked trend," she says, as if it were something visible and measurable, like a crack in a house.

"It was odd, though, to preach about it on Thanksgiving," Miss Jackson opines. Her hostess drily rejoins: "Oh, he means us to give thanks for what's left."

Archer has been wont to smile at these annual vaticinations. This year, however, he acknowledges that the "trend" is visible.

"The extravagance in dress—" Miss Jackson begins. "Sillerton took me to the first night of the Opera, and I can only tell you that Jane Merry's dress was the only one I recognized from last year; and even that had had the front panel changed. Yet I know she got it out from Worth only two years ago, because my seamstress always goes in to make over her Paris dresses before she wears them."

"Ah, Jane Merry is one of us," says Mrs. Archer, sighing, as if it were not such an enviable thing to be in an age when ladies begin to flaunt abroad their Paris dresses as soon as they leave the Custom House, instead of letting them mellow under lock and key, in the manner of Mrs. Archer's contemporaries.

"Yes; she's one of the few. In my youth," Miss Jackson rejoins, "it was considered vulgar to dress in the newest fashions; and Amy Sillerton has always told me that in Boston the rule was to put away one's Paris dresses for two years. Old Mrs. Baxter Pennilow, who did everything handsomely, used to import twelve a year, two velvet, two satin, two silk, and the other six of poplin and the finest cashmere. It was a standing order, and as she was ill for two years before she died, they found forty-eight Worth dresses that had never been taken out of tissue paper; and when the girls left off their mourning, they were able to wear the first lot at the Symphony concerts without looking in advance of the fashion."

"Ah, well, Boston is more conservative than New York; but I always think it's a safe rule for a lady to lay aside her French dresses for one season," Mrs. Archer concedes.

"It was Beaufort who started the new fashion by making his wife clap her new clothes on her back as soon as they arrived: I must say at times it takes all Regina's distinction not to look like... like..." Miss Jackson glances around the table, catches Janey's bulging gaze, and takes refuge in an unintelligible murmur.

"Like her rivals," says Mr. Sillerton Jackson, with the air of producing an epigram.

"Oh—" the ladies murmur. Mrs. Archer adds, partly to distract her daughter's attention from forbidden topics: "Poor Regina! Her Thanksgiving hasn't been a very cheerful one, I'm afraid. Have you heard the rumours about Beaufort's speculations, Sillerton?"

Mr. Jackson nods carelessly. Everyone has heard the rumours in question, and he scorces to confirm a tale that is already common property.

A gloomy silence falls upon the party. No one really likes Beaufort, and it is not wholly unpleasant to think the worst of his private life; but the idea of his having brought financial dishonor on his wife's family is too shocking to be enjoyed even by his enemies. Archer's New York tolerates hypocrisy in private relations; but in business matters it exacts a limpid and impeccable honesty. It is a long time since any well-known banker has failed discreditably; but everyone remembers the social extinction visited on the heads of the firm when the last event of the kind happened. It would be the same with the Beauforts, in spite of his power and her popularity; not all the leagued strength of the Dallas connection would save poor Regina if there were any truth in the reports of her husband's unlawful speculations.

The talk takes refuge in less ominous topics; but everything they touch on seems to confirm Mrs. Archer's sense of an accelerated trend.

"Of course, Newland, I know you let dear May go to Mrs. Struthers's Sunday evenings—" she begins; and May interposes gaily: "Oh, you know, everybody goes to Mrs. Struthers's now; and she was invited to Granny's last reception."

Thus, Archer reflects, New York manages its transitions: conspiring to ignore them until they are well over, and then, in all good faith, imagining that they have taken place in a preceding age. There is always a traitor in the citadel; and after he—or generally she—has surrendered the keys, what is the use of pretending that it is impregnable? Once people have tasted of Mrs. Struthers's easy Sunday hospitality, they are not likely to sit at home remembering that her champagne was transmuted shoe-polish.

"I know, dear, I know," Mrs. Archer sighs. "Such things have to be, I suppose, as long as amusement is what people go out for; but I've never quite forgiven your cousin Madame Olenska for being the first person to countenance Mrs. Struthers."

A sudden blush rises to young Mrs. Archer's face. It surprises her husband as much as the other guests about the table. "Oh, Ellen—" she murmurs, much in the same accusing and yet deprecating tone in which her parents might have said: "Oh, the Blenkers—"

This is the note which the family has taken to sounding on the mention of the Countess Olenska's name, since she has surprised and inconvenienced them by remaining obdurate to her husband's advances. But on May's lips, it gives food for thought, and Archer looks at her with the sense of strangeness that sometimes comes over him when she is most in the tone of her environment.

His mother, with less than her usual sensitiveness to atmosphere, still insists: "I've always thought that people like the Countess Olenska, who have lived in aristocratic societies, ought to help us to keep up our social distinctions, instead of ignoring them."

May's blush remains permanently vivid. It seems to have a significance beyond that implied by the recognition of Madame Olenska's social bad faith.

"I've no doubt we all seem alike to foreigners," says Miss Jackson tartly.

"I don't think Ellen cares for society; but nobody knows exactly what she does care for," May continues, as if she has been groping for something noncommittal.

"Ah, well—" Mrs. Archer sighs again.

Everyone knows that the Countess Olenska is no longer in the good graces of her family. Even her devoted champion, old Mrs. Manson Mingott, has been unable to defend her refusal to return to her husband. The Mingotts have not proclaimed their disapproval aloud: their sense of solidarity is too strong. They have simply, as Mrs. Welland says, "let poor Ellen find her own level"—and that, mortifyingly and incomprehensibly, is in the dim depths where the Blenkers prevail, and "people who wrote" celebrate their untidy rites. It is incredible, but it is a fact, that Ellen, in spite of all her opportunities and her privileges, has become simply "Bohemian." The fact enforces the contention that she has made a fatal mistake in not returning to Count Olenski. After all, a young woman's place is under her husband's roof,
