The brass ledge of the Western Union office was cool against Archer's palm as he slid the telegram across it. A sharp, tart young lady caught the paper, her fingers quick and impatient. "Ol--ol--howjer spell it, anyhow?" she demanded, her voice cutting through the hum of the machine.

"Olenska," Archer corrected, pulling the slip back to trace the foreign syllables above May's frantic, rambling script. "O-len-ska."

"It's an unlikely name for a New York telegraph office; at least in this quarter," a voice observed from the shadows. Archer turned to find Lawrence Lefferts standing at his elbow, adjusting an imperturbable moustache with a deliberate slowness that suggested he was performing a ritual rather than grooming. He affected not to glance at the message, though his presence was a wall of silent judgment.

"Hallo, Newland: thought I'd catch you here," Lefferts said, his tone flat and devoid of warmth. "I've just heard of old Mrs. Mingott's stroke; and as I was on my way to the house I saw you turning down this street and nipped after you. I suppose you've come from there?"

Archer nodded, pushing the telegram beneath the lattice to hide it from the girl behind the glass. "Very bad, eh?" Lefferts pressed, his eyes fixed on the empty space where the telegram had been. "Wiring to the family, I suppose. I gather it _is_ bad, if you're including Countess Olenska."

Archer's lips tightened. A savage impulse surged through him—a violent need to drive his fist into the long, vain, handsome face beside him. Lefferts, a man known for shrinking from conflict, raised his eyebrows in an ironic grimace that served as a warning to the watching damsel. Nothing could be worse "form" than a display of temper in a public place. Archer had never been more indifferent to the requirements of form; yet the urge to strike Lawrence Lefferts was fleeting, extinguished instantly by the sheer impossibility of bandying Ellen Olenska's name with him under such circumstances.

He paid for the telegram. The two young men stepped out into the street, the noise of the city rushing in to fill the silence between them. Once outside, having reclaimed his composure, Archer spoke smoothly. "Mrs. Mingott is much better: the doctor feels no anxiety whatever."

Lefferts offered profuse expressions of relief, pivoting immediately to the subject that hung heavier in the air than the telegram itself. "Have you heard that there are beastly bad rumours again about Beaufort?"

That afternoon, the announcement of the Beaufort failure dominated every newspaper, casting a shadow over the report of Mrs. Manson Mingott's stroke. Only a few, those aware of the mysterious connection between the two events, dared to speculate that old Catherine's illness stemmed from anything other than the natural accumulation of flesh and years. The entire city of New York was darkened by the tale of Beaufort's dishonor. In the memory of Mr. Letterblair, and indeed in the distant memory of the original Letterblair who had founded the firm, there had never been a worse case. The bank had continued to accept deposits for a full day after its collapse was inevitable; and since so many of its clients belonged to the ruling clans, Beaufort's duplicity seemed doubly cynical.

Had Mrs. Beaufort not adopted the tone that such misfortunes were "the test of friendship," compassion might have tempered the general indignation against her husband. As it was—and especially after the nature of her nocturnal visit to Mrs. Manson Mingott became known—her cynicism was deemed to exceed his. She possessed no excuse, nor did her detractors find satisfaction in claiming she was "a foreigner." It was a comfort to those whose securities remained intact to remind themselves that Beaufort _was_ American; but the argument lost its edge when a Dallas of South Carolina could glibly talk of being "on his feet again." There was nothing left to do but accept this awful evidence of the indissolubility of marriage. Society must manage to get on without the Beauforts, and there was an end of it—except for the hapless victims: Medora Manson, the poor old Miss Lannings, and certain other misguided ladies of good family who, if only they had listened to Mr. Henry van der Luyden...

"The best thing the Beauforts can do," said Mrs. Archer, summing it up with the clinical precision of a physician diagnosing a terminal condition, "is to go and live at Regina's little place in North Carolina. Beaufort has always kept a racing stable, and he had better breed trotting horses. I should say he had all the qualities of a successful horsedealer."

Every one agreed with her, yet no one condescended to inquire what the Beauforts truly intended. The next day, Mrs. Manson Mingott was significantly improved. She recovered enough voice to issue orders that no one should mention the Beauforts to her again, and when Dr. Bencomb appeared, she asked what in the world her family meant by making such a fuss about her health. "If people of my age _will_ eat chicken-salad in the evening what are they to expect?" she enquired. With the doctor having opportunistically modified her diet, the stroke was transformed into an attack of indigestion. Yet, despite her firm tone, old Catherine did not wholly recover her former attitude toward life. The growing remoteness of age, though it had not diminished her curiosity about her neighbors, had blunted her never-very-lively compassion for their troubles. She seemed to have no difficulty in putting the Beaufort disaster out of her mind. Instead, for the first time, she became absorbed in her own symptoms, developing a sentimental interest in certain members of her family to whom she had previously been contemptuously indifferent.

Mr. Welland, in particular, had the privilege of attracting her notice. Of her sons-in-law, he was the one she had most consistently ignored; and all his wife's efforts to represent him as a man of forceful character and marked intellectual ability (if he had only "chosen") had been met with a derisive chuckle. But his eminence as a valetudinarian now made him an object of engrossing interest. Mrs. Mingott issued an imperial summons for him to come and compare diets as soon as his temperature permitted; for old Catherine was now the first to recognize that one could not be too careful about temperatures.

Twenty-four hours after Madame Olenska's summons, a telegram announced that she would arrive from Washington on the evening of the following day. At the Wellands', where the Newland Archers chanced to be lunching, the question of who should meet her at Jersey City was immediately raised. The material difficulties amid which the Welland household struggled, as if it were a frontier outpost, lent animation to the debate. It was agreed that Mrs. Welland could not possibly go to Jersey City because she was to accompany her husband to old Catherine's that afternoon, and the brougham could not be spared, since, if Mr. Welland were "upset" by seeing his mother-in-law for the first time after her attack, he might have to be taken home at a moment's notice. The Welland sons would of course be "down town," Mr. Lovell Mingott would be just hurrying back from his shooting, and the Mingott carriage engaged in meeting him; and one could not ask May, at the close of a winter afternoon, to go alone across the ferry to Jersey City, even in her own carriage. Nevertheless, it might appear inhospitable—and contrary to old Catherine's express wishes—if Madame Olenska were allowed to arrive without any of the family being at the station to receive her.

"It's always one thing after another," the poor lady grieved, in one of her rare revolts against fate, "the only thing that makes me think Mamma must be less well than Dr. Bencomb will admit is this morbid desire to have Ellen come at once, however inconvenient it is to meet her."

The words were thoughtless, as the utterances of impatience often are; and Mr. Welland was upon them with a pounce. "Augusta," he said, turning pale and laying down his fork, "have you any other reason for thinking that Bencomb is less to be relied on than he was? Have you noticed that he has been less conscientious than usual in following up my case or your mother's?"

It was Mrs. Welland's turn to grow pale as the endless consequences of her blunder unrolled themselves before her; but she managed to laugh, and take a second helping of scalloped oysters, before she said, struggling back into her old armor of cheerfulness: "My dear, how could you imagine such a thing? I only meant that, after the decided stand Mamma took about its being Ellen's duty to go back to her husband, it seems strange that she should be seized with this sudden whim to see her, when there are half a dozen other grandchildren that she might have asked for. But we must never forget that Mamma, in spite of her wonderful vitality, is a very old woman."

Mr. Welland's brow remained clouded, and it was evident that his perturbed imagination had fastened at once on this last remark. "Yes: your mother's a very old woman; and for all we know Bencomb may not be as successful with very old people. As you say, my dear, it's always one thing after another; and in another ten or fifteen years I suppose I shall have the pleasing
