"Si taceant homines, facient te sidera notum,
Sol nescit comitis immemor esse sui."
—Old Epigram on Drake.

Five years have slipped away. It is nine o'clock on a still, bright November morning, yet the bells of Bideford church ring for the daily service two hours past their usual time. They do not toll soberly; instead, they burst forth every five minutes into a jocund peal, tumbling head over heels in ecstasies of joy. The streets of Bideford have transformed into a flower-garden of every color, swarming with seamen, burghers, and the wives and daughters of the town, all clad in holiday attire. Garlands span the thoroughfares, and tapestries adorn every window. The ships in the harbor are dressed in full array of flags, unleashing a tumultuous roar of ordnance from every size. Every stable is crammed with horses, and Sir Richard Grenville's house resembles a tavern in full swing, filled with eating, drinking, unsaddling, and the frantic running of grooms and serving-men.

Along the little churchyard, packed to capacity with women, flows the gentle blood of North Devon—tall, stately men and fair ladies worthy of an era when the English gentry led the people by personal prowess and beauty as much as by intellect and education. Leading the procession is my lady Countess of Bath, escorted by Sir Richard Grenville with cap in hand, for her good Earl Bourchier remains in London with the Queen. Following are the Bassets from Umberleigh, the Carys from Clovelly, the Fortescues of Wear, Buckland, and all quarters, the Coles from Slade, the Stukelys from Affton, the St. Legers from Annery, the Coffins from Portledge, and even the Coplestones from Eggesford, thirty miles away. Last, but certainly not least, comes Sir John Chichester of Ralegh, followed in single file, in the good old patriarchal fashion, by his eight daughters and three of his five famous sons—one fighting valiantly in Ireland to avenge his murdered brother, destined to rule wisely there as Lord Deputy and Baron of Belfast. He meets at the gate his cousin of Arlington, behind whom trails a train of four daughters and nineteen sons; the last has not yet passed the town-hall, while the first is at the Lychgate, laughing and making way for the elder, though shorter, branch of that most fruitful tree.

They enter the church, where all are seated according to their degrees, or as near as possible, not without a few sour looks, shoving, and whispering from one high-born matron to another. The churchwardens and sidesmen, never before having arranged such a goodly company, bustle themselves hot, red, and frantic, until they imploringly seek the help of the great Sir Richard himself to identify everyone, distinguish the elder from the younger branches, and determine who carries eight quarterings in their arms and who only four, lest they set half the fine ladies of North Devon at deadly feud. The old men are safely packed away in the corporation pews, while the young ones care only to secure a vantage point to gaze upon the ladies.

Finally, silence falls. Eyes turn toward the door, and then distant music arrives—flutes, hautboys, drums, and trumpets braying, screaming, and thundering merrily up to the very church doors before ceasing. The churchwardens and sidesmen rush down to the entrance, rods in hand. There is a general whisper and rustle, mingled with glad tears and blessings from many women and some men, as the wonder of the day enters. The rector begins, not the morning service, but the good old thanksgiving for a victory at sea.

What has thus sent old Bideford wild with that "goodly joy and pious mirth"? Why are all eyes fixed with greedy admiration on those four weather-beaten mariners, decked out with knots and ribbons by loving hands? And why even more on that gigantic figure walking before them—a beardless boy yet possessing the frame and stature of a Hercules, towering like Saul of old, a head and shoulders above the congregation, with golden locks flowing down over his shoulders? Why, as the five instinctively ascend to the altar and fall on their knees before the rails, are all eyes turned to the pew where Mrs. Leigh of Burrough hides her face between her hands, her hood rustling and shaking with joyful sobs?

Because there was a fellowship of old in merry England, in county and town. These are Devon men, men of Bideford: Amyas Leigh of Burrough, John Staveley, Michael Heard, and Jonas Marshall of Bideford, and Thomas Braund of Clovelly. They are the first of all English mariners to have sailed round the world with Francis Drake, come hither to give thanks to God.

It is a long story. To explain how it happened, we must go back almost to the point from whence we started in the last chapter.

Somewhat more than a twelvemonth after Mr. Oxenham's departure, young Amyas had gone on quietly enough, according to promise, save for certain occasional outbursts of fierceness common to all young male animals, and especially to boys of strong character. His scholarship progressed no better than before, but his home education flourished healthily. He was fast becoming, young as he was, a right good archer, rider, and swordsman (after the old school of buckler practice). Then his father, having gone down on business to the Exeter Assizes, caught—as was too common in those days—the gaol-fever from the prisoners. He sickened in the very court and died within a week.

Now Mrs. Leigh was left to God and her own soul, with this young lion-cub in leash, to tame and train for this life and the life to come. She had loved her husband fervently and holily. He had been often peevish and melancholy; a disappointed man with an estate impoverished by his father's folly and his own youthful ambition, which had led him to Court, wasting his heart and purse in following a vain shadow. He was one of those men who possess almost every gift except the power to use them. Though a scholar, courtier, and soldier, he found himself, past forty, without settled employment or aim in life, hindered by a certain shyness, pride, or delicate honor that kept him from playing a winning game in the very world after whose prizes he hankered, revenging himself by continual grumbling.

At last, by good luck, he met a fair young Miss Foljambe of Derbyshire, then at Queen Elizabeth's Court, who was as tired as he of the sins of the world, though she had seen less of them. The two contrived to please each other so well that, though the Queen grumbled a little at the lady for marrying and the gentleman for adoring anyone but her royal self, they obtained leave to vanish from the little Babylon at Whitehall and settle in peace at Burrough. In her, he found a treasure, and he knew what he had found.

Mrs. Leigh was, and had been from her youth, one of those noble old English churchwomen, without superstition and without severity, among the fairest features of that heroic time. Yet there was a certain melancholy about her; the recollections of her childhood carried her back to times when it was an awful thing to be a Protestant. She could remember, twenty-five years ago, the burning of poor blind Joan Waste at Derby, and of Mistress Joyce Lewis, too, a lady born. Sometimes, even now, in her nightly dreams, rang in her ears her mother's bitter cries to God, either to spare her that fiery torment or to give her strength to bear it, as she whom she loved had borne it before her. Her mother, of a good family in Yorkshire, had been one of Queen Catherine's bedchamber women and the bosom friend and disciple of Anne Askew. She had sat in Smithfield, with blood curdled by horror, to see the hapless Court beauty, a month before the paragon of Henry's Court, carried in a chair (so crippled was she by the rack) to her fiery doom at the stake, beside her fellow-courtier, Mr. Lascelles, while the very heavens seemed to the shuddering mob around to speak their wrath and grief in solemn thunder peals and heavy drops hissing upon the crackling pile.

Therefore a sadness hung upon her all her life, deepening in the days of Queen Mary, when, as a notorious Protestant and heretic, she had to hide for her life among the hills and caverns of the Peak. She was only saved by the love of her husband's tenants and his bold declaration that, good Catholic as he was, he would run through the body of any constable, justice, priest, yea, bishop or cardinal, who dared to serve the Queen's warrant upon his wife.

So she escaped. But, as I said, a sadness hung upon her all her life; and the skirt of that dark mantle fell upon the young girl who had been the partner of her wanderings and hidings among the lonely hills. After marriage, she gave herself utterly up to God.

And yet, in giving herself to God, Mrs. Leigh gave herself to her husband, her children, and the poor of Northam Town. She was none the less welcome to the Grenvilles, Fortescues, Chichesters, and all the gentle families round, who honored her husband's talents and enjoyed his wit. She accustomed herself to austerities, which often called forth the kindly rebukes of her husband, yet she did so without one superstitious thought of appeasing the fancied wrath of God or giving Him pleasure by any pain of hers. Her spirit had been trained in the freest and loftiest doctrines of Luther's school; and that little mystic "Alt-Deutsch Theologie"—to which the great Reformer said he owed more than to any book save the Bible and St. Augustine—was her counsellor and comforter by day and night.

Now, at little past forty, she was left a widow: lovely still in face and figure, and still more lovely from the divine calm which brooded, like the dove of peace and the Holy Spirit of God, over every look, word, and gesture. It was a sweetness ripened by storm as well as by sunshine, which this world had not given and could not take away. No wonder that Sir Richard and Lady Grenville loved her; no wonder that her children worshipped her; no wonder that the young Amyas, when the first burst of grief was over and he knew again where he stood, felt that a new life had begun for him. His mother was no longer to think and act for him only, but he must think and act for his mother.

Thus, on the very day after his father's funeral, when school-hours were over, instead of coming straight home, he walked boldly into Sir Richard Grenville's house and asked to see his godfather.

"You must be my father now, sir," said he, firmly.

Sir Richard looked at the boy's broad, strong face and swore a great and holy oath, like Glasgerion's, "by oak, and ash, and thorn," that he would be a father to him and a brother to his mother, for Christ's sake. Lady Grenville took the boy by the hand and walked home with him to Burrough. There the two fair women fell on each other's necks and wept together—the one for the loss which had been, the other, by a prophetic instinct, for the like loss which was to come to her also. For the sweet St. Leger knew well that her husband's fiery spirit would never leave his body on a peaceful bed, but that death (as he prayed almost nightly that it might) would find him sword in hand upon the field of duty and of fame. There those two vowed everlasting sisterhood and kept their vow. After that, all things went on at Burrough as before. Amyas rode, shot, boxed, and wandered on the quay at Sir Richard's side. Mrs. Leigh was too wise a woman to alter one tittle of the training her husband had thought best for his younger boy. It was enough that her elder son had of his own accord taken to that form of life in which she, in her secret heart, would fain have moulded both her children.

For Frank, God's wedding gift to that pure love of hers, had won himself honor at home and abroad. First at the school at Bideford, then at Exeter College, where he became a friend of Sir Philip Sidney's and many another young man of rank and promise. Next, in the summer of 1572, on his way to the University of Heidelberg, he went to Paris, with letters of recommendation to Walsingham at the English Embassy. By these letters he not only fell in a second time with Philip Sidney but saved his own life (as Sidney did his) in the Massacre of St. Bartholomew's Day. At Heidelberg he stayed two years, winning fresh honor from all who knew him and resisting all Sidney's entreaties to follow him into Italy. Scorning to be a burden to his parents, he became tutor to two young German princes, whom, after living with them at their father's house for a year or more, he finally took down to Padua "to perfect them," as he wrote home, "according to his insufficiency, in all princely studies."

Sidney was now returned to England, but Frank found friends enough without him. Such letters of recommendation and diplomas did he carry from princes, magnificos, and learned doctors who had fallen in love with the learning, modesty, and virtue of the fair young Englishman. Ere Frank returned to Germany, he had satiated his soul with all the wonders of that wondrous land. He had talked over the art of sonneteering with Tasso, the art of history with Sarpi; he had listened, between awe and incredulity, to the daring theories of Galileo; he had taken his pupils to Venice to be painted by Paul Veronese; he had seen the palaces of Palladio, the merchant princes on the Rialto, the argosies of Rag
