"It is virtue, yea virtue, gentlemen, that maketh gentlemen; that maketh the poor rich, the base-born noble, the subject a sovereign, the deformed beautiful, the sick whole, the weak strong, the most miserable most happy. There are two principal and peculiar gifts in the nature of man, knowledge and reason; the one commandeth, and the other obeyeth: these things neither the whirling wheel of fortune can change, neither the deceitful cavillings of worldlings separate, neither sickness abate, neither age abolish."—LILLY'S Euphues, 1586.

Now it falls to my lot to recount the founding of that most chivalrous brotherhood of the Rose, which, after a few years, became not only famous in its native Devon but formidable throughout Ireland, the Netherlands, the Spanish Main, and the heart of South America. Should this chapter seem Quixotic or fantastical to any modern reader, let them recall that the generation who spoke and acted thus in matters of love and honor were, nevertheless, practiced and valiant soldiers, prudent politicians, and sharp diplomats. He who wrote the "Arcadia" was simultaneously one of Europe's subtlest statesmen; the poet of the "Faerie Queene" also authored "The State of Ireland." If critics quote against me with a sneer regarding Lilly's "Euphues," I shall only ask: Have they ever read it? For if they have, I pity them if they have not found it, despite occasional pedantry, as a brave, righteous, and pious book. I wish for no better proof of the nobility of the Elizabethan age than the fact that "Euphues" and the "Arcadia" were the two popular romances of the day. While Sir Walter Scott may have ridiculed the Euphuists in his "Sir Piercie Shafton," we deny that Lilly's book could produce such a coxcomb in the hands of any man of common sense.

Indeed, there is a double anachronism in Sir Piercie; for he belongs not to the days of Sidney, but to the profligate days of James, after the breaking of Elizabeth's heart. Of them, perhaps, hereafter. Meanwhile, let those who have not read "Euphues" believe that, if they could train a son after the fashion of his Ephoebus, all fathers, even in these money-making days, would rise up and call them blessed. Let us rather open our eyes and see in these old Elizabethan gallants our own ancestors, showing forth with the luxuriant wildness of youth all the virtues which still go to the making of a true Englishman. Let us recognize in their commercial and military daring, their political astuteness, and their deep reverence for law the examples of our own time. Let us confess that their chivalry is only another garb of that beautiful tenderness and mercy which is now, as it was then, the twin sister of English valor. Even in their extravagant fondness for Continental manners, let us recognize that old Anglo-Norman teachableness and wide-heartedness which has enabled us to profit by the wisdom of all ages without prejudice to our own distinctive national character.

And so I go to my story. Amyas could not sail the next day, or the day after, for the southwester freshened and blew three parts of a gale dead into the bay. Having got the "Mary Grenville" down the river into Appledore pool, ready to start with the first shift of wind, he went quietly home. When his mother started on a pillion behind the old serving-man to ride to Clovelly, where Frank lay wounded, Amyas went in with her as far as Bideford. There he met, coming down the High Street, a procession of horsemen headed by Will Cary, clad cap-a-pie in shining armor, sword on thigh, and helmet at saddle-bow, looking as gallant a young gentleman as ever Bideford dames peeped at from door and window. Behind him, upon country ponies, came four or five stout serving-men carrying his lances and baggage, and their own long-bows, swords, and bucklers; and behind all, in a horse-litter to Mrs. Leigh's great joy, Master Frank himself. Frank deposed that his wounds were only flesh-wounds, the dagger having turned against his ribs; that he must see the last of his brother; and that with her good leave he would not come home to Burrough, but take up his abode with Cary in the Ship Tavern, close to the Bridge-foot. This he did forthwith, settling himself on a couch and holding his levee there in state, mobbed by all the gossips of the town, not without white fibs as to who had brought him into that sorry plight.

In the meanwhile, Frank and Amyas concocted a scheme put into effect the next day, being market-day. First, the innkeeper began under Amyas's orders a bustle of roasting, boiling, and frying unparalleled in the annals of the Ship Tavern. Next, Amyas himself went out into the market and invited as many of his old schoolfellows, one by one apart, as Frank had pointed out to him, to a merry supper and a "rowse" thereon consequent. By this crafty scheme, in came each of Rose Salterne's gentle admirers and found himself, to his considerable disgust, seated at the same table with six rivals, to none of whom had he spoken for the last six months. However, all were too well bred to let the Leighs discern as much; and they, though of course they knew all, settled their guests, Frank on his couch lying at the head of the table, and Amyas taking the bottom. They contrived, by filling all mouths with good things, to save them the pain of speaking to each other till the wine should have loosened their tongues and warmed their hearts. In the meanwhile, both Amyas and Frank, ignoring the silence of their guests with the most provoking good-humor, chatted, joked, and told stories, making themselves such good company that Will Cary, who always found merriment infectious, melted into a jest, and then into another. Finding good-humor far more pleasant than bad, he tried to make Mr. Coffin laugh, and only made him bow; to make Mr. Fortescue laugh, and only made him frown; and unabashed nevertheless, began playing his light artillery upon the waiters till he drove them out of the room bursting with laughter.

So far so good. And when the cloth was drawn, and sack and sugar became the order of the day, and "Queen and Bible" had been duly drunk with all the honors, Frank tried a fresh move.

"I have a toast, gentlemen—here it is. 'The gentlemen of the Irish wars; and may Ireland never be without a St. Leger to stand by a Fortescue, a Fortescue to stand by a St. Leger, and a Chichester to stand by both.'"

Which toast of course involved the drinking of the healths of the three representatives of those families, their returning thanks, and paying a compliment each to the other's house. Thus the ice cracked a little further, and young Fortescue proposed the health of "Amyas Leigh and all bold mariners." To which Amyas replied by a few blunt kindly words that he wished to know no better fortune than to sail round the world again with the present company as fellow-adventurers, and so give the Spaniards another taste of the men of Devon.

By this time, the wine going down sweetly, caused the lips of them that were asleep to speak, till the ice broke up altogether, and every man began talking like a rational Englishman to the man who sat next him.

"And now, gentlemen," said Frank, who saw that it was the fit moment for the grand assault which he had planned all along, "let me give you a health which none of you, I dare say, will refuse to drink with heart and soul as well as with lips—the health of one whom beauty and virtue have so ennobled, that in their light the shadow of lowly birth is unseen; the health of one whom I would proclaim as peerless in loveliness, were it not that every gentleman here has sisters, who might well challenge from her the girdle of Venus: and yet what else dare I say, while those same lovely ladies who, if they but use their own mirrors, must needs be far better judges of beauty than I can be, have in my own hearing again and again assigned the palm to her? Surely, if the goddesses decide among themselves the question of the golden apple, Paris himself must vacate the judgment-seat. Gentlemen, your hearts, I doubt not, have already bid you, as my unworthy lips do now, to drink 'The Rose of Torridge.'"

If the Rose of Torridge herself had walked into the room, she could hardly have caused more blank astonishment than Frank's bold speech. Every guest turned red, and pale, and red again, and looked at the other as much as to say, "What right has any one but I to drink her? Lift your glass, and I will dash it out of your hand." But Frank, with sweet effrontery, drank "The health of the Rose of Torridge, and a double health to that worthy gentleman, whosoever he may be, whom she is fated to honor with her love!"

"Well done, cunning Frank Leigh!" cried blunt Will Cary. "None of us dare quarrel with you now, however much we may sulk at each other. For there's none of us, I'll warrant, but thinks that she likes him the best of all; and so we are bound to believe that you have drunk our healths all round."

"And so I have: and what better thing can you do, gentlemen, than to drink each other's healths all round likewise: and so show yourselves true gentlemen, true Christians, ay, and true lovers? For what is love (let me speak freely to you, gentlemen and guests), what is love, but the very inspiration of that Deity whose name is Love? Be sure that not without reason did the ancients feign Eros to be the eldest of the gods, by whom the jarring elements of chaos were attuned into harmony and order. How, then, shall lovers make him the father of strife? Shall Psyche wed with Cupid, to bring forth a cockatrice's egg? or the soul be filled with love, the likeness of the immortals, to burn with envy and jealousy, division and distrust? True, the rose has its thorn: but it leaves poison and stings to the nettle. Cupid has his arrow: but he hurls no scorpions. Venus is awful when despised, as the daughters of Proetus found: but her handmaids are the Graces, not the Furies. Surely he who loves aright will not only find love lovely, but become himself lovely also. I speak not to reprehend you, gentlemen; for to you (as your piercing wits have already perceived, to judge by your honorable blushes) my discourse tends; but to point you, if you will but permit me, to that rock which I myself have, I know not by what Divine good hap, attained; if, indeed, I have attained it, and am not about to be washed off again by the next tide."

Frank's rapid and fantastic oratory, utterly unexpected as it was, had as yet left their wits no time to set their tempers on fire; but when, weak from his wounds, he paused for breath, there was a haughty murmur from more than one young gentleman, who took his speech as an impertinent interference with each man's right to make a fool of himself. Mr. Coffin, who had sat quietly bolt upright and looking at the opposite wall, now rose as quietly, and with a face which tried to look utterly unconcerned, was walking out of the room. Another minute, and Lady Bath's prophecy about the feast of the Lapithae might have come true.

But Frank's heart and head never failed him.

"Mr. Coffin!" said he, in a tone which compelled that gentleman to turn round, and so brought him under the power of a face which none could have beheld for five minutes and borne malice, so imploring, tender, earnest was it. "My dear Mr. Coffin! If my earnestness has made me forget even for a moment the bounds of courtesy, let me entreat you to forgive me. Do not add to my heavy griefs, heavy enough already, the grief of losing a friend. Only hear me patiently to the end (generously, I know, you will hear me); and then, if you are still incensed, I can but again entreat your forgiveness a second time."

Mr. Coffin, to tell the truth, had at that time never been to Court; and he was therefore somewhat jealous of Frank, and his Court talk, and his Court clothes, and his Court company. Moreover, being the eldest of the guests and only two years younger than Frank himself, he was a little nettled at being classed in the same category with some who were scarce eighteen. And if Frank had given the least hint which seemed to assume his own superiority, all had been lost: but when, instead thereof, he sued in forma pauperis and threw himself upon Coffin's mercy, the latter, who was a true-hearted man enough and after all had known Frank ever since either of them could walk, had nothing to do but to sit down again and submit, while Frank went on more earnestly than ever.

"Believe me; believe me, Mr. Coffin, and gentlemen all, I no more arrogate to myself a superiority over you than does the sailor hurled on shore by the surge fancy himself better than his comrade who is still battling with the foam. For I too, gentlemen—let me confess it, that by confiding in you I may, perhaps, win you to confide in me—have loved, ay and do love, where you love also. Do not start. Is it a matter of wonder that the sun which has dazzled you has dazzled me; that the lodestone which has drawn you has drawn me? Do not frown, either, gentlemen. I have learnt to love you
