"Take aim, you noble musqueteers,
And shoot you round about;
Stand to it, valiant pikemen,
And we shall keep them out.
There's not a man of all of us
A foot will backward flee;
I'll be the foremost man in fight,
Says brave Lord Willoughby!"

Elizabethan Ballad.

It was the blessed Christmas afternoon. The light was fading; the evening song was done. The good folk of Bideford were trooping home in merry groups—the father with his children, the lover with his sweetheart—to cakes, ale, flapdragons, and mummer's plays, celebrating the happy sports of Christmas night. Yet one lady only, wrapped close in her black muffler and followed by her maid, walked swiftly, yet sadly, toward the long causeway leading to Northam town.

Sir Richard Grenville and his wife caught her up and stopped her courteously.

"You will come home with us, Mrs. Leigh," said Lady Grenville, "and spend a pleasant Christmas night?"

Mrs. Leigh smiled sweetly, laying one hand on Lady Grenville's arm and pointing with the other to the westward.

"I cannot well spend a merry Christmas night while that sound is in my ears."

The whole party looked in the direction she indicated. Above them, the soft blue sky faded into gray, and misty stars peeped out. But to the westward, where the downs and woods of Raleigh closed in with those of Abbotsham, the blue was webbed with delicate white flakes. Iridescent spots marked the path where the sun had sunk, showing all the colors of the dying dolphin, while low on the horizon lay a long band of grassy green.

"What sound troubles Mrs. Leigh?" Sir Richard asked. "None of us, with our merry hearts and ears dulled by the town's din, had heard it till now. And yet—listen!"

It was dead calm. There was not a breath to stir a blade of grass. Yet the air was full of sound, a low, deep roar hovering over down, wood, salt-marsh, and river, like the roll of a thousand wheels or the tramp of endless armies. It was the thunder of a mighty surge upon the boulders of the pebble ridge.

"The ridge is noisy tonight," said Sir Richard. "There has been wind somewhere."

"There is wind now, where my boy is, God help him!" said Mrs. Leigh. All knew she spoke truly. The spirit of the Atlantic storm had sent forward the token of his coming in the smooth ground-swell heard inland, two miles away. Tomorrow, the pebbles rattling down with each retreating wave might leap to the ridge top and be hurled like round-shot far ashore by the force of the advancing hurricane.

"God help my boy!" Mrs. Leigh repeated.

"God is as near him by sea as by land," said good Sir Richard.

"True, but I am a lone mother; and one that has no heart just now but to go home and pray."

So Mrs. Leigh went onward up the lane, spending all that night listening between her prayers to the thunder of the surge until it was drowned, long ere sunrise, in the thunder of the storm.

And where was Amyas on this same Christmas afternoon?

Amyas sat bareheaded in the stern of a boat in Smerwick Bay, the spray whistling through his curls as he shouted cheerfully, "Pull, and with a will, my merry men all, and never mind shipping a sea. Cannon balls are a cargo that don't spoil by taking salt-water."

His mother's presage had been true enough. Christmas Eve had been the last of the still, dark, steaming nights of early winter, and the western gale had been roaring for the last twelve hours upon the Irish coast.

The short light of the winter day was fading fast. Behind him was a leaping line of billows lashed into mist by the tempest. Beside him, green foam-fringed columns rushed up the black rocks and fell again in a thousand cataracts of snow. Before him lay the deep, sheltered bay, but only four miles out at sea could they see clearly. Some sloping roof of thick gray cloud stretched over their heads, cutting the cliffs off at mid-height, hiding the Kerry mountains and darkening the distant firths into the blackness of night. Underneath that awful roof of whirling mist, the storm howled inland, sweeping before it great foam-sponges and gray salt spray until all the land was hazy, dim, and dun.

Let it howl on! For there was more mist than ever salt spray made, flying before that gale; more thunder than ever sea-surge wakened among the cliffs of Smerwick Bay. Along the sand-hills flashed in the evening gloom red sparks that never came from heaven. That fort, now christened by the invaders Fort Del Oro, where flaunted the hated golden flag of Spain, held San Josepho and eight hundred of the foe. But three nights ago, Amyas and Yeo, and the rest of Winter's shrewdest hands, had slung four culverins out of the Admiral's main deck, floated them ashore, and dragged them up to the battery among the sand-hills. Now it would be seen whether Spanish and Italian condottieri could hold their own on British ground against the men of Devon.

Small blame to Amyas if he was thinking not of his lonely mother at Burrough Court, but of those quick bright flashes on the sand-hill and the fort, where Salvation Yeo was hurling eighteen-pound shot with deadly aim. He watched with a cool, bitter smile of triumph the flying of the sand and the crashing of the gabions. Amyas and his party had been on board at the risk of their lives for a fresh supply of shot; Winter's battery was out of ball and had been firing stones for the last four hours. They ran the boat on shore through the surf, almost careless whether she stove or not, scrambling over the sand-hills with each man carrying a brace of shot slung across his shoulder. Amyas leaped into the trenches and shouted cheerfully to Salvation Yeo:

"More food for the bull-dogs, Gunner, and plums for the Spaniards' Christmas pudding!"

"Don't speak to a man at his business, Master Amyas," Yeo replied grimly. "Five mortal times have I missed; but I will have that accursed Popish rag down, as I'm a sinner."

"Down with it, then; nobody wants you to shoot crooked. Take good iron to it, and not footy paving-stones."

"I believe, sir, that the foul fiend is there, turning my shot aside. I thought I saw him once: but, thank Heaven, here's ball again. Ah, sir, if one could but cast a silver one! Now, stand by, men!"

Once again Yeo's eighteen-pounder roared, and away. Oh, glory! The great yellow flag of Spain, which streamed in the gale, lifted clean into the air, flagstaff and all, and then pitched wildly down head-foremost, far to leeward.

A hurrah from the sailors, answered by the soldiers of the opposite camp, shook the very cloud above them. Ere its echoes had died away, a tall officer leapt upon the parapet of the fort, holding the fallen flag in his hand. Rearing it as well as he could upon his lance point, he held it firmly against the gale while the fallen flagstaff was raised again within.

In a moment a dozen longbows were bent at the daring foe, but Amyas behind shouted, "Shame, lads! Stop and let the gallant gentleman have due courtesy!"

So they stopped. Amyas sprang on the rampart of the battery, took off his hat, and bowed to the flag-holder, who, as soon as relieved of his charge, returned the bow courteously and descended.

It was all but dark, and the firing began to slacken. Salvation and his brother gunners, having covered up their slaughtering tackle with tarpaulings, retired for the night. Leaving Amyas, who had volunteered to take the watch till midnight, the rest of the force lay down under arms among the sand-hills, grumbling themselves to sleep after a scanty supper of biscuit, for provisions were running very short.

Amyas had paced up and down in the gusty darkness for an hour or more, exchanging passing words with the sentinel, when two men entered the battery, chatting busily. One was in complete armor; the other wrapped in the plain short cloak of a man of pens and peace. But the talk of both was neither of sieges nor of sallies, catapults, nor culverins, but simply of English hexameters.

Fancy not, gentle reader, that the two were fiddling while Rome burned. For the commonweal of poetry and letters in that critical year, 1580, was in far greater danger from those hexameters than the common woe of Ireland was from the Spaniards. Imitating classic metres, "versifying," as it was called in contradistinction to rhyming, was becoming fast the fashion among the more learned. Stonyhurst and others had tried their hands at hexameter translations from the Latin and Greek epics, which seemed doggerel enough. Ever and anon some youthful wit broke out in iambics, sapphics, elegiacs, and what not, to the great detriment of the Queen's English and her subjects' ears.

Whether Mr. William Webbe had yet given to the world fragments of his precious hints for the "Reformation of English Poetry" was uncertain, but the Cambridge Malvolio, Gabriel Harvey, had succeeded in arguing Spenser, Dyer, Sidney, and probably Sidney's sister, into following his model of:

"What might I call this tree? A laurel? O bonny laurel!
Needes to thy bowes will I bowe this knee, and vail my bonetto;"

after snubbing the first book of "that Elvish Queene," which was then in manuscript, as a base declension from the classical to the romantic school.

And now Spenser, perhaps in mere melancholy wilfulness, was wasting his mighty genius upon doggerel which he fancied antique. Some piratical publisher had just given to the world "Three proper witty and familiar Letters, lately past between two University men, touching the Earthquake in April last, and our English reformed Versifying," which had set all town wits a-buzzing. It was a correspondence between Spenser and Harvey, proving to the world forever the correctness and melody of lines such as:

"For like magnificoes, not a beck but glorious in show,
In deede most frivolous, not a looke but Tuscanish always."

Let them pass—Alma Mater has seen as bad hexameters since. But the matter was serious. There was a story that Spenser was half bullied into re-writing the "Faerie Queene" in hexameters, had not Raleigh, a true romanticist, persuaded him to follow his better genius. The great dramatists had not yet arisen to form completely that truly English school, of which Spenser, unconscious of his own vast powers, was laying the foundation. Indeed, it was not till Daniel, twenty years after, in his admirable apology for rhyme, had smashed Mr. Campian and his "eight several kinds of classical numbers," that the matter was finally settled.

So Raleigh answered somewhat waspishly to some quotation of Spenser's from the three letters of "Immerito and G. H."

"Tut, tut, Colin Clout, much learning has made thee mad. A good old fishwives' ballad jingle is worth all your sapphics and trimeters, and 'riff-raff thurlery bouncing.' Hey? Have I you there, old lad? Do you mind that precious verse?"

"But, dear Wat, Homer and Virgil—"

"But, dear Ned, Petrarch and Ovid—"

"But, Wat, what have we that we do not owe to the ancients?"

"Ancients, quotha? Why, the legend of King Arthur, and Chevy Chase too, of which even your fellow-sinner Sidney cannot deny that every time he hears it even from a blind fiddler it stirs his heart like a trumpet-blast. Speak well of the bridge that carries you over, man! Did you find your Redcross Knight in Virgil, or such a dame as Una in old Ovid? No more than you did your Pater and Credo, you renegado baptized heathen, you!"

"Yet, surely, our younger and more barbarous taste must bow before divine antiquity, and imitate afar—"

"As dottrels do fowlers. If Homer was blind, lad, why dost not poke out thine eye? Ay, this hexameter is of an ancient house, truly, Ned Spenser, and so is many a rogue: but he cannot make way on our rough English roads. He goes hopping and twitching in our language like a three-legged terrier over a pebble-bank, tumble and up again, rattle and crash."

"Nay, hear, now—"

"'See ye the blindfolded pretty god that feathered archer,
Of lovers' miseries which maketh his bloody game?'"

True, the accent gaped in places, as Harvey had often confessed, but—

"Harvey be hanged for a pedant, and the whole crew of versifiers, from Lord Dorset to yourself! Why delude you into playing Procrustes as he does with the Queen's English, racking one word till its joints be pulled asunder, and squeezing the next all a-heap as the Inquisitors do heretics in their banca cava? Out upon him and you, and Sidney, and the whole kin. You have not made a verse among you, and never will, which is not as lame a gosling as Harvey's own—"

"'Oh thou weathercocke, that stands on the top of Allhallows,
Come thy ways down, if thou dar'st for thy crown, and take the wall
On us.'"

"Hark, now! There is our young
