The spring of 1582–83 brought a sky of bruised gray, curdling high above the jagged black peaks of Ireland. A wind, sharp and dry as a scourge, swept across a desolate expanse of bog, still stained red and yellow by the lingering frost of winter. Upon a solitary brown knoll rising from this waste, a few leafless oaks stretched their moss-grown limbs like the hairy claws of giants, looming over a desolate pool that shivered in the biting breeze. From its edge rose a mournful cry, faint and fitful, swallowed by the howling gale.

Along the bog's crumbling edge, a company of English soldiers pressed forward. Clad in helmets and quilted jerkins, with arquebuses resting on shoulders and pikes trailing behind, they were men hardened by two years of war, having fought at Smerwick and seen countless bloody frays. Two captains rode ahead on shaggy ponies. One, the taller, wore armor stained and rusted by storms and battle; the other, a figure of flamboyant contrast, donned a brilliant inlaid cuirass, a gaudy sash, a plumed helmet, and a sword hilt glittering with gold. Yet his mount was a meager garron, struggling under the weight of his finery. Beside them trotted a bare-legged Irish kerne, his only garment a ragged yellow mantle, his unkempt hair wild and matted. He was their guide in the hunt for the rebel Baltinglas, and woe to him if he betrayed them.

"A pleasant country, truly, Captain Raleigh," remarked the dapper officer to his companion. "I marvel how, having once escaped this mire to the splendor of Whitehall, you possess the courage to return and soil that gay suit with bog-water and mud."

"A very pleasant country, my friend Amyas," Raleigh replied earnestly. "What you say in jest, I say in truth."

"Hillo! Our tastes seem to have swapped places," Amyas countered, his tone weary. "I am already sick of it, just as you predicted. Oh, that I could hear of some adventure Westward-ho! I long to swing in a hammock once more. Pray, what has suddenly made you in love with bog and rock? I thought you had long since spied out the nakedness of this land."

"Bog and rock? Nakedness?" Raleigh laughed, a sound bright against the gloom. "What is needed here is merely prudence, skill, justice, and law. This soil is fertile enough if men would till it. These rocks—think of the minerals they may hold! I hear of gold and jewels found in divers parts. My brother Humphrey's German assayer, Daniel, assures me these stones are akin to those yielding silver in Peru. Tut, man! If Her Gracious Majesty would but grant me a few square miles of this wilderness, in seven years' time, by God's good help, I would make it blossom like a rose."

"Humph!" Amyas sighed. "Then I should be more inclined to stay."

"So you shall, and be my agent," Raleigh insisted, leaning forward. "If you will, you shall collect my mine-rents, my corn-rents, and my fishery-rents. Could you keep accounts, old knight of the bear's-paw?"

"Well enough for such short reckonings as yours would be, on the profit side at least. No, no—I'd sooner carry lime from Cauldy to Bideford all my days than spend another year in the land of Ire among the children of wrath. There is a curse upon the face of the earth, I believe."

"There is no curse save the old one of man's sin: 'Thorns and thistles it shall bring forth to thee,'" Raleigh corrected, speaking with a daring boldness that would later earn him the imputation of atheism. "But if you root up the thorns, Amyas, I know no fiend who can prevent you from growing wheat. If you till the ground like a man, you plough away nature's curse and the fables of the schoolmen."

"It is sword and bullet, I think, that are needed here before plough and harrow," Amyas said grimly. "Until a few more of these Irish lords are gone where the Desmonds are, there is no peace for Ireland."

"Humph! Not so far wrong, I fear. And yet... Irish lords? These very traitors are better English blood than we who hunt them down. When Yeo here slew the Desmond the other day, he shed no more Irish blood than if he had slain the Lord Deputy himself."

"His blood be on his own head," Yeo grunted. "He looked as wild a savage as the worst of them, more shame to him. The ancient here nearly cut off his arm before he told us who he was. And then, your worship, having a price on his head and bleeding to death..."

"Enough, enough, good fellow," Raleigh interrupted gently. "Thou hast done what was given thee to do. Strange, Amyas, is it not? Noble Normans sunk into savages—*Hibernis ipsis hiberniores!* Is there some uncivilizing venom in the air?"

"Some venom, at least, which makes English men traitors. But the Irish themselves are well enough, if their tyrants would let them be. See now, what more faithful liegeman has Her Majesty than Inchiquin, who, they say, is Prince of Thomond and should be king of all Ireland if every man had his right?"

"Don't talk of rights in the land of wrongs, man," Raleigh muttered. "But Inchiquin knows well that the true Irish Esau has no worse enemy than his supplanter, the Norman Jacob. And yet, Amyas, are even these men worse than we might be, if we had been bred up masters over the bodies and souls of men in some remote land where law and order had never come? Look at this Desmond: brought up a savage among savages, a Papist among Papists, a despot among slaves. A thousand easy maidens deem it honor to serve his pleasure; a thousand wild ruffians deem it piety to fulfill his revenge. Let him that is without sin among us cast the first stone."

Amyas fell silent as the conversation drifted. Raleigh's mind turned inward, wrestling with shadows. *What hadst thou been, Raleigh, hadst thou been that Desmond whose lands thou now desirest?* he asked himself. *What wilt thou be when thou hast them? Will thy children sink downwards, as these noble barons sank? Will the genius of tyranny and falsehood find soil within thy heart? What guarantee hast thou for doing better here than those who went before thee? And yet, cannot I do justice and love mercy? Can I not establish plantations, build and sow, and make the desert valleys laugh with corn? Shall I not have my Spenser with me to fill me with noble thoughts? Is not this true knight-errantry, to redeem to peace and use a generous soil and a more generous race? Trustful and tenderhearted they are... and if they be fickle and passionate, will not that very softness of temper make them as easy to be led towards good?*

*Yes,* he thought, *here, away from courts, among a people who should bless me as their benefactor... what golden days might be mine! And yet—is this but another angel's mask from that same cunning fiend, Ambition's stage? And will my house be indeed the house of God, with foundations of loyalty and bulwarks of righteousness, or the house of fame, whose walls are of soap-bubbles and whose floor a sea of glass mingled with fire? I would be good and great. When will the day come when I shall be content to be good, and yet not great, like this simple Leigh, toiling on by my side to do his duty with no more thought for the morrow than the birds of God?*

*Greatness? I have tasted that cup within the last twelve months. Do I not know it is sweet in the mouth but bitter in the belly? Greatness? And was not Essex great? And John of Austria? And Desmond, whose race stood for ages higher than I shall ever hope to climb—castles, lands, slaves by thousands, five hundred gentlemen who vowed to forswear God before they forswore Him, and well have they kept their vow! And now, dead in a turf-hovel, like a coney in a burrow!*

"Leigh, what noise was that?" Raleigh snapped back to reality.

"An Irish howl, I fancied," the ancient replied. "But it came from off the bog. It may be only a plover's cry."

"Something not quite right, sir captain, to my mind," the ancient added. "They have ugly stories here of pucks and banshees. There it was again, wailing just like a woman. They say the banshee cried all night before Desmond was slain."

"Perhaps, then, this one may be crying for Baltinglas; for his turn is likely to come next—not that I believe in such old wives' tales."

"Shamus, my man," Amyas addressed the guide. "Do you hear that cry in the bog?"

The guide put on a stolid face and answered in broken English. "Shamus hear naught. Perhaps... what you call him? Fishing in ta pool."

"An otter, he means, and I believe he is right. Stay, no! Did you not hear it then, Shamus? It was a woman's voice."

"Shamus is shick in his ears ever since Christmas."

"Shamus will go after Desmond if he lies," Amyas warned. "Ancient, we had better send a few men to see what it is. There may be a poor soul taken by robbers, or perhaps starving to death, as I have seen many a one."

"And I too, poor wretches; and by no fault of their own or ours either: but if their lords will fall to quarrelling, and then drive each other's cattle, and waste each other's lands, sir, you know—"

"I know," Amyas said impatiently. "Why dost not take the men, and go?"

"Cry you mercy, noble captain, but—I fear nothing born of woman."

"Well, what of that?" Amyas smiled.

"But these pucks, sir. The wild Irish do say that they haunt the pools. They do no manner of harm when you are coming up to them; but when you are past, sir, they jump on your back like apes, sir—and who can tackle that manner of fiend?"

"Why, then, by thine own showing, ancient," Raleigh interjected, "thou may'st go and see all safely enough. And then, if the puck jumps on thee as thou comest back, just run in with him here, and I'll buy him of thee for a noble; or thou may'st keep him in a cage and make money in London by showing him for a monster."

"Good heavens forefend, Captain Raleigh! But you talk rashly! But if I must, Captain Leigh—"

"Lads, who'll follow me?"

"Thou askest for volunteers, as if thou wert to lead a forlorn hope. Pull away at the usquebaugh, man, and swallow Dutch courage, since thine English is oozed away. Stay, I'll go myself."

"And I with you," Raleigh declared. "As the queen's true knight-errant, I am bound to be behindhand in no adventure. Who knows but we may find a wicked magician just going to cut off the head of some saffron-mantled princess?" He dismounted.

"Oh, sirs, sirs, to endanger your precious—"

"Pooh," said Raleigh. "I wear an amulet, and have a spell of art-magic at my tongue's end, whereby, sir ancient, neither can a ghost see me, nor I see them. Come with us, Yeo, the Desmond-slayer, and we will shame the devil, or be shamed by him."

"He may shame me, sir, but he will never frighten me," quoth Yeo. "But the bog, captains?"

"Tut! Devonshire men, and heath-trotters born, and not know our way over a peat moor!"

And the three strode away.

They splashed and scrambled for some quarter of a mile to the knoll, while the cry grew louder and more distinct.

"That's neither ghost nor otter, sirs, but a true Irish howl, as Captain Leigh said; and I'll warrant Master Shamus knew as much long ago," Yeo observed.

Indeed, they could now hear plainly the *"Ochone, Ochonorie"* of some wild woman. Scrambling over the boulders of the knoll, they came upon her in another minute.

She was a young girl, sluttish and unkempt, yet fair enough. Her only covering was the ample yellow mantle. There she sat upon a stone, tearing her black dishevelled hair, and every now and then throwing up her head to burst into a long, mournful cry, "for all the world," as Yeo noted, "like a dumb four-footed hound, and not a Christian soul."

On her knees lay the head of a man of middle age, clad in the long soutane of a Romish priest. One look at the attitude of his limbs told them he was dead.

The two paused in awe. Raleigh's spirit, susceptible to all poetical images, felt keenly the strangeness of the scene: the bleak and bitter sky, the shapeless bog, the stunted trees, the savage girl alone with the corpse in that utter desolation. As she bent her head over the still face, calling wildly to him who heard her not, and then, utterly unmindful of the intruders, sent up again that dreary wail into the dreary air, they felt a sacred horror that almost made them turn away and leave her unquestioned. But
