"The spirits of your fathers shall start from every wave; for the deck it was their field of fame, and ocean was their grave."

Thus spake Campbell, and the words hung heavy in the air of Mrs. Hawkins's study. The room was a testament to the new wealth of Plymouth, panelled in oak and adorned with gilding, Spanish silver vessels gleaming on the sideboard, and strange skins and charts hanging like maps of a conquered world. Above the fireplace, where the portrait of the old Captain Will Hawkins watched, fluttered the Spanish ensign taken at Rio de la Hacha—a trophy of violence that seemed to mock the peace the room otherwise tried to maintain.

In this chamber sat Adrian Gilbert, a tall man whose broad forehead was deeply wrinkled by the fires of the laboratory, and Mrs. Hawkins, once comely, now aged and worn by the sorrows of a sailor's wife.

"So you see, my dear Mrs. Hawkins," Adrian began, his voice trembling slightly with the fever of his ambition, "having the silver beside the ores of lead, manganese, and copper—and above all this gossan, which I suspect is the very crude form of all metals—if my recipes from Doctor Dee succeed even half as well as I hope, I shall refine out the luna, lay it by, and transmute the remaining ores into sol, gold. Whereupon Peru and Mexico become superfluities, and England the mistress of the globe. Strange, no doubt; distant, no doubt: but possible, my dear madam, possible!"

"And what good to you if it be, Mr. Gilbert?" Mrs. Hawkins replied, her voice soft but firm. "If you could find a philosopher's stone to turn sinners into saints, now—naught save God's grace can do that; and that last seems ofttimes over long in coming." She sighed, a sound that carried the weight of nine years of waiting.

"But indeed, my dear madam, conceive now. The Comb Martin mine thus becomes a gold mine, perhaps inexhaustible; yields me wherewithal to carry out my North-West patent. Meanwhile, my brother Humphrey holds Newfoundland, and builds me fresh ships year by year—for the forests of pine are boundless—for my China voyage."

"Sir Humphrey has better thoughts in his dear heart than gold, Mr. Adrian; a very close and gracious walker he has been these seven years. I wish my Captain John were so too."

"And how do you know I have naught better in my mind's eye than gold? Or, indeed, what better could I have? Is not gold the Spaniard's strength—the very mainspring of Antichrist? By gold only, therefore, can we out-wrestle him. You shake your head, but say, dear madam (for gold England must have), which is better: to make gold bloodlessly at home, or take it bloodily abroad?"

"Oh, Mr. Gilbert, Mr. Gilbert! Is it not written that those who make haste to be rich pierce themselves through with many sorrows? Oh, Mr. Gilbert! God's blessing is not on it all."

"Not on you, madam? Be sure that brave Captain John Hawkins's star told me a different tale when I cast his nativity for him. Born under stormy planets, truly, but under right royal and fortunate ones."

"Ah, Mr. Adrian! I am a simple body, and you a great philosopher, but I hold there is no star for the seaman like the Star of Bethlehem; and that goes with 'peace on earth and good will to men,' and not with such arms as that, Mr. Adrian. I can't abide to look upon them."

She pointed upward to one of the bosses of the ribbed oak roof, where was emblazoned the fatal crest Clarencieux Hervey had granted years before to her husband: *The Demi-Moor proper, bound.*

"Ah, Mr. Gilbert! Since first he went to Guinea after those poor negroes, little lightness has my heart known. And the very day that that crest was put up in our grand new house, as the parson read the first lesson, there was this text in it: 'Woe to him that buildeth his house by iniquity, and his chambers by wrong. Shalt thou live because thou closest thyself in cedar?' It went into my ears like fire, Mr. Gilbert, and into my heart like lead. And when the parson went on, 'Did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice? Then it was well with him,' I thought of good old Captain Will; and—I tell you, Mr. Gilbert, those negroes are on my soul from morning until night! We are all mighty grand now, and money comes in fast, but the Lord will require the blood of them at our hands yet, He will!"

"My dearest madam, who can prosper more than you? If your husband copied the Dons too closely once or twice in the matter of those negroes—which I do not deny—was he not punished at once when he lost ships, men, all but life, at St. Juan d'Ulloa?"

"Ay, yes," she said, "and that did give me a bit of comfort, especially when the Queen—God save her tender heart!—was so sharp with him for pity of the poor wretches. But it has not mended him. He is growing fast like the rest now, Mr. Gilbert, greedy to win, and niggardly to spend (God forgive him!), and always fretting and plotting for some new gain, and envying and grudging at Drake, and all who are deeper in the snare of prosperity than he is. Gold, gold, nothing but gold in every mouth—there it is! Ah! I mind when Plymouth was a quiet little God-fearing place as God could smile upon: but ever since my John, and Sir Francis, and poor Mr. Oxenham found out the way to the Indies, it's been a sad place. Not a sailor's wife but is crying 'Give, give,' like the daughters of the horse-leech; and every woman must drive her husband out across seas to bring her home money to squander on hoods and farthingales, and go mincing with outstretched necks and wanton eyes; and they will soon learn to do worse than that, for the sake of gain. But the Lord's hand will be against their tires and crisping-pins, their mufflers and farthingales, as it was against the Jews of old. Ah, dear me!"

The two sat in silence for a moment, the weight of the future pressing down upon them. Adrian, half ashamed of his own ambitious dreams, looked at her with a mixture of pity and awe.

"The Lord be with you, dearest lady. Strange, how you women sit at home to love and suffer, while we men rush forth to break our hearts and yours against rocks of our own seeking! Ah well! Were it not for Scripture, I should have thought that Adam, rather than Eve, had been the one who plucked the fruit of the forbidden tree."

"We women, I fear; did the deed nevertheless; for we bear the doom of it our lives long."

"You always remind me, madam, of my dear Mrs. Leigh of Burrough, and her counsels."

"Do you see her often? I hear of her as one of the Lord's most precious vessels."

"I would have done more ere now than see her," said he with a blush, "had she allowed me: but she lives only for the memory of her husband and the fame of her noble sons."

As he spoke, the door opened, and in walked, wrapped in his rough sea-gown, none other than one of those said noble sons.

Adrian turned pale.

"Amyas Leigh! What brings you hither? How fares my brother? Where is the ship?"

"Your brother is well, Mr. Gilbert. The Golden Hind is gone on to Dartmouth, with Mr. Hayes. I came ashore here, meaning to go north to Bideford, ere I went to London. I called at Drake's just now, but he was away."

"The Golden Hind? What brings her home so soon?"

"Yet welcome ever, sir," said Mrs. Hawkins. "This is a great surprise, though. Captain John did not look for you till next year."

Amyas was silent.

"Something is wrong!" cried Adrian. "Speak!"

Amyas tried, but could not.

"Will you drive a man mad, sir? Has the adventure failed? You said my brother was well."

"He is well."

"Then what? Why do you look at me in that fashion, sir?" Springing up, Adrian rushed forward and held the candle to Amyas's face.

Amyas's lip quivered as he laid his hand on Adrian's shoulder. "Your great and glorious brother, sir, is better bestowed than in settling Newfoundland."

"Dead?" shrieked Adrian.

"He is with the God whom he served!"

"He was always with Him, like Enoch: parable me no parables, if you love me, sir!"

"And, like Enoch, he was not; for God took him."

Adrian clasped his hands over his forehead and leaned against the table. "Go on, sir, go on. God will give me strength to hear all."

Gradually, Amyas opened to Adrian that tragic story which Mr. Hayes had long ago told far too well to allow a second edition. He spoke of the unruliness of the men, ruffians caught up at hap-hazard; of conspiracies to carry off the ships, the plunder of fishing vessels, and desertions multiplying daily. Licenses from the general to the lazy and fearful to return home had turned the fleet into a collection of cowards.

"From him? Conspired against him? Deserted from him? Dotards, buzzards! Where would they have found such another leader?" Adrian broke out with a groan.

"Your illustrious brother, sir," said Amyas, "if you will pardon me, was a very great philosopher, but not so much of a general."

"General, sir? Where was braver man?"

"Not on God's earth, but that does not make a general, sir. If Cortez had been brave and no more, Mexico would have been Mexico still. The truth is, sir, Cortez, like my Captain Drake, knew when to hang a man; and your great brother did not."

Amyas was right. Gilbert was a man who could be angry enough at baseness or neglect, but who was too kindly to punish it; he could form the wisest and best-digested plans, but he could not stoop to that hail-fellow-well-met drudgery among his subordinates which has been the talisman of great captains.

Then Amyas went on to tell the rest of his story. They had set sail from St. John's to discover the southward coast. Sir Humphrey, in a chivalrous determination to prove his courage, had gone in the little *Squirrel* of only ten tons—"overcharged with nettings, fights, and small ordnance"—not only because she was more fit to examine the creeks, but because he had heard of some taunt among the men that he was afraid of the sea.

After that, woe on woe. Seven days after they left Cape Raz, their largest ship, the *Delight*, after she had "most part of the night" continued in sounding of trumpets, drums, and fifes, like the swan that singeth before her death, struck the next day upon unknown shoals. There were lost all but fourteen, and among them Frank's philosopher friend, poor Budaeus. Those who escaped, after all horrors of cold and famine, were cast on shore in Newfoundland. Worn out with hunger and want of clothes, the crews of the two remaining ships persuaded Sir Humphrey to sail toward England on the 31st of August. On "that very instant, even in winding about," they beheld close alongside "a very lion in shape, hair, and color, not swimming, but sliding on the water, with his whole body; who passed along, turning his head to and fro, yawning and gaping wide, with ugly demonstration of long teeth and glaring eyes; and to bid us farewell (coming right against the Hind) he sent forth a horrible voice, roaring or bellowing as doth a lion."

"And the devil it was, doubtless," said Adrian, "the roaring lion who goes about seeking whom he may devour."

"He has not got your brother, at least," quoth Amyas.

"No," rejoined Mrs. Hawkins, a smile not on her lips but in her eyes, for those were days in which men believed in the devil; "he roared for joy to think how many poor souls would be left still in heathen darkness by Sir Humphrey's death. God be with that good knight, and send all mariners where he is now!"

Then Amyas told the last scene. When they were off the Azores, the storms came on heavier than ever, with "terrible seas, breaking short and pyramid-wise," till, on the 9th of September, the tiny *Squirrel* nearly foundered and yet recovered. "And the general, sitting abaft with a book in his hand, cried out to us in the Hind so oft as we did approach within hearing, 'We are as near heaven by sea as by land,' reiterating the same speech, well beseeming a soldier resolute in Jesus Christ, as I can testify he was."

"The same Monday, about twelve of the clock, or not long after, the frigate (the *Squirrel*) being ahead of us in the Golden Hind, suddenly her lights were out; and withal our watch cried, the general was cast away, which was true; for in that moment the frigate was devoured and swallowed up of the sea."

And so ended Amyas Leigh's story.

"Oh, my brother! My brother!" moaned poor Adrian. "The glory of his house, the glory of Devon!"

"Ah! What will the Queen say?" asked Mrs. Hawkins through her tears.

"Tell me," asked Adrian, "had he the jewel on when he died?"

"The
