"The sun's rim dips; the stars rush out;
At one stride comes the dark."

Land! Land! Land! Yes, there it lay, far to the south and west, a long, blue ribbon separating the crimson sea from the golden sky. It was land at last—a promise of fresh streams, cooling fruits, and space for limbs cramped by scurvy and weakness. Perhaps, too, it held gold and gems, the hidden wealth of India. Who could say? The old world of hard facts lay thousands of miles behind them; before them stretched a realm of wonder, fable, and boundless hope. Men who had crawled from their stifling hammocks now rose; strong men fell to their knees in gratitude. Every eye and hand reached toward the fading blue cloud, which seemed to rise higher as the ship surged forward, driven by the trade-wind that whispered affectionately against brow and sail: "I am the faithful friend of those who dare!"

"Blow freshly, blow yet more strongly, thou good trade-wind," Frank murmured to himself, his straining eyes fixed on that first outpost of the New World, which held his entire existence. His cheeks were hollow, wasted, and the feverish flush on each burned crimson in the dying light. Soon, the western rainbows—emerald, topaz, amethyst, ruby—faded into silver-gray. Above, through the deepening sapphire, the Moon and Venus reigned over the darkening sea.

"That must be Barbados, your worship," said Drew, the master. "Unless my reckoning is hopelessly wrong, which Heaven knows it has no right to be after such a voyage, and God be praised."

"Barbados? I've never heard of it."

"Likely enough, sir. Yeo and I were here with Captain Drake, and I returned afterward with poor Captain Barlow. I recall good harborage to the south and west."

"And free from Spaniards, cannibals, or other evil beasts," added Yeo. "A true garden of the Lord, hidden in the seas as an inheritance for those who love Him. I heard Captain Drake speak of planting it, should the chance ever arise."

"I remember now," said Amyas, "some talk between him and poor Sir Humphrey regarding an island here. God grant he had gone there instead of to Newfoundland!"

"Nay, then," replied Yeo. "He is in bliss now with the Lord; and you would not have kept him from that, sir?"

"He would have waited as willingly as he went, if he could have served his Queen thereby. But what say you, my masters? Is it not better to spend a few days here, to restore our sick, before we strike for the Main and begin our work?"

All approved the counsel except Frank, who remained silent.

"Come, fellow-adventurer," urged Cary. "We must have your voice too."

"To my impatience, Will," Frank replied softly, "there is but one place on earth, and I long daily for wings to fly thither. Yet the counsel is sound. I approve it."

The verdict was announced and met with a hearty cheer from the crew. Before morning, they had sailed along the southern shore and were feeling their way into the bay where Bridgetown now stands. All eyes were fixed on the low, wooded hills sleeping in the moonlight, spangled by fireflies like a million dancing stars. All nostrils drank greedily the fragrant air sweeping from the land, heavy with the scent of a thousand flowers; all ears welcomed the hum of insects, the snore of tree-toads, and the plaintive notes of shore-fowl, a noisy life that filled the tropic night.

At last, the ship stopped. The cable rattled through the hawsehole. Then, careless of lurking Spaniards or Caribs, an instinctive cheer burst from every throat. Poor fellows! Amyas had much ado to prevent them landing immediately in the darkness, reminding them that daylight was but two hours away.

"Never were two such long hours," complained a young lad, pacing restlessly.

"You never were in the Inquisition," retorted Yeo dryly, "or you'd know better how slow time can run. Stand still and give thanks you are where you are."

"I say, Gunner, is there gold on that island?"

"Never heard of any; and so much the better for it," Yeo replied.

"But, Gunner," asked a scurvy-stricken cripple, licking his lips, "are there oranges and lemons there?"

"Not that I've seen; but plenty of good fruit down to the beach, thank the Lord. Here comes the dawn at last."

The rose flushed upward, the sun rushed forth, and its level rays glittered on the smooth stems of the palms, throwing rainbows across the foam of the coral reefs and gilding lonely uplands far away. Long lines of pelicans clanged out to sea; the insect hum hushed, and a thousand birds burst into jubilant song. A thin blue mist crept upward toward the inner downs and vanished, leaving them to quiver in the burning glare. The land-breeze, which had blown fresh out to sea all night, died away into glassy calm, and the tropic day began.

The sick were lifted over the side and landed boat-load after boat-load on the beach, stretching themselves in the shade of the palms. Within half an hour, the whole crew was scattered on the shore, save for a dozen men who had volunteered to keep watch aboard until noon.

Now, the first instinctive cry of nature was for fruit! Fruit! Fruit! The poor, lame wretches crawled from place to place, plucking greedily the violet grapes of the creeping shore vine, staining their mouths and blistering their lips with prickly pears despite Yeo's entreaties. Some of the healthy began hewing down cocoa-nut trees, achieving little but blunting their hatchets. Till Yeo and Drew, having gathered half a dozen reasonable men, went inland and returned in an hour laden with the dainties of that primeval orchard—acid juniper-apples, luscious guavas, and crowned ananas, queen of all fruits, found by hundreds on the broiling ledges of the low tufa-cliffs. Then, sitting on the sandy turf, defiant of galliwasps and jackspaniards, they partook of an equal banquet. Old blue land-crabs sat in their house-doors, brandishing their fists in defiance, while solemn cranes stood in the shallow water with heads on one side, meditating on how long it had been since they had seen featherless bipeds breaking the solitude of their isle.

Frank wandered up and down, silent, more in wonder than sadness, while great Amyas walked after him, mouth full of juniper-apples, enacting the part of a showman with a patronizing air, as one who had seen the wonders already and was above being astonished.

"New, new; everything new!" Frank said meditatively. "Oh, awful feeling! All things changed around us, even to the tiniest fly and flower; yet we the same, the same forever!"

Amyas, to whom such utterances were altogether sibylline and unintelligible, answered:

"Look, Frank, that's a colibri. Have you heard of colibris?"

Frank looked at the living gem hanging, loud-humming, over some fantastic bloom, then dashed away, seemingly to call its mate, whirring and dancing round and round the flower-starred bushes, flashing fresh rainbows at every shift of light.

Frank watched solemnly for a while, then:

"Qualis Natura formatrix, si talis formata? Oh my God, how fair must be Thy real world, if even Thy phantoms are so fair!"

"Phantoms?" asked Amyas uneasily. "That's no ghost, Frank, but a jolly little honey-sucker, with a wee wife and children no bigger than peas, but yet solid, greedy little fellows enough, I'll warrant."

"Not phantoms in thy sense, good fellow, but in the sense of those who know the worthlessness of all below."

"I'll tell you what, brother Frank, you are a great deal wiser than me, I know; but I can't abide to see you turn up your nose as it were at God's good earth. See now, God made all these things; and never a man, perhaps, set eyes on them till fifty years ago; and yet they were as pretty as they are now, ever since the making of the world. And why do you think God could have put them here, then, but to please Himself"—Amyas took off his hat—"with the sight of them? Now, I say, brother Frank, what's good enough to please God is good enough to please you and me."

"Your rebuke is just, dear old simple-hearted fellow; and God forgive me, if with all my learning, which has brought me no profit, and my longings, which have brought me no peace, I presume at moments, sinner that I am, to be more dainty than the Lord Himself. He walked in Paradise among the trees of the garden, Amyas; and so will we, and be content with what He sends. Why should we long for the next world before we are fit even for this one?"

"And in the meanwhile," said Amyas, "this earth's quite good enough, at least here in Barbados."

"Do you believe," asked Frank, trying to turn his own thoughts, "in those tales of the Spaniards, that the Sirens and Tritons are heard singing in these seas?"

"I can't tell. There's more fish in the water than ever came out of it, and more wonders in the world, I'll warrant, than we ever dreamt of; but I was never in these parts before. In the South Sea, I must say, I never came across any, though Yeo says he has heard fair music at night up in the Gulf, far away from land."

"The Spaniards report that at certain seasons choirs of these nymphs assemble in the sea, and with ravishing music sing their watery loves. It may be so. For Nature, which has peopled the land with rational souls, may not have left the sea altogether barren of them; above all, when we remember that the ocean is as it were the very fount of all fertility, and its slime (as the most learned hold with Thales of Miletus) that *prima materia* out of which all things were one by one concocted. Therefore, the ancients feigned wisely that Venus, the mother of all living things, whereby they designed the plastic force of nature, was born of the sea-foam, and rising from the deep, floated ashore upon the isles of Greece."

"I don't know what plastic force is; but I wish I had had the luck to be by when the pretty poppet came up. However, the nearest thing I ever saw to that was maidens swimming alongside of us when we were in the South Seas, and would have come aboard, too; but Drake sent them all off again for a lot of naughty packs, and I verily believe they were no better. Look at the butterflies now! Don't you wish you were a boy again, and not too proud to go catching them in your cap?"

And so the two wandered on together through the glorious tropic woods, then returned to the beach to find the sick already grown cheerful, and many who that morning could not stir from their hammocks pacing up and down, gaining strength with every step.

"Well done, lads!" cried Amyas. "Keep a cheerful mind. We will have the music ashore after dinner, for want of mermaids to sing to us, and those that can dance may."

Thus those four days were spent. The men, like schoolboys on a holiday, gave themselves up to simple merriment, not forgetting, however, to wash clothes, take in fresh water, and store up a good supply of such fruit as seemed likely to keep. Until, tired with fruitless rambles after gold, which they expected to find in every bush despite Yeo's warnings that none had been heard of on the island, they were fain to lounge about, full-grown babies, picking up shells and sea-fans to take home to their sweethearts, smoking agoutis out of hollow trees with shout and laughter, and tormenting every living thing they could come near, till not a land-crab dared look out of his hole, or an armadillo unroll itself, till they were safe out of the bay and off again to the westward, unconscious pioneers of all the wealth, commerce, beauty, and science which has in later centuries made that lovely isle the richest gem of all the tropic seas.
