"My mariners,
Souls that have toil'd, and wrought, and thought with
me—Death closes all: but something ere the end,
Some work of noble note, may yet be done,
Not unbecoming men that strove with gods!"

TENNYSON'S Ulysses.

Nearly three years had slipped away since that small band knelt at evensong beneath the giant tree of Guayra. Years of apparent blankness, traceable only by scattered notes and misspelled names. Through untrodden hills and forests, spanning some eight hundred miles in length by four hundred in breadth, they had hunted for the Golden City, seeking in vain. They had searched along the wooded banks of the Orinoco, beyond the roaring foam of Maypures, and up the upper waters of the mighty Amazon. They had ascended streams into Peru itself, trampling the cinchona groves of Loxa, ignorant as the world then was of their healing virtues. They had witnessed the virgin snows of Chimborazo towering white above thunderclouds and the giant cone of Cotopaxi blackening in sullen wrath before fiery streams rolled down its sides. Foiled at the back of the Andes, they had turned eastward, plunging from alpine cliffs into "the green and misty ocean of the Montana." Slowly and painfully, they had worked their way northward again, along the eastern foot of the inland Cordillera, and now they bivouacked upon one of the many feeders of the Meta, flowing down from the Suma Paz into the forest-covered plains.

There they sat, their watch-fires glittering on the stream beneath enormous trees. Amyas and Cary, Brimblecombe, Yeo, and the Indian lad who had followed them through all their wanderings were alive and well; yet as far as ever from Manoa, its fairy lake, golden palaces, and the wonders of the Indian's tale. Again and again in their wanderings they had heard faint rumors of its existence, starting off in fresh directions only to meet fresh disappointment, a hope deferred that maketh sick the heart.

There they sat at last—forty-four men out of the eighty-four who left the tree of Guayra. Where were the rest?

"Their bones are scatter'd far and wide,
By mount, by stream, and sea."

Drew, the master, lay on the banks of the Rio Negro, five brave fellows by him, slain in fight by poisoned arrows in a vain attempt to penetrate the mountain-gorges of the Parima. Two more lay amid the valleys of the Andes, frozen to death by fierce slaty hail sweeping down from the condor's eyrie; four more were drowned at the rapids of the Orinoco; five or six wounded men remained behind at another rapid among friendly Indians, to be recovered perhaps never. Fever, snakes, jaguars, alligators, cannibal fish, electric eels, had thinned their ranks month by month. Of their march through the primeval wilderness no track remained except those lonely graves.

And there the survivors sat beside the silent stream beneath the tropic moon. Sun-dried and lean, yet strong and bold as ever, with the quiet fire of English courage burning undimmed in every eye and the genial smile of English mirth fresh on every lip. They made a jest of danger and a sport of toil, as cheerily as when they sailed over the bar of Bideford in days belonging to some antenatal life. Their beards had grown down upon their breasts; their long hair was knotted on their heads like women's to keep off the burning sunshine; their leggings were of the skin of the delicate Guazu-puti deer; their shirts were patched with Indian cotton web. The spoils of jaguar, puma, and ape hung from their shoulders. Their ammunition was long since spent; their muskets, spoiled by the perpetual vapor-bath of the steaming woods, were left behind as useless in a cave by some cataract of the Orinoco. But their swords were bright and terrible as ever, and they carried bows of a strength which no Indian arm could bend, arrows pointed with the remnants of their armor. Many were armed with the pocuna or blowgun of the Indians—more deadly, because more silent, than the firearms they had abandoned. Thus they had wandered, and thus they would wander still, the lords of the forest and its beasts; terrible to all hostile Indians, but kindly, just, and generous to all who dealt faithfully with them. Many a smooth-chinned Carib and Ature, Solimo and Guahiba, recounted with wonder and admiration the righteousness of the bearded heroes, who proclaimed themselves the deadly foes of the faithless and murderous Spaniard and spoke of the great and good queen beyond the seas, who would send her warriors to deliver and avenge the oppressed Indian.

The men slept among the trees, some on the ground, some in grass-hammocks slung between stems. All was silent save the heavy plunge of the tapir in the river as he tore up water-weeds for his night's repast. Sometimes the jaguar, climbing from tree-top to tree-top after his prey, awakened the monkeys clustered on the boughs, which again aroused the birds. Ten minutes of unearthly roars, howls, shrieks, and cacklings made the forest ring as if all pandemonium had broken loose; but that soon died away again. Even while it lasted, it was too common a matter to awaken the sleepers, much less to interrupt the council of war going on beside the watch-fire between the three adventurers and the faithful Yeo. A hundred times they had held such councils in vain, and for aught they knew, this one would be as fruitless as those gone before. Nevertheless, it was a more solemn one than usual, for the two years during which they had agreed to search for Manoa were long past, and some new place must be determined on unless they intended to spend the rest of their lives in that green wilderness.

"Well," said Will Cary, taking his cigar from his mouth, "at least we have got something out of those last Indians. It is a comfort to have a puff at tobacco once more, after three weeks' fasting."

"For me," said Jack Brimblecombe, "Heaven forgive me! but when I get the magical leaf between my teeth again, I feel tempted to sit as still as a chimney and smoke till my dying day without stirring hand or foot."

"Then I shall forbid you tobacco, Master Parson," said Amyas. "For we must be up and away again to-morrow. We have been idling here three mortal days, and nothing done."

"Shall we ever do anything? I think the gold of Manoa is like the gold which lies where the rainbow touches the ground, always a field beyond you."

Amyas was silent awhile, and so were the rest. There was no denying that their hopes were all but gone. In the immense circuit they had made, they had met with nothing but disappointment.

"There is but one more chance," said he at length. "That is the mountains to the east of the Orinoco, where we failed the first time. The Incas may have moved on to them when they escaped."

"Why not?" said Cary. "They would so put all the forests, beside the Llanos and half-a-dozen great rivers, between them and those dogs of Spaniards."

"Shall we try it once more?" said Amyas. "This river ought to run into the Orinoco; and once there, we are again at the very foot of the mountains. What say you, Yeo?"

"I cannot but mind, your worship, that when we came up the Orinoco, the Indians told us terrible stories of those mountains, how far they stretched, and how difficult they were to cross by reason of the cliffs aloft and the thick forests in the valleys. And have we not lost five good men there already?"

"What care we? No forests can be thicker than those we have bored through already. Why, if one had but a tail, like a monkey, for an extra warp, one might have gone a hundred miles on end along the tree-tops and found it far pleasanter walking than tripping in withes and being eaten up with creeping things from morn till night."

"But remember, too," said Jack, "how they told us to beware of the Amazons."

"What, Jack, afraid of a parcel of women?"

"Why not?" said Jack. "I wouldn't run from a man, as you know; but a woman—it's not natural, like. They must be witches or devils. See how the Caribs feared them. And there were men there without necks and with their eyes in their breasts, they said. Now how could a Christian tackle such customers as them?"

"He couldn't cut off their heads, that's certain; but I suppose a poke in the ribs will do as much for them as for their neighbors."

"Well," said Jack, "if I fight, let me fight honest flesh and blood, that's all, and none of these outlandish monsters. How do you know but that they are invulnerable by art-magic?"

"How do you know that they are? And as for the Amazons," said Cary, "woman's woman, all the world over. I'll bet that you may wheedle them round with a compliment or two, just as if they were so many burghers' wives. Pity I have not a court-suit and a Spanish hat. I would have taken an orange in one hand and a handkerchief in the other, gone all alone to them as ambassador, and been in a week as great with Queen Blackfacealinda as ever Raleigh is at Whitehall."

"Gentlemen!" said Yeo. "Where you go, I go; and not only I, but every man of us, I doubt not. But we have lost now half our company and spent our ammunition, so we are no better men, were it not for our swords, than these naked heathens round us. Now it was, as you all know, by the wonder and noise of their ordnance (let alone their horses, which is a break-neck beast I put no faith in) that both Cortez and Pizarro, those imps of Satan, made their golden conquests. With which if we could have astounded the people of Manoa—"

"Having first found the said people," laughed Amyas. "It is like the old fable. Every craftsman thinks his own trade the one pillar of the commonweal."

"Well! your worship," quoth Yeo, "it may be that being a gunner I overprize guns. But it don't need slate and pencil to do this sum—are forty men without shot as good as eighty with?"

"Thou art right, old fellow, right enough, and I was only jesting for very sorrow and must needs laugh about it lest I weep about it. Our chance is over, I believe, though I dare not confess as much to the men."

"Sir," said Yeo, "I have a feeling on me that the Lord's hand is against us in this matter. Whether He means to keep this wealth for worthier men than us, or whether it is His will to hide this great city in the secret place of His presence from the strife of tongues, and so to spare them from sinful man's covetousness, and England from that sin and luxury which I have seen gold beget among the Spaniards, I know not, sir; for who knoweth the counsels of the Lord? But I have long had a voice within which saith, 'Salvation Yeo, thou shalt never behold the Golden City which is on earth, where heathens worship sun and moon and the hosts of heaven; be content, therefore, to see that Golden City which is above, where is neither sun nor moon, but the Lord God and the Lamb are the light thereof.'"

There was a simple majesty about old Yeo when he broke forth in utterances like these, which made his comrades, and even Amyas and Cary, look on him as Mussulmans look on madmen, as possessed of mysterious knowledge and flashes of inspiration. Brimblecombe, whose pious soul looked up to the old hero with a reverence which had overcome all his Churchman's prejudices against Anabaptists, answered gently, "Amen! amen! my masters all: and it has been on my mind, too, this long time, that there is a providence against our going east; for see how this two years past, whenever we have pushed eastward, we have fallen into trouble and lost good men; and whenever we went Westward-ho, we have prospered; and do prosper to this day."

"And what is more, gentlemen," said Yeo, "if, as Scripture says, dreams are from the Lord, I verily believe mine last night came from Him. For as I lay by the fire, sirs, I heard my little maid's voice calling of me, as plain as ever I heard in my life; and the very same words, sirs, which she learned from me and my good comrade William Penberthy to say, 'Westward-ho! jolly mariners all!' a bit of an ungodly song, my masters, which we sang in our wild days; but she stood and called it as plain as ever mortal ears heard, and called again till I answered, 'Coming! my maid, coming!' and after that the dear chuck called no more—God grant I find her yet!--and so I woke."

Cary had long since given up laughing at Yeo about the "little maid"; and Amyas answered, "So let it be, Yeo, if the rest agree: but what shall we do to the westward?"

"Do?" said Cary. "There's plenty to do; for there's plenty of gold, and plenty of Spaniards, too, they say, on the other side of these mountains: so that our swords will not rust for lack of adventures, my gay knights-errant all."

So they chatted on; and before night was half through a plan was matured, desperate enough—but what cared those brave hearts for that? They would cross the Cordillera to Santa Fe de Bogota, of the wealth whereof both Yeo and Amyas had often
