The golden tropic sea stretched out before them, a shimmering expanse of living flame under the evening sky. On the shore of New Granada, the bay of Santa Marta rippled in the land-breeze, while the mighty forests sparkled with the light of myriad fireflies. High above, nineteen thousand feet aloft, the peak of Horqueta cleaved the dark-blue vault of heaven, its rose-red cone fading to a dull leaden hue as the stars began to flash out one by one. Venus, like a second moon, tinged the eastern snows with gold, casting a long, rippling line of light across the water. Everywhere was glory and richness; the heavens, hills, and sea formed a sparkling garland of jewels, leading one to wonder if the soil beneath was equally jewelled with emeralds, rubies, and grains of gold.

Inside the state cabin of the great galleon, *The City of the True Cross*, the Bishop of Cartagena sat in a state of holy calm. His stout figure rested on an easy-chair, his ankles propped on another, beside a table laden with the fruits of the Indies—oranges, limes, guavas, and pineapples. An Indian girl, bedizened with scarfs and gold chains, kept the flies at bay with a feather fan, while flasks of virtuous wine from Alicant stood in a pail of ice brought down from the Horqueta. The bishop was not alone; Don Pedro, the colonel; Don Alverez, the intendant; Don Paul, the captain of mariners; and two friars had gathered to comfort him regarding the unsatisfactory state of his cathedral town, which had just been sacked and burnt by an old friend of theirs, Sir Francis Drake.

"We have been great sufferers, señores," the bishop snuffled, quoting Scripture with a glibness that bordered on irreverence, his texts often travestied by his grumbling at the mosquitoes. "Great sufferers, truly; but there shall be a remnant... Ah! Gold? Yes, I trust Our Lady's mercies are not shut up. Look, señores!" He pointed majestically out the window. "It looks gold! It smells of gold. Yea, the very waves sing of gold!"

"It is a great privilege," said the intendant, "to have comfort so gracefully administered by a churchman and a scholar."

"A poet, too," added Don Pedro. "You have no notion what sweet sonnets—"

"Hush, Don Pedro," the bishop interrupted. "If I, a mateless bird, have spent an idle hour teaching lovers how to sing, what of that? I am a churchman, señores; but I am a man and I can feel. I can sympathize, palliate, excuse. Who knows better than I how much human nature lurks in us, fallen sons of Adam?" He turned to the trembling Indian girl. "Tita!"

"Um?" she grunted.

"Fill his excellency the intendant's glass. Does much more treasure come down, illustrious señor? May the poor of Mary hope for a few more crumbs?"

"Not a pezo, I fear," the bishop replied, pointing to the snow-capped Horqueta. "The big white cow up there has been milked dry for this year."

"Ah!" he looked up at the magnificent peak. "Only good to cool wine with, eh? And as safe for the time being as Solomon's birds."

"Solomon's birds? Explain your recondite allusion, my lord," the intendant requested.

The bishop launched into a tale of hoopoes who once wore golden crowns. He recounted how, at the court of King Solomon, the birds begged for crowns of feathers instead, for mankind hunted and trapped them so ruthlessly for the sake of gold that life had become a burden. Solomon granted their wish, and ever since, they lived merrily as crickets in an oven, bearing the name of the King.

"Then, friend," replied the other friar, a Dominican of darker and sterner complexion, "corrupt human nature would within a week discover some fresh bauble, for which to kill and be killed in vain."

"I merely remarked," the first friar, Fray Gerundio, interjected, "that it were well for the world if all mankind were to put up the same prayer as the hoopoes."

"World, sir? What do you know about the world?" the bishop scoffed, turning to the Dons. "Convert your Indians, sir, if you please, and leave affairs of state to your superiors. You will excuse him, señores. A very worthy and pious man, but a poor peasant's son; and besides—a little wrong here; too much fasting and watching, I fear, good man." He touched his forehead knowingly, signaling that Fray Gerundio's wits were in an unsatisfactory state.

The friar heard and saw with a quiet smile. He was one of those excellent men whom the cruelties of his countrymen had stirred up to deeds of love and pious daring. True Protestants in their own way, they protested against the evil nearest them; true liberals, they called the dark-skinned heathen their brothers; true martyrs, they bore witness of Christ, often receiving slander and contempt in return. Such an one was Fray Gerundio, a clumsy-tongued peasant's son who could never put three sentences together save when he waxed eloquent, crucifix in hand, amid groups of Indians or negroes. He was accustomed to such rebuffs as the bishop's; he took them for what they were worth and sipped his wine in silence.

"They say," observed the commandant, "that a very small Plate-fleet will go to Spain this year."

"What else?" said the intendant. "What have we to send, in the name of all saints, since these accursed English Lutherans have swept us out clean?"

"And if we had anything to send," said the sea-captain, "what have we to send it in? That fiend incarnate, Drake—"

"Ah!" said his holiness. "Spare my ears! Don Pedro, you will oblige my weakness by not mentioning that man; his name is Tartarean, unfit for polite lips. Draco—a dragon—the emblem of Diabolus himself! And the guardian of the golden apples of the West, who would fain devour our new Hercules, his most Catholic majesty. Deceived Eve, too, with one of those same apples—a very evil name, señores—a Tartarean name—Tita!"

"Um!"

"Fill my glass."

"Nay," cried the colonel, with a great oath, "this English fellow is of another breed of serpent from that, I warrant."

"Your reason, señor; your reason?"

"Because this one would have seen Eve at the bottom of the sea, before he let her, or any one but himself, taste aught which looked like gold."

The conversation drifted to the devastation of Cartagena, the loss of the blockhouse, and the shame of being beaten behind their own barricades. The bishop lamented the villainous trick of the ransom, recalling how Drake had dined with him, offered to convert him, and then demanded fresh ransom for the priory and the fort.

"Well," said the colonel, "they had the law of us, the cunning rascals, for we forgot to mention anything but the town in the agreement. Who would have dreamed of such a fetch?"

"So I told my good friend the prior," the bishop sighed. "It was Heaven's will. Unexpected like the thunderbolt, and to be borne as such. Every man must bear his own burden. How could I lend him aught?"

"Your holiness's money had been all carried off by them before," said the intendant, who knew the exact contrary.

"Just so—all my scanty savings! Desolate in my lone old age. Ah, señores, had we not had warning of the coming of these wretches from my dear friend the Marquess of Santa Cruz... we had been like to them who go down quick into the pit."

"Warning or none, we had no right to be beaten by such a handful," said the sea-captain. "And a shame it is, and a shame it will be, for many a day to come."

"Do you mean to cast any slur, sir, upon the courage and conduct of his Catholic majesty's soldiers?" asked the colonel.

"I?—No; but we were foully beaten, and that behind our barricades too, and there's the plain truth."

"Beaten, sir! Do you apply such a term to the fortunes of war? What more could our governor have done? Had we not the ways filled with poisoned caltrops, guarded by Indian archers, barred with butts full of earth, raked with culverins and arquebuses? What familiar spirit had we, sir, to tell us that these villains would come along the sea-beach, and not by the high-road, like Christian men?"

"Ah!" said the bishop. "It was by intuition diabolic, I doubt not, that they took that way. Satanas must need help those who serve him; and for my part, I can only attribute the misfortune which occurred to art-magic. I believe these men to have been possessed by all fiends whatsoever."

"Well, your holiness," said the colonel, "there may have been devilry in it; how else would men have dared to run right into the mouths of our cannon, fire their shot against our very noses, and tumble harmless over those huge butts of earth?"

"Doubtless by force of the fiends which raged with them," interposed the bishop.

"And then, with their blasphemous cries, leap upon us with sword and pike? I myself saw that Lieutenant-General Carlisle hew down with one stroke that noble young gentleman the ensign-bearer, your excellency's sister's son's nephew, though he was armed cap-a-pie. Was not art-magic here? And that most furious and blaspheming Lutheran Captain Young, I saw how he caught our general by the head, after the illustrious Don Alonzo had given him a grievous wound, threw him to the earth, and so took him. Was not art-magic here?"

"Well, I say," said the captain, "if you are looking for art-magic, what say you to their marching through the flank fire of our galleys, with eleven pieces of ordnance, and two hundred shot playing on them, as if it had been a mosquito swarm? Some said my men fired too high: but that was the English rascals' doing, for they got down on the tide beach. But, señor commandant, though Satan may have taught them that trick, was it he that taught them to carry pikes a foot longer than yours?"

"Ah, well," said the bishop, "sacked are we; and San Domingo, as I hear, in worse case than we are; and St. Augustine in Florida likewise; and all that is left for a poor priest like me is to return to Spain, and see whether the pious clemency of his majesty... may not be willing to grant some small relief or bounty to the poor of Mary—perhaps—to translate to a sphere of more peaceful labor one who is now old, señores, and weary with many toils—Tita! fill our glasses. I have saved somewhat—as you may have done, señores, from the general wreck; and for the flock, when I am no more, illustrious señores, Heaven's mercies are infinite; new cities will rise from the ashes of the old, new mines pour forth their treasures into the sanctified laps of the faithful, and new Indians flock toward the life-giving standard of the Cross, to put on the easy yoke and light burden of the Church, and—"

"And where shall I be then? Ah, where? Fain would I rest, and fain depart. Tita! sling my hammock. Señores, you will excuse age and infirmities. Fray Gerundio, go to bed!"

And the Dons rose to depart, while the bishop went on maundering, "Farewell! Life is short. Ah! we shall meet in heaven at last. And there are really no more pearls?"

"Not a frail; nor gold either," said the intendant.

"Ah, well! Better a dinner of herbs where love is, than—Tita!"

"My breviary—ah! Man's gratitude is short-lived, I had hoped—you have seen nothing of the Señora Bovadilla?"

"No."

"Ah! she promised—but no matter—a little trifle as a keepsake—a gold cross, or an emerald ring, or what not—I forget. And what have I to do with worldly wealth!—Ah! Tita! bring me the casket."

And when his guests were gone, the old man began mumbling prayers out of his breviary, and fingering over jewels and gold, with the dull greedy eyes of covetous old age. "Ah!—it may buy the red hat yet!—Omnia Romae venalia! Put it by, Tita, and do not look at it too much, child. Enter not into temptation. The love of money is the root of all evil; and Heaven, in love for the Indian, has made him poor in this world, that he may be rich in faith. Ah!—Ugh!—So!"

And the old miser clambered into his hammock. Tita drew the mosquito net over him, wrapped another round her own head, and slept, or seemed to sleep; for she coiled herself up upon the floor, and master and slave soon snored a merry bass to the treble of the mosquitoes.

It was long past midnight, and the moon was down. The sentinels, who had tramped and challenged overhead till they thought their officers were sound asleep, had slipped out of the unwholesome rays of the planet to seek that health and peace which they considered their right, and slept as soundly as the bishop's self.

Two long lines glided out from behind the isolated rocks of the Morro Grande, which bounded the bay some five hundred yards astern of the galleon. They were almost
