"All precious things, discover'd late,
To them who seek them issue forth;
For love in sequel works with fate,
And draws the veil from hidden worth."

The Sleeping Beauty.

Thus Ayacanora took her place within Lucy's cabin, accepted as a full and accredited member of the crew. Yet she proved a most troublesome addition to the household. For now began in her that perilous crisis which threatens the bodies and souls of all savages when they first mingle with the white man—a crisis that, a few years hence, would hasten the extermination of the North American tribes. Had it not been for the admirable good sense and constancy of Amyas, Ayacanora might have met a fate even more miserable than that of Pocahontas, the daughter of the Virginian king. After being received at Court by the pedantic James the First with the honors of a sister sovereign, and becoming the reputed ancestress of many ancient families, she had ended her days in wretchedness in a garret in Wapping.

The mind of the savage, crushed by the sight of the white man's superior skill, wealth, and wisdom, loses at first its self-respect. While his body, pampered with easily obtained luxuries, ceases to win the necessaries of life through heavy toil, it loses its self-helpfulness. With self-respect and self-help vanish all the savage virtues, few and flimsy as they are, and the downward road toward begging, stealing, sottishness, and idleness becomes easy, if not inevitable.

It seemed at first that poor Ayacanora walked swiftly down this road. The warrior-prophetess of the Omaguas soon appeared to be nothing more than a very naughty child. The Diana of the Meta, after satisfying her simple wonder at the great floating house by roaming from deck to deck and peeping into every cupboard and cranny, manifested a great propensity to steal and hide every trifle that smited her fancy (she was too proud or too shy to ask). When Amyas forbade her to take anything without leave, she threatened to drown herself and sulked all day in her cabin. Nevertheless, she obeyed him, except regarding sweet things. Perhaps she craved naturally the vegetable food of her native forests; at all events, the Bishop's stores of fruit and sweetmeats diminished rapidly. Worse still, so did the sweet Spanish wine Amyas had set apart for poor Lucy's daily cordial.

Upon this, Amyas delivered another severe lecture, telling her how mean it was to rob poor sick Lucy. Whereat she, as usual, threatened to drown herself. Running upon deck to do so, she was caught by Amyas and forgiven. This was followed by a violent fit of crying, great penitence, and promises. A week later, Amyas found she had cheated Satan and her own conscience by tormenting the Portuguese steward into giving her other wine. Luckily for her, she found Amyas's warnings about wine making her mad so far fulfilled that she did several foolish things one evening and suffered a bad headache the next morning. Thus the murder was out, and Amyas ordered the steward up for a sound flogging. But Ayacanora, honorably enough, not only begged him off but offered to be whipped instead, confessing that the poor fellow spoke truly when he swore she had threatened to kill him and that he had given her the wine in bodily fear for his life.

However, her own headache and Amyas's cold looks served as lesson enough. After another attempt to drown herself, the wilful beauty settled down for a while; and what was better, she could hardly be persuaded, thenceforth to her dying day, to touch fermented liquors.

But in the meanwhile, poor Amyas had many a brains-beating as to how he was to tame a lady who, on the least provocation, took refuge in suicide. Punish her he dared not, even if he had the heart. As for putting her ashore, he had an instinct, surely not a superstitious one, that her strange affection for the English was not unsent by Heaven, and that God had committed her into his charge, requiring an account at his hands of the soul of that fair lost lamb.

So, almost at his wits' end, he prayed to God, good simple fellow, many a time to show him what he should do with her before she killed either herself or one of the crew. It seemed best to him to have Parson Jack teach her the rudiments of Christianity, that she might be baptized in due time when they reached England.

But here arose a fresh trouble—for she roundly refused to learn of Jack or anyone but Amyas himself. While he had many good reasons for refusing the office of schoolmaster, for a week or two more Ayacanora remained untaught, save in the English tongue, which she picked up with marvellous rapidity.

Next, as if troubles would never end, she took a violent dislike not only to John Brimblecombe, whose gait and voice she openly mimicked for the edification of the men, but also to Will Cary, whom she never allowed to speak to her or approach her. Perhaps she was jealous of his intimacy with Amyas; or perhaps, with the subtle instinct of a woman, she knew he was the only other man on board who might dare to make love to her (though Will, to do him justice, was as guiltless of any such intention as Amyas himself). But when remonstrated with, her only answer was that Cary was a cacique as well as Amyas, and that there ought not to be two caciques. One day she actually proposed to Amyas to kill his supposed rival and take the ship all to himself, sulking for several days at hearing Amyas, amid shouts of laughter, retail her precious advice to its intended victim.

Moreover, the negroes came in for their share, being regarded by her with an unspeakable repugnance. This showed itself first in hiding from them whenever she could, and afterwards in throwing at them everything she could lay hands on, till the poor Quashies, in danger of their lives, complained to Amyas and got rest for a while.

Over the rest of the sailors she lorded it like a very princess, calling them from their work to run on her errands and make toys for her, enforcing her commands now and then by a shrewd box on the ear. While the good fellows, especially old Yeo, like true sailors, petted her, obeyed her, and even jested with her, much as they might have done with a tame leopard whose claws might be unsheathed about their ears at any moment. But she amused them, and amused Amyas too. They must of course have a pet; and what prettier one could they have? As for Amyas, the constant interest of her presence, even the constant anxiety of her wilfulness, kept his mind busy and drove out many a sad foreboding about that meeting with his mother and the tragedy he had to tell her, which would otherwise, so heavily did they weigh on him, have crushed his spirit with melancholy and made all his worldly success and marvellous deliverance worthless in his eyes.

At last the matter, as most things luckily do, came to a climax.

The ship had been slipping along for many days, slowly but steadily before a favorable breeze. She had passed the ring of the West India islands and was now crawling, safe from all pursuit, through the vast weed-beds of the Sargasso Sea. There, for the first time, it was thought safe to relax the discipline hitherto kept up and to "rummage" their noble prize. What they found of gold and silver, jewels, and merchandise will interest no readers. Suffice it to say that there was enough, with the other treasure, to make Amyas rich for life after all claims of Cary's and the crew, not forgetting Mr. Salterne's third as owner of the ship, had been paid off. But in the captain's cabin were found two chests, one full of gorgeous Mexican feather dresses and the other of Spanish and East Indian finery, which, having come by way of Havana and Cartagena, seemed destined for some senora at Caracas.

Which two chests were, at Cary's proposal, voted amid the acclamations of the crew to Ayacanora as her due and fit share of the pillage, in consideration of her Amazonian prowess and valuable services.

So the poor child took greedy possession of the trumpery, had them carried into Lucy's cabin, and there knelt gloating over them many an hour. The Mexican work she chose to despise as savage; but the Spanish dresses were a treasure. For two or three days she appeared on the quarter-deck, sunning herself like a peacock before the eyes of Amyas in Seville mantillas, Madrid hats, Indian brocade farthingales, and countless other gewgaws, dare not say how put on.

The crew tittered; Amyas felt much more inclined to cry. There is nothing so pathetic as a child's vanity, saving a grown person aping a child's vanity; and saving, too, a child's agony of disappointment when it finds that it has been laughed at instead of being admired. Amyas would have spoken, but he was afraid. However, the evil brought its own cure. The pageant went on, as its actor thought, most successfully for three days or so; but at last the dupe, unable to contain herself longer, appealed to Amyas—"Ayacanora quite English girl now; is she not?"—heard a titter behind her, looked round, saw a dozen honest faces in broad grin, comprehended all in a moment, darted down the companion-ladder, and vanished.

Amyas, fully expecting her to jump overboard, followed as fast as he could. But she had locked herself in with Lucy, and he could hear her violent sobs and Lucy's faint voice entreating to know what was the matter.

In vain he knocked. She refused to come out all day, and at even they were forced to break the door open to prevent Lucy being starved.

There sat Ayacanora, her finery half torn off and scattered about the floor in spite, crying still as if her heart would break; while poor Lucy cried too, half from fright and hunger, and half for company.

Amyas tried to comfort the poor child, assured her that the men should never laugh at her again. "But then," added he, "you must not be so—so—" What to say he hardly knew.

"So what?" asked she, crying more bitterly than ever.

"So like a wild girl, Ayacanora."

Her hands dropped on her knees; a strong spasm ran through her throat and bosom, and she fell on her knees before him, looking up imploringly in his face.

"Yes; wild girl—poor, bad wild girl... But I will be English girl now!"

"Fine clothes will never make you English, my child," said Amyas.

"No! Not English clothes—English heart! Good heart, like yours! Yes, I will be good, and Sir John shall teach me!"

"There's my good maid," said Amyas. "Sir John shall begin and teach you to-morrow."

"No! Now! Now! Ayacanora cannot wait. She will drown herself if she is bad another day! Come, now!"

And she made him fetch Brimblecombe, heard the honest fellow patiently for an hour or more, and told Lucy that very night all that he had said. And from that day, whenever Jack went in to read and pray with the poor sufferer, Ayacanora, instead of escaping on deck as before, stood patiently trying to make it all out, and knelt when he knelt, and tried to pray too—that she might have an English heart; and doubtless her prayers, dumb as they were, were not unheard.

So went on a few days more, hopefully enough, without any outbreak, till one morning, just after they had passed the Sargasso-beds. The ship was taking care of herself; the men were all on deck under the awning, tinkering, cobbling, and chatting; Brimblecombe was catechising his fair pupil in the cabin; Amyas and Cary, cigar in mouth, were chatting about all heaven and earth, and, above all, of the best way of getting up a fresh adventure against the Spaniards as soon as they returned, while Amyas was pouring out to Will that dark hatred of the whole nation, that dark purpose of revenge for his brother and for Rose, which had settled down like a murky cloud into every cranny of his heart and mind.

Suddenly there was a noise below; a scuffle and a shout, which made them both leap to their feet. Up on deck rushed Jack Brimblecombe, holding his head on with both his hands.

"Save me! Save me from that she-fiend! She is possessed with a legion! She has broken my nose—torn out half my hair—and I'm sure I have none to spare! Here she comes! Stand by me, gentlemen both! Satanas, I defy thee!" And Jack ensconced himself behind the pair as Ayacanora whirled upon deck like a very Maenad, and, seeing Amyas, stopped short.

"If you had defied Satan down below there," said Cary, with a laugh, "I suspect he wouldn't have broken out on you so boldly, Master Jack."

"I am innocent—innocent as the babe unborn! Oh! Mr. Cary! This is too bad of you, sir!" quoth Jack indignantly, while Amyas asked what was the matter.

"He looked at me," said she, sturdily.

"Well, a cat may look at a king."

"But he sha'n't look at Ayacanora. Nobody shall but you, or I'll kill him!"

In vain Jack protested his innocence of having even looked at her. The fancy (and I verily believe it was nothing more) had taken possession of her. She refused to return below to her lesson. Jack went off grumbling, minus his hair, and wore a black eye for a week after.

"At all events," quoth Cary, re-lighting his cigar, "it's a fault on the right side."

"God give me grace, or it may be one on the wrong side for me."

"He
