"Oh, where be these gay Spaniards,
Which make so great a boast O?
Oh, they shall eat the gray-goose feather,
And we shall eat the roast O!"

Cornish Song.

Imagine the spectators who, last summer, stood with swelling pride before the noble port of Plymouth. They beheld the vast breakwater spanning the Sound, the arsenals and docks, the twin estuaries teeming with gallant ships, and watched the great screw-liners turning within their own length by invisible force, threading crowded fleets with the ease of a toy boat. Now, imagine if, by some magical reversal, the nineteenth century—with all its magnificence of wealth and science—vanished as surely as it may vanish hereafter. Suppose they found themselves cast back three hundred years into the pleasant summer days of 1588.

Mount Edgecombe remains, beautiful as ever. But where are the docks? Where is Devonport? No vast dry-dock roofs rise at the water's edge. Drake's Island carries but a paltry battery, freshly raised by the man whose name it bears; Mount Wise is a lone gentleman's house amidst the fields; the citadel is a pop-gun fort that a third-class steamer would shell into rubble for an afternoon's amusement. And the shipping? The floating castles of the Hamoaze have dwindled to a few crawling lime-hoys. The Catwater is packed, not as it is now with merchant craft, but with the ships that will, tomorrow, begin the greatest sea-fight the world has ever seen.

To modern eyes, they are a paltry squadron. The largest vessel is not equal in size to a thirty-six-gun frigate, carries less weight of metal than one of our new gun-boats, and can employ that weight at no more than a quarter of our modern range. Would our modern spectators, arriving by rail for a few hours to witness the cavalry embark and returning in time for dinner, look down upon that petty port and fleet with a contemptuous smile? Would they begin some flippant speech about the progress of intellect and the triumphs of science, regarding our benighted ancestors as a raree-show to feed their silly wonder? Doubtless, they would, if they belonged to the many who gaze on such triumphs without thankfulness or understanding, like an ox eating clover thrust into his rack without knowing how it grew.

But if any of them were of the class by whom those very triumphs have been achieved—the thinkers and workers who labor themselves, knowing by hard experience the struggles, self-restraints, and disappointments by which the discoverer reaches his prize—then their smile would not be one of pity, but of filial love. For they would see in those outwardly paltry armaments the potential germ of the mightier power that now loads the Black Sea waves. They would be aware that to produce it, with the materials and knowledge of that time, demanded an intellect, an energy, and a spirit of progress equal, if not superior, to those of which we now so loudly boast.

Yet, if he had been a student of men rather than of machinery, he would have found few nobler companies to exercise his discernment than those gathered on the little terrace bowling-green behind the Pelican Inn on the afternoon of July nineteenth. Chatting in groups or lounging over the low wall commanding a view of the Sound and the shipping far below were almost every notable man of the Plymouth fleet, the entire *posse comitatus* of "England's forgotten worthies." The Armada had been scattered by a storm; Lord Howard had sought it as far as the Spanish coast, but the wind had shifted south, and fearing the Dons might pass him, he had returned to Plymouth, uncertain if the Armada would come at all. Slip on for a while the drawer's apron, enter through the rose-clad door with a tray of long-necked Dutch glasses and a silver tankard of wine, and look around at the gallant captains waiting for the Spanish Armada, like lions in their lair waiting for the passing herd of deer.

See those five talking earnestly in the center of a ring that longs to overhear yet is too respectful to approach. Those soft, long eyes and pointed chin are Walter Raleigh's. The fair young man in the flame-colored doublet, whose arm is round Raleigh's neck, is Lord Sheffield. Opposite them stands, beside Sir Richard Grenville, a man as stately even as he, Lord Sheffield's uncle, Lord Charles Howard of Effingham, Lord High Admiral of England; next to him is his son-in-law, Sir Robert Southwell, captain of the *Elizabeth Jonas*. But who is that short, sturdy, plainly dressed man standing with legs apart and hands behind his back, looking up with keen gray eyes into the face of each speaker? His cap is in his hands, revealing a bullet-shaped head of crisp brown hair and a wrinkled forehead, high cheekbones, a short square face, broad temples, and thick lips firm as granite. A coarse plebeian stamp of man, yet the whole figure and attitude radiate boundless determination, self-possession, and energy. When he finally speaks a few blunt words, all eyes turn respectfully upon him—for his name is Francis Drake.

A burly, grizzled elder in greasy, sea-stained garments, contrasting oddly with the huge gold chain about his neck, waddles up as if born and living ever since in a gale at sea. The upper half of his sharp, dogged visage seems of brick-red leather, the lower of badger's fur. As he claps Drake on the back and, with a broad Devon twang, shouts, "Be you a coming to drink your wine, Francis Drake, or be you not?—saving your presence, my lord," the Lord High Admiral only laughs and bids Drake go and drink his wine. For John Hawkins, Admiral of the Port, is the patriarch of Plymouth seamen; if Drake is their hero, Hawkins is their grandfather, and he says and does pretty much what he likes in any company on earth. Not to mention that today's prospect of an Armageddon fight has shaken him altogether out of his usual crabbed reserve, making him overflow with loquacious good-humor, even toward his rival Drake.

So they push through the crowd, wherein is many another man whom one would gladly have spoken with face to face on earth. Martin Frobisher and John Davis sit on that bench smoking tobacco from long silver pipes; by them are Fenton and Withrington, who have both tried to follow Drake's path round the world and failed, though by no fault of their own. The man who pledges them better luck next time is George Fenner, known to "the seven Portugals," Leicester's pet, and captain of the galleon which Elizabeth bought of him. That short, prim man in the huge yellow ruff, with sharp chin, minute imperial, and self-satisfied smile, is Richard Hawkins, the Complete Seaman, Admiral John's hereafter famous and hapless son. The elder talking with him is his good uncle William, whose monument still stands—or should stand—in Deptford Church; for Admiral John set it up there but one year after this time, recording how he was "a worshipper of the true religion, an especial benefactor of poor sailors, a most just arbiter in most difficult causes, and of a singular faith, piety, and prudence." That, and the fact that he got creditably through some sharp work at Porto Rico, is all I know of William Hawkins: but if you or I, reader, can have as much or half as much said of us when we have to follow him, we shall have no reason to complain.

There is John Drake, Sir Francis' brother, ancestor of the present stock of Drakes; and there is George, his nephew, a man not overwise who has been round the world with Amyas. And there is Amyas himself, talking to one who answers him with fierce, curt sentences, Captain Barker of Bristol, brother of the hapless Andrew Barker who found John Oxenham's guns and, owing to a mutiny among his men, perished by the Spaniards in Honduras twelve years ago. Barker is now captain of the *Victory*, one of the Queen's best ships, and he has his accounts to settle with the Dons, as Amyas has; so they are both growling together in a corner while all the rest are as merry as flies upon the vine above their heads.

But who is the aged man sitting upon a bench against the sunny south wall of the tavern, his long white beard flowing almost to his waist, his hands upon his knees, his palsied head moving slowly from side to side to catch the scraps of discourse of the passing captains? His great-grandchild, a little maid of six, has laid her curly head upon his knees, and his granddaughter, a buxom black-eyed dame of thirty, stands by him, tending him half as nurse and half as showman, for he seems an object of curiosity to all the captains. His fair nurse has to entreat again and again, "Bless you, sir, please now, don't give him no liquor, poor old soul, the doctor says." It is old Martin Cockrem, father of the ancient host, aged himself beyond the years of man, who can recollect the bells of Plymouth ringing for the coronation of Henry the Eighth, and who was perhaps the first Englishman ever to set foot on the soil of the New World. There he sits, like an old Druid Tor of primeval granite amid the tall wheat and rich clover crops of a modern farm. He has seen the death of old Europe and the birth-throes of the new.

Go to him and question him, for his senses are quick as ever. Just now, the old man seems uneasy. He peers with rheumy eyes through the groups, listening for a well-known voice.

"There 'a be again! Why don't 'a come, then?"

"Quiet, gramfer, and don't trouble his worship."

"Here an hour, and never speak to poor old Martin! I say, sir"—and the old man feebly plucks Amyas's cloak as he passes—"I say, captain, do 'e tell young master old Martin's looking for him."

"Marcy, gramfer, where's your manners? Don't be vexed, sir, he'm a'most a babe, and tejous at times, mortal."

"Young master who?" says Amyas, bending down to the old man and smiling to the dame to let him have his way.

"Master Hawkins; he'm never been a-near me all day."

Off goes Amyas; of course, he lays hold of the sleeve of young Richard Hawkins. But as he is in act to speak, the dame lays hold of his, laughing and blushing.

"No, sir, not Mr. Richard, sir; Admiral John, sir, his father; he always calls him young master, poor old soul!" and she points to the grizzled beard and the face scarred and tanned with fifty years of fight and storm.

Amyas goes to the Admiral and gives his message.

"Mercy on me! Where be my wits? Iss, I'm a-coming," says the old hero in his broadest Devon, waddling off to the old man and beginning to lug at a pocket. "Here, Martin, I've got mun, I've got mun, man alive; but his Lordship keept me so. Lookee here, then! Why, I do get so lusty of late, Martin, I can't get to my pockets!"

And out struggle a piece of tarred string, a bundle of papers, a thimble, a piece of pudding-tobacco, and last of all, a little paper of Muscovado sugar—then as great a delicacy as any French bonbons would be now—which he thrusts into the old man's eager and trembling hand.

Old Martin begins dipping his finger into it, rubbing it on his toothless gums, smiling and nodding thanks to his young master; while the little maid at his knee, unrebuked, takes her share also.

"There, Admiral Leigh; both ends meet—gramfers and babies! You and I shall be like to that one day, young Samson!"

"We shall have slain a good many Philistines first, I hope."

"Amen! so be it; but look to mun! so fine a sailor as ever drank liquor; and now greedy after a hit of sweet trade! 'Tis piteous like; but I bring mun a hit whenever I come, and he looks for it. He's one of my own flesh like, is old Martin. He sailed with my father Captain Will, when they was both two little cracks aboard of a trawler; and my father went up, and here I am—he didn't, and there he is. We'm up now, we Hawkinses. We may be down again some day."

"Never, I trust," said Amyas.

"'Tain't no use trusting, young man: you go and do. I do hear too much of that there from my lad. Let they ministers preach till they'm black in the face, works is the trade!" with a nudge in Amyas's ribs. "Faith can't save, nor charity nether. There, you tell with him, while I go play bowls with Drake. He'll tell you a sight of stories. You ask him about good King Hal, now, just—"

And off waddled the Port Admiral.

"You have seen good King Henry, then, father?" said Amyas, interested.

The old man's eyes lighted at once, and he stopped mumbling his sugar.

"Seed mun? Iss, I reckon. I was with Captain Will when he went to meet the Frenchman there to Calais—at the Field, the Field—"

"The Field of the Cloth of Gold, gramfer," suggested the dame.

"That's it. Seed mun? Iss, fegs. Oh, he was a king! The face o' mun like a rising sun, and the back o' mun so broad as that there" (and he held out his palsied arms), "and the voice of mun! Oh, to hear mun swear if he was merry, oh, 'tas royal!--Seed mun? Iss, feg
