From Munich, where he had traveled immediately after submitting his final report on the Manderson case to *The Record*, Trent penned a letter to Sir James Molloy. "I am returning the cheque you sent for what I did on the Manderson case," he wrote. "What I sent you wasn't worth one-tenth of the amount; but I should have no scruple about pocketing it if I hadn't taken a fancy—not to touch any money at all for this business. I should like you, if there is no objection, to pay for the stuff at your ordinary space-rate, and hand the money to some charity which does not devote itself to bullying people, if you know of any such."

"I have come to this place to see some old friends and arrange my ideas," Trent continued, "and the idea that comes out uppermost is that for a little while I want some employment with activity in it. I find I can't paint at all: I couldn't paint a fence. Will you try me as your Own Correspondent somewhere? If you can find me a good adventure I will send you good accounts. After that I could settle down and work."

Sir James responded via telegram, instructing Trent to proceed at once to Kurland and Livonia, where Citizen Browning was once again abroad amidst a town and countryside blazing in revolt. It was a roving commission, and for two months Trent followed his luck. It served him not less well than usual. He was the only correspondent who witnessed General Dragilew killed in the street at Volmar by a girl of eighteen. He saw burnings, lynchings, fusillades, hangings; each day his soul sickened anew at the imbecilities born of misrule. Many nights he lay down in danger. Many days he went fasting. But there was never an evening or a morning when he did not see the face of the woman whom he hopelessly loved.

He discovered within himself an unhappy pride regarding the enduring force of this infatuation. It intrigued him as a phenomenon, amassing and enlightening him. Such a thing had not visited him before. It confirmed so many doubts he had harbored concerning the recorded experiences of men.

At thirty-two, Trent could not pretend ignorance of this world of emotion. What he had learned had come unpursued and unpurchased, devoid of intolerable memories. Broken to the realities of sex, he remained troubled by its inscrutable history. He lived with a strange respect for certain feminine weaknesses and a profound, simple terror of certain feminine strengths. He had maintained a lukewarm faith that something remained within him to be called forth, and that the voice summoning it would be heard in its own time, if ever, and not through any seeking.

Yet, he had not anticipated the possibility that, if this proved true, the truth might arrive in a sinister shape. The two elements that had utterly surprised him regarding his feelings toward Mabel Manderson were the insane suddenness of its uprising and its extravagant hopelessness. Before it struck, he had been prone to laugh at the permanence of unrequited passion as a generous boyish delusion. Now, he knew he had been wrong, and he lived bitterly with that knowledge.

In his imagination, the woman always appeared exactly as she had when he first laid eyes on her, performing the gesture he had spotted as he walked past unseen on the edge of the cliff. It was a great gesture of passionate joy in her newfound liberty, telling him more clearly than speech that her widowhood was a release from torment, and confirming with terrible force the suspicion active in his mind prior—that it was her passport to happiness with a man she loved. He could not certainly name the moment he first suspected this, but he believed the seed of the thought must have been sown at his first meeting with Marlowe. His mind would have automatically noted that such evident strength and grace, paired with the looks and manners of the tall young man, might go far with any woman of unfixed affections. The connection of this with what Mr. Cupples had told him of the Mandersons' married life must have formed itself in the unconscious depths of his mind. Certainly, it presented itself as an established fact when he began, after verifying the murderer's identity, to cast about for the motive of the crime.

*Motive, motive!* How desperately he had sought for another, turning his back upon the grim thought that Marlowe—obsessed by passion like himself, and perhaps privy to maddening truths about the wife's unhappiness—had taken a leaf, the guiltiest, from the book of Bothwell. But in all his investigations at the time, in all his broodings thereafter, he had discovered nothing to prompt Marlowe to such a deed—nothing but that temptation, the whole strength of which he could not know, but which, if it had existed, must have pressed urgently upon a bold spirit in which scruple had been somehow paralyzed. If he could trust his senses at all, the young man was neither insane nor by nature evil. But that could not clear him. Murder for a woman's sake, he thought, was not a rare crime, Heaven knew! If the modern feebleness of impulse in the comfortable classes, and their respect for the modern apparatus of detection, had made it rare among them, it was yet far from impossible. It only needed a man of equal daring and intelligence, his soul drugged with the vapors of an intoxicating intrigue, to plan and perform such a deed.

A thousand times, with a heart full of anguish, he had sought to reason away the dread that Mabel Manderson had known too much of what had been intended against her husband's life. That she knew all the truth after the act was done he could not doubt; her unforgettable collapse in his presence when the question about Marlowe was suddenly and bluntly put had swept away his last hope that there was no love between the pair, and seemed to him, moreover, to speak of dread of discovery. In any case, she knew the truth after reading what he had left with her; and it was certain that no public suspicion had been cast upon Marlowe since. She had destroyed his manuscript, then, and taken him at his word to keep the secret that threatened her lover's life.

But it was the monstrous thought that she might have known murder was brewing, and guiltily kept silence, that haunted Trent's mind. She might have suspected, have guessed something; was it conceivable that she was aware of the whole plot, that she connived? He could never forget that his first suspicion of Marlowe's motive in the crime had been roused by the fact that his escape was made through the lady's room. At that time, when he had not yet seen her, he had been ready enough to entertain the idea of her equal guilt and her cooperation. He had pictured to himself some passionate *hystérique*, merciless as a cat in her hate and her love, a zealous abettor, perhaps even the ruling spirit in the crime.

Then he had seen her, had spoken with her, had helped her in her weakness; and such suspicions, since their first meeting, had seemed the vilest of infamy. He had seen her eyes and her mouth; he had breathed the woman's atmosphere. Trent was one of those who fancy they can scent true wickedness in the air. In her presence, he had felt an inward certainty of her ultimate goodness of heart; and it was nothing against this that she had abandoned herself a moment, that day on the cliff, to the sentiment of relief at the ending of her bondage, of her years of starved sympathy and unquickened motherhood. That she had turned to Marlowe in her destitution he believed; that she had any knowledge of his deadly purpose he did not believe.

And yet, morning and evening, the sickening doubts returned, and he recalled again that it was almost in her presence that Marlowe had made his preparations in the bedroom of the murdered man, that it was by the window of her own chamber that he had escaped from the house. Had he forgotten his cunning and taken the risk of telling her then? Or had he, as Trent thought more likely, still played his part with her then, and stolen off while she slept? He did not think she had known of the masquerade when she gave evidence at the inquest; it read like honest evidence. Or—the question would never be silenced, though he scorned it—had she lain expecting the footsteps in the room and the whisper that should tell her that it was done? Among the foul possibilities of human nature, was it possible that black ruthlessness and black deceit as well were hidden behind that good and straight and gentle seeming?

These thoughts would scarcely leave him when he was alone.

Trent served Sir James well, earning his pay for six months, and then returned to Paris, where he resumed work with a better heart. His powers had returned to him, and he began to live more happily than he had expected among a tribe of strangely assorted friends—French, English, and American artists, poets, journalists, policemen, hotel-keepers, soldiers, lawyers, businessmen, and others. His old faculty of sympathetic interest in his fellows won for him, just as in his student days, privileges seldom extended to the Briton. He enjoyed again the rare experience of being taken into the bosom of a Frenchman's family. He was admitted to the momentous confidence of *les jeunes*, and found them as sure that they had surprised the secrets of art and life as the departed *jeunes* of ten years before had been.

The bosom of the Frenchman's family was the same as those he had known in the past, even to the patterns of the wallpaper and movables. But
