The sun was very bright, but I doubted if the day would long be fine, and looked into the milky sapphire I wore, to see whether the star in it was clear. It was even less defined than I had expected. I rose from the breakfast-table, and went to the window to glance at the stone again. There had been heavy rain in the night, and on the lawn was a thrush breaking his way into the shell of a snail. As I was turning my ring about to catch the response of the star to the sun, I spied a keen black eye gazing at me out of the milky misty blue. The sight startled me so that I dropped the ring, and when I picked it up the eye was gone from it. The same moment the sun was obscured; a dark vapour covered him, and in a minute or two the whole sky was clouded.

opened the window, and stood there looking out at the precipitous rain, when I descried a raven walking toward me over the grass, with solemn gait, and utter disregard of the falling deluge. Suspecting who he was, I congratulated myself that I was safe on the ground-floor. At the same time I had a conviction that, if I were not careful, something would happen. He came nearer and nearer, made a profound bow, and with a sudden winged leap stood on the window-sill. Then he stepped over the ledge, jumped down into the room, and walked to the door. I thought he was on his way to the library, and followed him, determined, if he went up the stair, not to take one step after him. He turned, however, neither toward the library nor the stair, but to a little door that gave upon a grass-patch in a nook between two portions of the rambling old house.

he added, with a glance upward; “I believe it is raining there too; it was, all the last week!” “Why should that make it a grand time?” I asked. “Because the animals there are all burrowers,” he answered, “--like the field-mice and the moles here.--They will be, for ages to come.” “How do you know that, if I may be so bold?” I rejoined. “As any one would who had been there to see,” he replied. “It is a great sight, until you get used to it, when the earth gives a heave, and out comes a beast. You might think it a hairy elephant or a deinotherium--but none of the animals are the same as we have ever had here. I was almost frightened myself the first time I saw the dry-bog-serpent come wallowing out--such a head and mane! and SUCH eyes!--but the shower is nearly over.

grass, and turned, waiting. “I will not leave the house to-day,” I said with obstinacy. “You will come into the garden!” rejoined the raven. “I give in so far,” I replied, and stepped from the porch. The sun broke through the clouds, and the raindrops flashed and sparkled on the grass. The raven was walking over it. “You will wet your feet!” I cried. “And mire my beak,” he answered, immediately plunging it deep in the sod, and drawing out a great wriggling red worm. He threw back his head, and tossed it in the air. It spread great wings, gorgeous in red and black, and soared aloft. “Tut! tut!” I exclaimed; “you mistake, Mr. Raven: worms are not the larv of butterflies!” “Never mind,” he croaked; “it will do for once! I’m not a reading man at present, but sexton at the--at a certain graveyard--cemetery, more properly--in--at--no matter where!” “I see! you can’t keep your spade still: and when you have nothing to bury, you must dig something up!

down!” I exclaimed, struck with amazement. “Oh, no!” returned the raven. “That red belongs to the worm.” “You see what comes of making creatures forget their origin!” I cried with some warmth. “It is well, surely, if it be to rise higher and grow larger!” he returned. “But indeed I only teach them to find it!” “Would you have the air full of worms?” “That is the business of a sexton. If only the rest of the clergy understood it as well!” In went his beak again through the soft turf, and out came the wriggling worm. He tossed it in the air, and away it flew. I looked behind me, and gave a cry of dismay: I had but that moment declared I would not leave the house, and already I was a stranger in the strange land! “What right have you to treat me so, Mr.

your house left you. At the same time it cannot contain you, or you inhabit it!” “I do not understand you,” I replied. “Where am I?” “In the region of the seven dimensions,” he answered, with a curious noise in his throat, and a flutter of his tail. “You had better follow me carefully now for a moment, lest you should hurt some one!” “There is nobody to hurt but yourself, Mr. Raven! I confess I should rather like to hurt you!” “That you see nobody is where the danger lies. But you see that large tree to your left, about thirty yards away?” “Of course I do: why should I not?” I answered testily. “Ten minutes ago you did not see it, and now you do not know where it stands!” “I do.” “Where do you think it stands?” “Why THERE, where you know it is!” “Where is THERE?” “You bother me with your silly questions!” I cried.

through the kitchen fire?” “Certainly. You would first, however, walk through the lady at the piano in the breakfast-room. That rosebush is close by her. You would give her a terrible start!” “There is no lady in the house!” “Indeed! Is not your housekeeper a lady? She is counted such in a certain country where all are servants, and the liveries one and multitudinous!” “She cannot use the piano, anyhow!” “Her niece can: she is there--a well-educated girl and a capital musician.” “Excuse me; I cannot help it: you seem to me to be talking sheer nonsense!” “If you could but hear the music! Those great long heads of wild hyacinth are inside the piano, among the strings of it, and give that peculiar sweetness to her playing!--Pardon me: I forgot your deafness!” “Two objects,” I said, “cannot exist in the same place at the same time!” “Can they not?

the Wedding March. When I looked up, there was the bird by my side. “Mr. Raven,” I said, “forgive me for being so rude: I was irritated. Will you kindly show me my way home? I must go, for I have an appointment with my bailiff. One must not break faith with his servants!” “You cannot break what was broken days ago!” he answered. “Do show me the way,” I pleaded. “I cannot,” he returned. “To go back, you must go through yourself, and that way no man can show another.” Entreaty was vain. I must accept my fate! But how was life to be lived in a world of which I had all the laws to learn? There would, however, be adventure! that held consolation; and whether I found my way home or not, I should at least have the rare advantage of knowing two worlds!
