I followed him deep into the pine-forest. Neither of us said much while yet the sacred gloom of it closed us round. We came to larger and yet larger trees--older, and more individual, some of them grotesque with age. Then the forest grew thinner. “You see that hawthorn?” said my guide at length, pointing with his beak. I looked where the wood melted away on the edge of an open heath. “I see a gnarled old man, with a great white head,” I answered. “Look again,” he rejoined: “it is a hawthorn.” “It seems indeed an ancient hawthorn; but this is not the season for the hawthorn to blossom!” I objected. “The season for the hawthorn to blossom,” he replied, “is when the hawthorn blossoms. That tree is in the ruins of the church on your home-farm. You were going to give some directions to the bailiff about its churchyard, were you not, the morning of the thunder?” “I was going to tell him I wanted it turned into a wilderness of rose-trees, and that the plough must never come within three yards of it.” “Listen!” said the raven, seeming to hold his breath.

they will not go much longer, I think.” “What makes them go now?” “They need help from each other to get their thinking done, and their feelings hatched, so they talk and sing together; and then, they say, the big thought floats out of their hearts like a great ship out of the river at high water.” “Do they pray as well as sing?” “No; they have found that each can best pray in his own silent heart.--Some people are always at their prayers.--Look! look! There goes one!” He pointed right up into the air. A snow-white pigeon was mounting, with quick and yet quicker wing-flap, the unseen spiral of an ethereal stair. The sunshine flashed quivering from its wings. “I see a pigeon!” I said. “Of course you see a pigeon,” rejoined the raven, “for there is the pigeon!

shapes, this or that, the nearest likeness to each. All live things were thoughts to begin with, and are fit therefore to be used by those that think. When one says to the great Thinker:--‘Here is one of thy thoughts: I am thinking it now!’ that is a prayer--a word to the big heart from one of its own little hearts.--Look, there is another!” This time the raven pointed his beak downward--to something at the foot of a block of granite. I looked, and saw a little flower. I had never seen one like it before, and cannot utter the feeling it woke in me by its gracious, trusting form, its colour, and its odour as of a new world that was yet the old. I can only say that it suggested an anemone, was of a pale rose-hue, and had a golden heart.
