We had been for some time walking over a rocky moorland covered with dry plants and mosses, when I descried a little cottage in the farthest distance. The sun was not yet down, but he was wrapt in a gray cloud. The heath looked as if it had never been warm, and the wind blew strangely cold, as if from some region where it was always night. “Here we are at last!” said the raven. “What a long way it is! In half the time I could have gone to Paradise and seen my cousin--him, you remember, who never came back to Noah! Dear! dear! it is almost winter!” “Winter!” I cried; “it seems but half a day since we left home!” “That is because we have travelled so fast,” answered the raven. “In your world you cannot pull up the plumb-line you call gravitation, and let the world spin round under your feet!

is my wife’s house! She is very good to let me live with her, and call it the sexton’s cottage!” “But where is your churchyard--your cemetery--where you make your graves, I mean?” said I, seeing nothing but the flat heath. The raven stretched his neck, held out his beak horizontally, turned it slowly round to all the points of the compass, and said nothing. I followed the beak with my eyes, and lo, without church or graves, all was a churchyard! Wherever the dreary wind swept, there was the raven’s cemetery! He was sexton of all he surveyed! lord of all that was laid aside! I stood in the burial-ground of the universe; its compass the unenclosed heath, its wall the gray horizon, low and starless! I had left spring and summer, autumn and sunshine behind me, and come to the winter that waited for me!

few yards from the door. The same instant I was assailed by a cold that seemed almost a material presence, and I struggled across the threshold as if from the clutches of an icy death. A wind swelled up on the moor, and rushed at the door as with difficulty I closed it behind me. Then all was still, and I looked about me. A candle burned on a deal table in the middle of the room, and the first thing I saw was the lid of a coffin, as I thought, set up against the wall; but it opened, for it was a door, and a woman entered. She was all in white--as white as new-fallen snow; and her face was as white as her dress, but not like snow, for at once it suggested warmth. I thought her features were perfect, but her eyes made me forget them.

and could not speak. “I knew you would be glad to see him!” added the raven. She stood in front of the door by which she had entered, and did not come nearer. “Will he sleep?” she asked. “I fear not,” he replied; “he is neither weary nor heavy laden.” “Why then have you brought him?” “I have my fears it may prove precipitate.” “I do not quite understand you,” I said, with an uneasy foreboding as to what she meant, but a vague hope of some escape. “Surely a man must do a day’s work first!” I gazed into the white face of the woman, and my heart fluttered. She returned my gaze in silence. “Let me first go home,” I resumed, “and come again after I have found or made, invented, or at least discovered something!” “He has not yet learned that the day begins with sleep!” said the woman, turning to her husband.

was not a raven!” he said with a smile. “I knew you were Mr. Raven,” I replied; “but somehow I thought you a bird too!” “What made you think me a bird?” “You looked a raven, and I saw you dig worms out of the earth with your beak.” “And then?” “Toss them in the air.” “And then?” “They grew butterflies, and flew away.” “Did you ever see a raven do that? I told you I was a sexton!” “Does a sexton toss worms in the air, and turn them into butterflies?” “Yes.” “I never saw one do it!” “You saw me do it!--But I am still librarian in your house, for I never was dismissed, and never gave up the office. Now I am librarian here as well.” “But you have just told me you were sexton here!” “So I am.

its nose handsomely encased the beak that had retired within it; its lips were very thin, and even they had no colour, but their curves were beautiful, and about them quivered a shadowy smile that had humour in it as well as love and pity. “We are in want of something to eat and drink, wife,” he said; “we have come a long way!” “You know, husband,” she answered, “we can give only to him that asks.” She turned her unchanging face and radiant eyes upon mine. “Please give me something to eat, Mrs. Raven,” I said, “and something--what you will--to quench my thirst.” “Your thirst must be greater before you can have what will quench it,” she replied; “but what I can give you, I will gladly.” She went to a cupboard in the wall, brought from it bread and wine, and set them on the table.

to his wife: “will you give it something and put it out? she may want it!” The woman took it from him gently, gave it a little piece of bread, and went out with it, closing the door behind her. “How then am I to make use of your hospitality?” I asked. “By accepting it to the full,” he answered. “I do not understand.” “In this house no one wakes of himself.” “Why?” “Because no one anywhere ever wakes of himself. You can wake yourself no more than you can make yourself.” “Then perhaps you or Mrs. Raven would kindly call me!” I said, still nowise understanding, but feeling afresh that vague foreboding. “We cannot.” “How dare I then go to sleep?” I cried. “If you would have the rest of this house, you must not trouble yourself about waking.
