I had been at work but a few moments, when I heard small voices near me, and presently the Little Ones, as I soon found they called themselves, came creeping out from among the tiny trees that like brushwood filled the spaces between the big ones. In a minute there were scores and scores about me. I made signs that the giants had but just left me, and were not far off; but they laughed, and told me the wind was quite clean. “They are too blind to see us,” they said, and laughed like a multitude of sheep-bells. “Do you like that rope about your ankles?” asked one. “I want them to think I cannot take it off,” I replied. “They can scarcely see their own feet!” he rejoined. “Walk with short steps and they will think the rope is all right.” As he spoke, he danced with merriment.

on until the sun was setting, and heavy steps were heard approaching. The little people started from me, and I made haste to put the rope round my ankles. “We must have a care,” said the girl who had freed me; “a crush of one of their horrid stumpy feet might kill a very little one!” “Can they not perceive you at all then?” “They might see something move; and if the children were in a heap on the top of you, as they were a moment ago, it would be terrible; for they hate every live thing but themselves.--Not that they are much alive either!” She whistled like a bird. The next instant not one of them was to be seen or heard, and the girl herself had disappeared. It was my master, as doubtless he counted himself, come to take me home.

alone. I did not come to know the giants at all, and I believe there was scarcely anything in them to know. They never became in the least friendly, but they were much too stupid to invent cruelties. Often I avoided a bad kick by catching the foot and giving its owner a fall, upon which he never, on that occasion, renewed his attempt. But the little people were constantly doing and saying things that pleased, often things that surprised me. Every day I grew more loath to leave them. While I was at work, they would keep coming and going, amusing and delighting me, and taking all the misery, and much of the weariness out of my monotonous toil. Very soon I loved them more than I can tell. They did not know much, but they were very wise, and seemed capable of learning anything.

at whose door I lay. She carried a boy-baby in her arms: hitherto a girl-baby, apparently about a year old, had been the youngest. Three of the bigger girls were her nurses, but they shared their treasure with all the rest. Among the Little Ones, dolls were unknown; the bigger had the smaller, and the smaller the still less, to tend and play with. Lona came to me and laid the infant in my arms. The baby opened his eyes and looked at me, closed them again, and fell asleep. “He loves you already!” said the girl. “Where did you find him?” I asked. “In the wood, of course,” she answered, her eyes beaming with delight, “--where we always find them. Isn’t he a beauty? We’ve been out all night looking for him. Sometimes it is not easy to find!” “How do you know when there is one to find?” I asked.

from.” She knew where they came from last, and thought nothing else was to be known about their advent. “How often do you find one?” “Such a happy thing takes all the glad we’ve got, and we forget the last time. You too are glad to have him--are you not, good giant?” “Yes, indeed, I am!” I answered. “But how do you feed him?” “I will show you,” she rejoined, and went away--to return directly with two or three ripe little plums. She put one to the baby’s lips. “He would open his mouth if he were awake,” she said, and took him in her arms. She squeezed a drop to the surface, and again held the fruit to the baby’s lips. Without waking he began at once to suck it, and she went on slowly squeezing until nothing but skin and stone were left.

“Baby will grow bigger, won’t he?” “Of course he will!” “And will you grow bigger?” “I don’t think so. I hope not. I am the biggest. It frightens me sometimes.” “Why should it frighten you?” She gave me no answer. “How old are you?” I resumed. “I do not know what you mean. We are all just that.” “How big will the baby grow?” “I cannot tell.--Some,” she added, with a trouble in her voice, “begin to grow after we think they have stopped.--That is a frightful thing. We don’t talk about it!” “What makes it frightful?” She was silent for a moment, then answered, “We fear they may be beginning to grow giants.” “Why should you fear that?” “Because it is so terrible.--I don’t want to talk about it!” She pressed the baby to her bosom with such an anxious look that I dared not further question her.

anxiety. None of them put a hand to my work: they would do nothing for the giants! But they never relaxed their loving ministrations to me. They would sing to me, one after another, for hours; climb the tree to reach my mouth and pop fruit into it with their dainty little fingers; and they kept constant watch against the approach of a giant. Sometimes they would sit and tell me stories--mostly very childish, and often seeming to mean hardly anything. Now and then they would call a general assembly to amuse me. On one such occasion a moody little fellow sang me a strange crooning song, with a refrain so pathetic that, although unintelligible to me, it caused the tears to run down my face. This phenomenon made those who saw it regard me with much perplexity. Then first I bethought myself that I had not once, in that world, looked on water, falling or lying or running.

“Is there always the same number of the giants then? I thought, before I had time to know better, that they were your fathers and mothers.” She burst into the merriest laughter, and said, “No, good giant; WE are THEIR firsters.” But as she said it, the merriment died out of her, and she looked scared. I stopped working, and gazed at her, bewildered. “How CAN that be?” I exclaimed. “I do not say; I do not understand,” she answered. “But we were here and they not. They go from us. I am sorry, but we cannot help it. THEY could have helped it.” “How long have you been here?” I asked, more and more puzzled--in the hope of some side-light on the matter. “Always, I think,” she replied. “I think somebody made us always.” I turned to my scraping.

was growing, for he would not believe anything told him; but when he refused to share his berries, and said he had gathered them for himself, then we knew it! He is a glutton, and there is no hope of him.--It makes me sick to see him eat!” “Could not some of the boys watch him, and not let him touch the poisonous things?” “He may have them if he will: it is all one--to eat the apples, and to be a boy that would eat them if he could. No; he must go to the giants! He belongs to them. You can see how much bigger he is than when first you came! He is bigger since yesterday.” “He is as like that hideous green lump in his hand as boy could look!” “It suits what he is making himself.” “His head and it might change places!” “Perhaps they do!” “Does he want to be a giant?” “He hates the giants, but he is making himself one all the same: he likes their apples!

care; he will eat his apples.” “Do tell me how it will come about. I understand your world so little! I come from a world where everything is different.” “I do not know about WORLD. What is it? What more but a word in your beautiful big mouth?--That makes it something!” “Never mind about the word; tell me what next will happen to Blunty.” “He will wake one morning and find himself a giant--not like you, good giant, but like any other bad giant. You will hardly know him, but I will tell you which. He will think he has been a giant always, and will not know you, or any of us. The giants have lost themselves, Peony says, and that is why they never smile. I wonder whether they are not glad because they are bad, or bad because they are not glad.

up at me--oh, so sweetly! SHE will never go bad and grow big! When they begin to grow big they care for nothing but bigness; and when they cannot grow any bigger, they try to grow fatter. The bad giants are very proud of being fat.” “So they are in my world,” I said; “only they do not say FAT there, they say RICH.” “In one of their houses,” continued Lona, “sits the biggest and fattest of them--so proud that nobody can see him; and the giants go to his house at certain times, and call out to him, and tell him how fat he is, and beg him to make them strong to eat more and grow fat like him.” The rumour at length reached my ears that Blunty had vanished. I saw a few grave faces among the bigger ones, but he did not seem to be much missed.
