I travelled on attended by the moon. As usual she was full--I had never seen her other--and to-night as she sank I thought I perceived something like a smile on her countenance. When her under edge was a little below the horizon, there appeared in the middle of her disc, as if it had been painted upon it, a cottage, through the open door and window of which she shone; and with the sight came the conviction that I was expected there. Almost immediately the moon was gone, and the cottage had vanished; the night was rapidly growing dark, and my way being across a close succession of small ravines, I resolved to remain where I was and expect the morning. I stretched myself, therefore, in a sandy hollow, made my supper off the fruits the children had given me at parting, and was soon asleep.

seemed larger than human. It moved its head, and then first I saw that its back was toward me. “Will you not come with me?” said a sweet, mellow voice, unmistakably a woman’s. Wishing to learn more of my hostess, “I thank you,” I replied, “but I am not uncomfortable here. Where would you have me go? I like sleeping in the open air.” “There is no hurt in the air,” she returned; “but the creatures that roam the night in these parts are not such as a man would willingly have about him while he sleeps.” “I have not been disturbed,” I said. “No; I have been sitting by you ever since you lay down.” “That is very kind of you! How came you to know I was here? Why do you show me such favour?” “I saw you,” she answered, still with her back to me, “in the light of the moon, just as she went down.

well when they do.” “I suppose, madam, you live in the cottage I saw in the heart of the moon?” “I do. I live there alone, except when I have visitors. It is a poor place, but I do what I can for my guests, and sometimes their sleep is sweet to them.” Her voice entered into me, and made me feel strangely still. “I will go with you, madam,” I said, rising. She rose at once, and without a glance behind her led the way. I could see her just well enough to follow. She was taller than myself, but not so tall as I had thought her. That she never turned her face to me made me curious--nowise apprehensive, her voice rang so true. But how was I to fit her with a name who could not see her?

but hardly any one anywhere knows his own name! It would make many a fine gentleman stare to hear himself addressed by what is really his name!” I held my peace, beginning to wonder what my name might be. “What now do you fancy yours?” she went on, as if aware of my thought. “But, pardon me, it is a matter of no consequence.” I had actually opened my mouth to answer her, when I discovered that my name was gone from me. I could not even recall the first letter of it! This was the second time I had been asked my name and could not tell it! “Never mind,” she said; “it is not wanted. Your real name, indeed, is written on your forehead, but at present it whirls about so irregularly that nobody can read it. I will do my part to steady it.

at last.” This startled me, and I was silent. We had left the channels and walked a long time, but no sign of the cottage yet appeared. “The Little Ones told me,” I said at length, “of a smooth green country, pleasant to the feet!” “Yes?” she returned. “They told me too of a girl giantess that was queen somewhere: is that her country?” “There is a city in that grassy land,” she replied, “where a woman is princess. The city is called Bulika. But certainly the princess is not a girl! She is older than this world, and came to it from yours--with a terrible history, which is not over yet. She is an evil person, and prevails much with the Prince of the Power of the Air. The people of Bulika were formerly simple folk, tilling the ground and pasturing sheep.

dusty as her own heart. Were it not for the waters under it, every living thing would long ago have perished from it. For where no water is, no rain falls; and where no rain falls, no springs rise. Ever since then, the princess has lived in Bulika, holding the inhabitants in constant terror, and doing what she can to keep them from multiplying. Yet they boast and believe themselves a prosperous, and certainly are a self-satisfied people--good at bargaining and buying, good at selling and cheating; holding well together for a common interest, and utterly treacherous where interests clash; proud of their princess and her power, and despising every one they get the better of; never doubting themselves the most honourable of all the nations, and each man counting himself better than any other. The depth of their worthlessness and height of their vainglory no one can understand who has not been there to see, who has not learned to know the miserable misgoverned and self-deceived creatures.” “I thank you, madam.

they will have grown; yet I think too they will not have grown. It is possible to grow and not to grow, to grow less and to grow bigger, both at once--yes, even to grow by means of not growing!” “Your words are strange, madam!” I rejoined. “But I have heard it said that some words, because they mean more, appear to mean less!” “That is true, and such words HAVE to be understood. It were well for the princess of Bulika if she heard what the very silence of the land is shouting in her ears all day long! But she is far too clever to understand anything.” “Then I suppose, when the little Lovers are grown, their land will have water again?” “Not exactly so: when they are thirsty enough, they will have water, and when they have water, they will grow.

not at hand, it is better you should be indoors. Here you will be safe, and a little lack is not a great misery.” “I thank you heartily, madam,” I replied. “But, seeing you know the name I could not tell you, may I not now know yours?” “My name is Mara,” she answered. Then I remembered the sexton and the little black cat. “Some people,” she went on, “take me for Lot’s wife, lamenting over Sodom; and some think I am Rachel, weeping for her children; but I am neither of those.” “I thank you again, Mara,” I said. “--May I lie here on your floor till the morning?” “At the top of that stair,” she answered, “you will find a bed--on which some have slept better than they expected, and some have waked all the night and slept all the next day.

said. I ate up the loaf, drank the water every drop, and laid myself down. The bed was hard, the covering thin and scanty, and the night cold: I dreamed that I lay in the chamber of death, between the warrior and the lady with the healing wound. I woke in the middle of the night, thinking I heard low noises of wild animals. “Creatures of the desert scenting after me, I suppose!” I said to myself, and, knowing I was safe, would have gone to sleep again. But that instant a rough purring rose to a howl under my window, and I sprang from my bed to see what sort of beast uttered it. Before the door of the cottage, in the full radiance of the moon, a tall woman stood, clothed in white, with her back toward me.

setting; yet here she was, a few hours after, shining in all her glory! “Everything is uncertain here,” I said to myself, “--even the motions of the heavenly bodies!” I learned afterward that there were several moons in the service of this world, but the laws that ruled their times and different orbits I failed to discover. Again I fell asleep, and slept undisturbed. When I went down in the morning, I found bread and water waiting me, the loaf so large that I ate only half of it. My hostess sat muffled beside me while I broke my fast, and except to greet me when I entered, never opened her mouth until I asked her to instruct me how to arrive at Bulika. She then told me to go up the bank of the river-bed until it disappeared; then verge to the right until I came to a forest--in which I might spend a night, but which I must leave with my face to the rising moon.

messengers like her?” “As many as I require.” “Are they hard to teach?” “They need no teaching. They are all of a certain breed, but not one of the breed is like another. Their origin is so natural it would seem to you incredible.” “May I not know it?” “A new one came to me last night--from your head while you slept.” I laughed. “All in this world seem to love mystery!” I said to myself. “Some chance word of mine suggested an idea--and in this form she embodies the small fact!” “Then the creature is mine!” I cried. “Not at all!” she answered. “That only can be ours in whose existence our will is a factor.” “Ha! a metaphysician too!” I remarked inside, and was silent. “May I take what is left of the loaf?” I asked presently. “You will want no more to-day,” she replied.

go. “The time will come when you must house with me many days and many nights,” she murmured sadly through her muffling. “Willingly,” I replied. “Nay, NOT willingly!” she answered. I said to myself that she was right--I would not willingly be her guest a second time! but immediately my heart rebuked me, and I had scarce crossed the threshold when I turned again. She stood in the middle of the room; her white garments lay like foamy waves at her feet, and among them the swathings of her face: it was lovely as a night of stars. Her great gray eyes looked up to heaven; tears were flowing down her pale cheeks. She reminded me not a little of the sexton’s wife, although the one looked as if she had not wept for thousands of years, and the other as if she wept constantly behind the wrappings of her beautiful head.
