I had not gone ten paces when I caught sight of a strange-looking object, and went nearer to know what it might be. I found it a mouldering carriage of ancient form, ruinous but still upright on its heavy wheels. On each side of the pole, still in its place, lay the skeleton of a horse; from their two grim white heads ascended the shrivelled reins to the hand of the skeleton-coachman seated on his tattered hammer-cloth; both doors had fallen away; within sat two skeletons, each leaning back in its corner. Even as I looked, they started awake, and with a cracking rattle of bones, each leaped from the door next it. One fell and lay; the other stood a moment, its structure shaking perilously; then with difficulty, for its joints were stiff, crept, holding by the back of the carriage, to the opposite side, the thin leg-bones seeming hardly strong enough to carry its weight, where, kneeling by the other, it sought to raise it, almost falling itself again in the endeavour.

contortions, the kneeling one rose next, and addressed its companion. “Have you hurt yourself, my lord?” it said, in a voice that sounded far-off, and ill-articulated as if blown aside by some spectral wind. “Yes, I have,” answered the other, in like but rougher tone. “You would do nothing to help me, and this cursed knee is out!” “I did my best, my lord.” “No doubt, my lady, for it was bad! I thought I should never find my feet again!--But, bless my soul, madam! are you out in your bones?” She cast a look at herself. “I have nothing else to be out in,” she returned; “--and YOU at least cannot complain! But what on earth does it mean? Am I dreaming?” “YOU may be dreaming, madam--I cannot tell; but this knee of mine forbids me the grateful illusion.--Ha!

come so seldom to mine, that I do not know, my lord; but I may take your word for THAT!” “I hope so!” “--if for nothing else!” “Hoity toity! I never told you a lie in my life!” “You never told me anything but lies.” “Upon my honour!--Why, I never saw the woman before!” “You knew me well enough to lie to, my lord!” “I do seem to begin to dream I have met you before, but, upon my oath, there is nothing to know you by! Out of your clothes, who is to tell who you may not be?--One thing I MAY swear--that I never saw you so much undressed before!--By heaven, I have no recollection of you!” “I am glad to hear it: my recollections of you are the less distasteful!--Good morning, my lord!” She turned away, hobbled, clacking, a few paces, and stood again.

from her knees. “Eh? what!--Now I look at you again, it seems to me I used to hate you!--Eh?” “Naturally, my lord! You hated a good many people!--your wife, of course, among the rest!” “Ah, I begin, I be-gin---- But--I must have been a long time somewhere!--I really forget!--There! your damned, miserable bit of grass is breaking!--We used to get on PRETTY well together--eh?” “Not that I remember, my lord. The only happy moments I had in your company were scattered over the first week of our marriage.” “Was that the way of it? Ha! ha!--Well, it’s over now, thank goodness!” “I wish I could believe it! Why were we sitting there in that carriage together? It wakes apprehension!” “I think we were divorced, my lady!” “Hardly enough: we are still together!” “A sad truth, but capable of remedy: the forest seems of some extent!” “I doubt!

the sooner, and not hated you so much afterward!--But let bygones be bygones!--WHERE are we? Locality is the question! To be or not to be, is NOT the question!” “We are in the other world, I presume!” “Granted!--but in which or what sort of other world? This can’t be hell!” “It must: there’s marriage in it! You and I are damned in each other.” “Then I’m not like Othello, damned in a fair wife!--Oh, I remember my Shakspeare, madam!” She picked up a broken branch that had fallen into a bush, and steadying herself with it, walked away, tossing her little skull. “Give that stick to me,” cried her late husband; “I want it more than you.” She returned him no answer. “You mean to make me beg for it?” “Not at all, my lord. I mean to keep it,” she replied, continuing her slow departure.

laying the stick in dispute beyond his reach and within her own. The instant she had finished retying the joint, he made a grab at her, thinking, apparently, to seize her by the hair; but his hard fingers slipped on the smooth poll. “Disgusting!” he muttered, and laid hold of her upper arm-bone. “You will break it!” she said, looking up from her knees. “I will, then!” he answered, and began to strain at it. “I shall not tie your leg again the next time it comes loose!” she threatened. He gave her arm a vicious twist, but happily her bones were in better condition than his. She stretched her other hand toward the broken branch. “That’s right: reach me the stick!” he grinned. She brought it round with such a swing that one of the bones of the sounder leg snapped.

speaker. “You are not in hell,” it resumed. “Neither am I in hell. But those skeletons are in hell!” Ere he ended I caught sight of the raven on the bough of a beech, right over my head. The same moment he left it, and alighting on the ground, stood there, the thin old man of the library, with long nose and long coat. “The male was never a gentleman,” he went on, “and in the bony stage of retrogression, with his skeleton through his skin, and his character outside his manners, does not look like one. The female is less vulgar, and has a little heart. But, the restraints of society removed, you see them now just as they are and always were!” “Tell me, Mr. Raven, what will become of them,” I said. “We shall see,” he replied.

Besides, they cannot now get far away from each other, and they see none else of their own kind: they must at last grow weary of their mutual repugnance, and begin to love one another! for love, not hate, is deepest in what Love ‘loved into being.’” “I saw many more of their kind an hour ago, in the hall close by!” I said. “Of their kind, but not of their sort,” he answered. “For many years these will see none such as you saw last night. Those are centuries in advance of these. You saw that those could even dress themselves a little! It is true they cannot yet retain their clothes so long as they would--only, at present, for a part of the night; but they are pretty steadily growing more capable, and will by and by develop faces; for every grain of truthfulness adds a fibre to the show of their humanity.

persons as if they were one and the same. Your consciousness of yourself and my knowledge of you are far apart!” The lapels of his coat flew out, and the lappets lifted, and I thought the metamorphosis of HOMO to CORVUS was about to take place before my eyes. But the coat closed again in front of him, and he added, with seeming inconsequence, “In this world never trust a person who has once deceived you. Above all, never do anything such a one may ask you to do.” “I will try to remember,” I answered; “--but I may forget!” “Then some evil that is good for you will follow.” “And if I remember?” “Some evil that is not good for you, will not follow.” The old man seemed to sink to the ground, and immediately I saw the raven several yards from me, flying low and fast.
