I woke one morning from a profound sleep, with one of my hands very painful. The back of it was much swollen, and in the centre of the swelling was a triangular wound, like the bite of a leech. As the day went on, the swelling subsided, and by the evening the hurt was all but healed. I searched the cave, turning over every stone of any size, but discovered nothing I could imagine capable of injuring me. Slowly the days passed, and still the body never moved, never opened its eyes. It could not be dead, for assuredly it manifested no sign of decay, and the air about it was quite pure. Moreover, I could imagine that the sharpest angles of the bones had begun to disappear, that the form was everywhere a little rounder, and the skin had less of the parchment-look: if such change was indeed there, life must be there! the tide which had ebbed so far toward the infinite, must have begun again to flow!

Oh joy to me, if the rising ripples of life’s ocean were indeed burying under lovely shape the bones it had all but forsaken! Twenty times a day I looked for evidence of progress, and twenty times a day I doubted--sometimes even despaired; but the moment I recalled the mental picture of her as I found her, hope revived. Several weeks had passed thus, when one night, after lying a long time awake, I rose, thinking to go out and breathe the cooler air; for, although from the running of the stream it was always fresh in the cave, the heat was not seldom a little oppressive. The moon outside was full, the air within shadowy clear, and naturally I cast a lingering look on my treasure ere I went. “Bliss eternal!” I cried aloud, “do I see her eyes?” Great orbs, dark as if cut from the sphere of a starless night, and luminous by excess of darkness, seemed to shine amid the glimmering whiteness of her face.

I searched yet more thoroughly, but again in vain. The wound was of the same character, and, as before, was nearly well by the evening. I concluded that some large creature of the leech kind came occasionally from the hot stream. “But, if blood be its object,” I said to myself, “so long as I am there, I need hardly fear for my treasure!” That same morning, when, having peeled a grape as usual and taken away the seeds, I put it in her mouth, her lips made a slight movement of reception, and I KNEW she lived! My hope was now so much stronger that I began to think of some attire for her: she must be able to rise the moment she wished! I betook myself therefore to the forest, to investigate what material it might afford, and had hardly begun to look when fibrous skeletons, like those of the leaves of the prickly pear, suggested themselves as fit for the purpose.

there was no farther sign except that she more evidently took the grapes. But indeed all the signs became surer: plainly she was growing plumper, and her skin fairer. Still she did not open her eyes; and the horrid fear would at times invade me, that her growth was of some hideous fungoid nature, the few grapes being nowise sufficient to account for it. Again I was bitten; and now the thing, whatever it was, began to pay me regular visits at intervals of three days. It now generally bit me in the neck or the arm, invariably with but one bite, always while I slept, and never, even when I slept, in the daytime. Hour after hour would I lie awake on the watch, but never heard it coming, or saw sign of its approach. Neither, I believe, did I ever feel it bite me.

should terrify her. “What creature?” I breathed, rather than said. “The creature,” she answered, “that was biting you.” “What was it?” “A great white leech.” “How big?” I pursued, forcing myself to be calm. “Not far from six feet long, I should think,” she answered. “You have saved my life, perhaps!--But how could you touch the horrid thing! How brave of you!” I cried. “I did!” was all her answer, and I thought she shuddered. “Where is it? What could you do with such a monster?” “I threw it in the river.” “Then it will come again, I fear!” “I do not think I could have killed it, even had I known how!--I heard you moaning, and got up to see what disturbed you; saw the frightful thing at your neck, and pulled it away. But I could not hold it, and was hardly able to throw it from me.

leave me?” “Because I hoped you were not dead.” “Why should you have cared?” “Because I was very lonely, and wanted you to live.” “You would have kept me enchanted for my beauty!” she said, with proud scorn. Her words and her look roused my indignation. “There was no beauty left in you,” I said. “Why, then, again, did you not let me alone?” “Because you were of my own kind.” “Of YOUR kind?” she cried, in a tone of utter contempt. “I thought so, but find I was mistaken!” “Doubtless you pitied me!” “Never had woman more claim on pity, or less on any other feeling!” With an expression of pain, mortification, and anger unutterable, she turned from me and stood silent. Starless night lay profound in the gulfs of her eyes: hate of him who brought it back had slain their splendour.

in twenty days,” I rejoined, “hardly in thirty!” “Ha! How long do you pretend I have lain unconscious?--Answer me at once.” “I cannot tell how long you had lain when I found you, but there was nothing left of you save skin and bone: that is more than three months ago.--Your hair was beautiful, nothing else! I have done for it what I could.” “My poor hair!” she said, and brought a great armful of it round from behind her; “--it will be more than a three-months’ care to bring YOU to life again!--I suppose I must thank you, although I cannot say I am grateful!” “There is no need, madam: I would have done the same for any woman--yes, or for any man either!” “How is it my hair is not tangled?” she said, fondling it. “It always drifted in the current.” “How?--What do you mean?” “I could not have brought you to life but by bathing you in the hot river every morning.” She gave a shudder of disgust, and stood for a while with her gaze fixed on the hurrying water.
