I turned aside into an alley, and sought shelter in a small archway. In the mouth of it I stopped, and looked out at the moonlight which filled the alley. The same instant a woman came gliding in after me, turned, trembling, and looked out also. A few seconds passed; then a huge leopard, its white skin dappled with many blots, darted across the archway. The woman pressed close to me, and my heart filled with pity. I put my arm round her. “If the brute come here, I will lay hold of it,” I said, “and you must run.” “Thank you!” she murmured. “Have you ever seen it before?” I asked. “Several times,” she answered, still trembling. “She is a pet of the princess’s. You are a stranger, or you would know her!” “I am a stranger,” I answered.

stranger!” “All strangers are not bad!” I said. “The beast shall not touch you till she has done with me, and by that time you will be in. You are happy to have a house to go to! What a terrible wind it is!” “Take me home safe, and I will give you shelter from it,” she rejoined. “But we must wait a little!” I asked her many questions. She told me the people never did anything except dig for precious stones in their cellars. They were rich, and had everything made for them in other towns. “Why?” I asked. “Because it is a disgrace to work,” she answered. “Everybody in Bulika knows that!” I asked how they were rich if none of them earned money. She replied that their ancestors had saved for them, and they never spent. When they wanted money they sold a few of their gems.

of a stranger defiled the city. “How is that?” I said. “Because we are more ancient and noble than any other nation.--Therefore,” she added, “we always turn strangers out before night.” “How, then, can you take me into your house?” I asked. “I will make an exception of you,” she replied. “Is there no place in the city for the taking in of strangers?” “Such a place would be pulled down, and its owner burned. How is purity to be preserved except by keeping low people at a proper distance? Dignity is such a delicate thing!” She told me that their princess had reigned for thousands of years; that she had power over the air and the water as well as the earth--and, she believed, over the fire too; that she could do what she pleased, and was answerable to nobody.
