In the morning we set out, and made for the forest as fast as we could. I rode Lona’s horse, and carried her body. I would take it to her father: he would give it a couch in the chamber of his dead! or, if he would not, seeing she had not come of herself, I would watch it in the desert until it mouldered away! But I believed he would, for surely she had died long ago! Alas, how bitterly must I not humble myself before him! To Adam I must take Lilith also. I had no power to make her repent! I had hardly a right to slay her--much less a right to let her loose in the world! and surely I scarce merited being made for ever her gaoler! Again and again, on the way, I offered her food; but she answered only with a look of hungering hate.

and given a scream of pain. “Please, king,” she whimpered, “suck finger. Bad giantess make hole in it!” I sucked the tiny finger. “Well now!” she cried, and a minute after was holding a second fruit to a mouth greedy of other fare. But this time she snatched her hand quickly away, and the fruit fell to the ground. The child’s name was Luva. The next day we crossed the hot stream. Again on their own ground, the Little Ones were jubilant. But their nests were still at a great distance, and that day we went no farther than the ivy-hall, where, because of its grapes, I had resolved to spend the night. When they saw the great clusters, at once they knew them good, rushed upon them, ate eagerly, and in a few minutes were all fast asleep on the green floor and in the forest around the hall.

weary souls who, their present taken from them and their future dark, had no life save the shadow of their vanished past. Many a merry but never a rude prank did the children play; and if they did at times cause a momentary jar in the rhythm of the dance, the poor spectres, who had nothing to smile withal, at least manifested no annoyance. Just ere the morning began to break, I started to see the skeleton-princess in the doorway, her eyes open and glowing, the fearful spot black on her side. She stood for a moment, then came gliding in, as if she would join the dance. I sprang to my feet. A cry of repugnant fear broke from the children, and the lights vanished. But the low moon looked in, and I saw them clinging to each other.

that neighbourhood. The children at once made friends with them, laying hold of their arms, and stroking the bones of their long fingers; and it was plain the poor creatures took their attentions kindly. The two seemed on excellent terms with each other. Their common deprivation had drawn them together! the loss of everything had been the beginning of a new life to them! Perceiving that they had gathered handfuls of herbs, and were looking for more--presumably to rub their bones with, for in what other way could nourishment reach their system so rudimentary?--the Little Ones, having keenly examined those they held, gathered of the same sorts, and filled the hands the skeletons held out to receive them. Then they bid them goodbye, promising to come and see them again, and resumed their journey, saying to each other they had not known there were such nice people living in the same forest.

body wrapt in her cloak before me. As nearly as I could judge I took the direct way, across the left branch of the river-bed, to the House of Bitterness, where I hoped to learn how best to cross the broader and rougher branch, and how to avoid the basin of monsters: I dreaded the former for the elephants, the latter for the children. I had one terrible night on the way--the third, passed in the desert between the two branches of the dead river. We had stopped the elephants in a sheltered place, and there let the princess slip down between them, to lie on the sand until the morning. She seemed quite dead, but I did not think she was. I laid myself a little way from her, with the body of Lona by my other side, thus to keep watch at once over the dead and the dangerous.

second blast of hot-stinging cold enveloped us; the moon shone out clear, and I saw her face--gaunt and ghastly, besmeared with red. “Down, devil!” I cried. “Where are you taking me?” she asked, with the voice of a dull echo from a sepulchre. “To your first husband,” I answered. “He will kill me!” she moaned. “At least he will take you off my hands!” “Give me my daughter,” she suddenly screamed, grinding her teeth. “Never! Your doom is upon you at last!” “Loose my hands for pity’s sake!” she groaned. “I am in torture. The cords are sunk in my flesh.” “I dare not. Lie down!” I said. She threw herself on the ground like a log. The rest of the night passed in peace, and in the morning she again seemed dead. Before evening we came in sight of the House of Bitterness, and the next moment one of the elephants came alongside of my horse.

“Oh, no; that can’t be! you are good!” “The giants might have told you so!” I pursued. “We shouldn’t believe them about you!” “Are the giants good?” “No; they love lying.” “Then why do you believe them about her? I know the lady is good; she cannot have claws.” “Please how do you know she is good?” “How do you know I am good?” I rode on, while he waited for his companions, and told them what I had said. They hastened after me, and when they came up,-- “I would not take you to her house if I did not believe her good,” I said. “We know you would not,” they answered. “If I were to do something that frightened you--what would you say?” “The beasts frightened us sometimes at first, but they never hurt us!” answered one. “That was before we knew them!” added another.

“That is why they are her friends.” “Will the cat-woman--I mean the woman that isn’t the cat-woman, and has no claws to her toes--give her grapes?” “She is more likely to give her scratches!” “Why?--You say she is her friend!” “That is just why.--A friend is one who gives us what we need, and the princess is sorely in need of a terrible scratching.” They were silent again. “If any of you are afraid,” I said, “you may go home; I shall not prevent you. But I cannot take one with me who believes the giants rather than me, or one who will call a good lady the cat-woman!” “Please, king,” said one, “I’m so afraid of being afraid!” “My boy,” I answered, “there is no harm in being afraid. The only harm is in doing what Fear tells you.

is a pretty name!” said a girl; “I will call her ‘lady Mara’; then perhaps she will show me her beautiful face!” Mara, drest and muffled in white, was indeed standing in the doorway to receive us. “At last!” she said. “Lilith’s hour has been long on the way, but it is come! Everything comes. Thousands of years have I waited--and not in vain!” She came to me, took my treasure from my arms, carried it into the house, and returning, took the princess. Lilith shuddered, but made no resistance. The beasts lay down by the door. We followed our hostess, the Little Ones looking very grave. She laid the princess on a rough settle at one side of the room, unbound her, and turned to us. “Mr. Vane,” she said, “and you, Little Ones, I thank you! This woman would not yield to gentler measures; harder must have their turn.

know I am beside her, but that will not comfort her.” “Will you scratch her very deep?” asked Odu, going near, and putting his hand in hers. “Please, don’t make the red juice come!” She caught him up, turned her back to the rest of us, drew the muffling down from her face, and held him at arms’ length that he might see her. As if his face had been a mirror, I saw in it what he saw. For one moment he stared, his little mouth open; then a divine wonder arose in his countenance, and swiftly changed to intense delight. For a minute he gazed entranced, then she set him down. Yet a moment he stood looking up at her, lost in contemplation--then ran to us with the face of a prophet that knows a bliss he cannot tell.
