The Mother of Sorrows rose, muffled her face, and went to call the Little Ones. They slept as if all the night they had not moved, but the moment she spoke they sprang to their feet, fresh as if new-made. Merrily down the stair they followed her, and she brought them where the princess lay, her tears yet flowing as she slept. Their glad faces grew grave. They looked from the princess out on the rain, then back at the princess. “The sky is falling!” said one. “The white juice is running out of the princess!” cried another, with an awed look. “Is it rivers?” asked Odu, gazing at the little streams that flowed adown her hollow cheeks. “Yes,” answered Mara, “--the most wonderful of all rivers.” “I thought rivers was bigger, and rushed, like a lot of Little Ones, making loud noises!” he returned, looking at me, from whom alone he had heard of rivers.

Luva. “They are not her juice, for they are not red!” “They are the juice inside the juice,” answered Mara. Odu put one finger to his eye, looked at it, and shook his head. “Princess will not bite now!” said Luva. “No; she will never do that again,” replied Mara. “--But now we must take her nearer home.” “Is that a nest?” asked Sozo. “Yes; a very big nest. But we must take her to another place first.” “What is that?” “It is the biggest room in all this world.--But I think it is going to be pulled down: it will soon be too full of little nests.--Go and get your clumsies.” “Please are there any cats in it?” “Not one. The nests are too full of lovely dreams for one cat to get in.” “We shall be ready in a minute,” said Odu, and ran out, followed by all except Luva.

said our hostess. “Tell me, please,” I said, “is there not a way by which to avoid the channels and the den of monsters?” “There is an easy way across the river-bed, which I will show you,” she answered; “but you must pass once more through the monsters.” “I fear for the children,” I said. “Fear will not once come nigh them,” she rejoined. We left the cottage. The beasts stood waiting about the door. Odu was already on the neck of one of the two that were to carry the princess. I mounted Lona’s horse; Mara brought her body, and gave it me in my arms. When she came out again with the princess, a cry of delight arose from the children: she was no longer muffled! Gazing at her, and entranced with her loveliness, the boys forgot to receive the princess from her; but the elephants took Lilith tenderly with their trunks, one round her body and one round her knees, and, Mara helping, laid her along between them.

that is not hers.” “Please, lady Mara, may we have some of your very dry bread before we go?” said Luva. Mara smiled, and brought them four loaves and a great jug of water. “We will eat as we go,” they said. But they drank the water with delight. “I think,” remarked one of them, “it must be elephant-juice! It makes me so strong!” We set out, the Lady of Sorrow walking with us, more beautiful than the sun, and the white leopardess following her. I thought she meant but to put us in the path across the channels, but I soon found she was going with us all the way. Then I would have dismounted that she might ride, but she would not let me. “I have no burden to carry,” she said. “The children and I will walk together.” It was the loveliest of mornings; the sun shone his brightest, and the wind blew his sweetest, but they did not comfort the desert, for it had no water.

had no water. We crossed the channels without difficulty, the children gamboling about Mara all the way, but did not reach the top of the ridge over the bad burrow until the sun was already in the act of disappearing. Then I made the Little Ones mount their elephants, for the moon might be late, and I could not help some anxiety about them. The Lady of Sorrow now led the way by my side; the elephants followed--the two that bore the princess in the centre; the leopardess brought up the rear; and just as we reached the frightful margin, the moon looked up and showed the shallow basin lying before us untroubled. Mara stepped into it; not a movement answered her tread or the feet of my horse. But the moment that the elephants carrying the princess touched it, the seemingly solid earth began to heave and boil, and the whole dread brood of the hellish nest was commoved.

they will not touch you.” “What will not touch us? We don’t know what to be brave at!” they answered; and I perceived they were unaware of one of the deformities around them. “Never mind then,” I returned; “only keep close.” They were panoplied in their blindness! Incapacity to see was their safety. What they could nowise be aware of, could not hurt them. But the hideous forms I saw that night! Mara was a few paces in front of me when a solitary, bodiless head bounced on the path between us. The leopardess came rushing under the elephants from behind, and would have seized it, but, with frightful contortions of visage and a loathsome howl, it gave itself a rapid rotatory twist, sprang from her, and buried itself in the ground. The death in my arms assoiling me from fear, I regarded them all unmoved, although never, sure, was elsewhere beheld such a crew accursed!

to heed the phantom-horde. But I understood the peril and hastened the crossing--the rather that the moon was carrying herself strangely. Even as she rose she seemed ready to drop and give up the attempt as hopeless; and since, I saw her sink back once fully her own breadth. The arc she made was very low, and now she had begun to descend rapidly. We were almost over, when, between us and the border of the basin, arose a long neck, on the top of which, like the blossom of some Stygian lily, sat what seemed the head of a corpse, its mouth half open, and full of canine teeth. I went on; it retreated, then drew aside. The lady stepped on the firm land, but the leopardess between us, roused once more, turned, and flew at the throat of the terror.

is good and wise. Yet I would not have her live beyond her hour!” “She has gone down with the wicked; she will rise with the righteous. We shall see her again ere very long.” “Mother,” I said, although I did not see her, “we come to you many, but most of us are Little Ones. Will you be able to receive us all?” “You are welcome every one,” she answered. “Sooner or later all will be little ones, for all must sleep in my house! It is well with those that go to sleep young and willing!--My husband is even now preparing her couch for Lilith. She is neither young nor quite willing, but it is well indeed that she is come.” I heard no more. Mother and daughter had gone away together through the dark. But we saw a light in the distance, and toward it we went stumbling over the moor.

severity. “We have long waited for thee, Lilith!” he said. She returned him no answer. Eve and her daughter came to the door. “The mortal foe of my children!” murmured Eve, standing radiant in her beauty. “Your children are no longer in her danger,” said Mara; “she has turned from evil.” “Trust her not hastily, Mara,” answered her mother; “she has deceived a multitude!” “But you will open to her the mirror of the Law of Liberty, mother, that she may go into it, and abide in it! She consents to open her hand and restore: will not the great Father restore her to inheritance with His other children?” “I do not know Him!” murmured Lilith, in a voice of fear and doubt. “Therefore it is that thou art miserable,” said Adam. “I will go back whence I came!” she cried, and turned, wringing her hands, to depart.

disgrace eternal? Cease thou canst not: wilt thou not be restored and BE?” She stood silent with bowed head. “Father,” said Mara, “take her in thine arms, and carry her to her couch. There she will open her hand, and die into life.” “I will walk,” said the princess. Adam turned and led the way. The princess walked feebly after him into the cottage. Then Eve came out to me where I sat with Lona in my bosom. She reached up her arms, took her from me, and carried her in. I dismounted, and the children also. The horse and the elephants stood shivering; Mara patted and stroked them every one; they lay down and fell asleep. She led us into the cottage, and gave the Little Ones of the bread and wine on the table. Adam and Lilith were standing there together, but silent both.

She stood ghastly with terror. “It is he!” said her voiceless lips: I read their motion. “Who, princess!” I whispered. “The great Shadow,” she murmured. “Here he cannot enter,” said Adam. “Here he can hurt no one. Over him also is power given me.” “Are the children in the house?” asked Lilith, and at the word the heart of Eve began to love her. “He never dared touch a child,” she said. “Nor have you either ever hurt a child. Your own daughter you have but sent into the loveliest sleep, for she was already a long time dead when you slew her. And now Death shall be the atonemaker; you shall sleep together.” “Wife,” said Adam, “let us first put the children to bed, that she may see them safe!” He came back to fetch them. As soon as he was gone, the princess knelt to Eve, clasped her knees, and said, “Beautiful Eve, persuade your husband to kill me: to you he will listen!

to rise, but fell at the feet of Eve. The Mother lifted, and carried her inward. I followed Adam and Mara and the children into the chamber of death. We passed Eve with Lilith in her arms, and went farther in. “You shall not go to the Shadow,” I heard Eve say, as we passed them. “Even now is his head under my heel!” The dim light in Adam’s hand glimmered on the sleeping faces, and as he went on, the darkness closed over them. The very air seemed dead: was it because none of the sleepers breathed it? Profoundest sleep filled the wide place. It was as if not one had waked since last I was there, for the forms I had then noted lay there still. My father was just as I had left him, save that he seemed yet nearer to a perfect peace.

the voice of Eve behind us; and we came to the couch while the little fellow was yet creeping slowly and softly under the sheet. He laid his head beside the lady’s, looked up at us, and was still. His eyelids fell; he was asleep. We went a little farther, and there was another who had climbed up on the couch of a woman. “Mother! mother!” he cried, kneeling over her, his face close to hers. “--She’s so cold she can’t speak,” he said, looking up to us; “but I will soon make her warm!” He lay down, and pressing close to her, put his little arm over her. In an instant he too was asleep, smiling an absolute content. We came to a third Little One; it was Luva. She stood on tiptoe, leaning over the edge of a couch.

answered Adam. “Promises to the dying are easy!” she said. “But I know it: I too have slept. I am dead!” “I believed you dead long ago; but I see you alive!” “More alive than you know, or are able to understand. I was scarce alive when first you knew me. Now I have slept, and am awake; I am dead, and live indeed!” “I fear that child,” she said, pointing to Lona: “she will rise and terrify me!” “She is dreaming love to you.” “But the Shadow!” she moaned; “I fear the Shadow! he will be wroth with me!” “He at sight of whom the horses of heaven start and rear, dares not disturb one dream in this quiet chamber!” “I shall dream then?” “You will dream.” “What dreams?” “That I cannot tell, but none HE can enter into.

you will sleep indeed--then wake indeed.” “I am trying hard, but the fingers have grown together and into the palm.” “I pray you put forth the strength of your will. For the love of life, draw together your forces and break its bonds!” “I have struggled in vain; I can do no more. I am very weary, and sleep lies heavy upon my lids.” “The moment you open your hand, you will sleep. Open it, and make an end.” A tinge of colour arose in the parchment-like face; the contorted hand trembled with agonised effort. Mara took it, and sought to aid her. “Hold, Mara!” cried her father. “There is danger!” The princess turned her eyes upon Eve, beseechingly. “There was a sword I once saw in your husband’s hands,” she murmured. “I fled when I saw it. I heard him who bore it say it would divide whatever was not one and indivisible!” “I have the sword,” said Adam.

already fast asleep. Mara covered the arm with the sheet, and the three turned away. “Will you not dress the wound?” I said. “A wound from that sword,” answered Adam, “needs no dressing. It is healing and not hurt.” “Poor lady!” I said, “she will wake with but one hand!” “Where the dead deformity clung,” replied Mara, “the true, lovely hand is already growing.” We heard a childish voice behind us, and turned again. The candle in Eve’s hand shone on the sleeping face of Lilith, and the waking faces of the three Little Ones, grouped on the other side of her couch. “How beautiful she is grown!” said one of them. “Poor princess!” said another; “I will sleep with her. She will not bite any more!” As he spoke he climbed into her bed, and was immediately fast asleep.
