When I woke, the ground was moist about me, and my track to the grave was growing a quicksand. In its ancient course the river was swelling, and had begun to shove at its burden. Soon it would be roaring down the precipice, and, divided in its fall, rushing with one branch to resubmerge the orchard valley, with the other to drown perhaps the monster horde, and between them to isle the Evil Wood. I set out at once on my return to those who sent me. When I came to the precipice, I took my way betwixt the branches, for I would pass again by the cottage of Mara, lest she should have returned: I longed to see her once more ere I went to sleep; and now I knew where to cross the channels, even if the river should have overtaken me and filled them.

replied, “that I cannot; for she refuses none whom it is lawful for her to receive.” “How know you this of her? You have never sought death! you are much too young to desire it!” “I fear your words may indicate that, were you young again, neither would you desire it.” “Indeed, young sir, I would not! and certain I am that you cannot.” “I may not be old enough to desire to die, but I am young enough to desire to live indeed! Therefore I go now to learn if she will at length take me in. You wish to die because you do not care to live: she will not open her door to you, for no one can die who does not long to live.” “It ill becomes your youth to mock a friendless old man. Pray, cease your riddles!” “Did not then the Mother tell you something of the same sort?” “In truth I believe she did; but I gave little heed to her excuses.” “Ah, then, sir,” I rejoined, “it is but too plain you have not yet learned to die, and I am heartily grieved for you.

him weeping. What I said, I fear he did not heed. But Mara would find him! The sun was down, and the moon unrisen, when I reached the abode of the monsters, but it was still as a stone till I passed over. Then I heard a noise of many waters, and a great cry behind me, but I did not turn my head. Ere I reached the house of death, the cold was bitter and the darkness dense; and the cold and the darkness were one, and entered into my bones together. But the candle of Eve, shining from the window, guided me, and kept both frost and murk from my heart. The door stood open, and the cottage lay empty. I sat down disconsolate. And as I sat, there grew in me such a sense of loneliness as never yet in my wanderings had I felt.

dropped Adam’s old spade, and the dull sound of its fall on the clay floor seemed reverberated from the chamber beyond: a childish terror seized me; I sat and stared at the coffin-door.--But father Adam, mother Eve, sister Mara would soon come to me, and then--welcome the cold world and the white neighbours! I forgot my fears, lived a little, and loved my dead. Something did move in the chamber of the dead! There came from it what was LIKE a dim, far-off sound, yet was not what I knew as sound. My soul sprang into my ears. Was it a mere thrill of the dead air, too slight to be heard, but quivering in every spiritual sense? I KNEW without hearing, without feeling it! The something was coming! it drew nearer! In the bosom of my desertion awoke an infant hope.

my bed, king. I want to sleep.” I bore her to the death-chamber, holding her tight lest she should dissolve out of my arms. Unaware that I saw, I carried her straight to her couch. “Lay me down,” she said, “and cover me from the warm air; it hurts--a little. Your bed is there, next to mine. I shall see you when I wake.” She was already asleep. I threw myself on my couch--blessed as never was man on the eve of his wedding. “Come, sweet cold,” I said, “and still my heart speedily.” But there came instead a glimmer of light in the chamber, and I saw the face of Adam approaching. He had not the candle, yet I saw him. At the side of Lona’s couch, he looked down on her with a questioning smile, and then greeted me across it.

I should go to sleep like the Little Ones the moment I laid my head down!” “Your hour is not quite come. You must have food ere you sleep.” “Ah, I ought not to have lain down without your leave, for I cannot sleep without your help! I will get up at once!” But I found my own weight more than I could move. “There is no need: we will serve you here,” he answered. “--You do not feel cold, do you?” “Not too cold to lie still, but perhaps too cold to eat!” He came to the side of my couch, bent over me, and breathed on my heart. At once I was warm. As he left me, I heard a voice, and knew it was the Mother’s. She was singing, and her song was sweet and soft and low, and I thought she sat by my bed in the dark; but ere it ceased, her song soared aloft, and seemed to come from the throat of a woman-angel, high above all the region of larks, higher than man had ever yet lifted up his heart.

again!” answered Eve. “How could you know it?” I returned. “Because here was I, born to look after my brothers and sisters!” answered Mara with a smile. “Every creature must one night yield himself and lie down,” answered Adam: “he was made for liberty, and must not be left a slave!” “It will be late, I fear, ere all have lain down!” I said. “There is no early or late here,” he rejoined. “For him the true time then first begins who lays himself down. Men are not coming home fast; women are coming faster. A desert, wide and dreary, parts him who lies down to die from him who lies down to live. The former may well make haste, but here is no haste.” “To our eyes,” said Eve, “you were coming all the time: we knew Mara would find you, and you must come!” “How long is it since my father lay down?” I asked.

your mother again,” he continued, “you will not at first know her. She will go on steadily growing younger until she reaches the perfection of her womanhood--a splendour beyond foresight. Then she will open her eyes, behold on one side her husband, on the other her son--and rise and leave them to go to a father and a brother more to her than they.” I heard as one in a dream. I was very cold, but already the cold caused me no suffering. I felt them put on me the white garment of the dead. Then I forgot everything. The night about me was pale with sleeping faces, but I was asleep also, nor knew that I slept.
