The fourth night I seemed to fall asleep, and that night woke indeed. I opened my eyes and knew, although all was dark around me, that I lay in the house of death, and that every moment since there I fell asleep I had been dreaming, and now first was awake. “At last!” I said to my heart, and it leaped for joy. I turned my eyes; Lona stood by my couch, waiting for me! I had never lost her!--only for a little time lost the sight of her! Truly I needed not have lamented her so sorely! It was dark, as I say, but I saw her: SHE was not dark! Her eyes shone with the radiance of the Mother’s, and the same light issued from her face--nor from her face only, for her death-dress, filled with the light of her body now tenfold awake in the power of its resurrection, was white as snow and glistering.

greeted us with a quiet good-morning and a smile: they were used to such wakings! “I hope you have had a pleasant darkness!” said the Mother. “Not very,” I answered, “but the waking from it is heavenly.” “It is but begun,” she rejoined; “you are hardly yet awake!” “He is at least clothed-upon with Death, which is the radiant garment of Life,” said Adam. He embraced Lona his child, put an arm around me, looked a moment or two inquiringly at the princess, and patted the head of the leopardess. “I think we shall meet you two again before long,” he said, looking first at Lona, then at me. “Have we to die again?” I asked. “No,” he answered, with a smile like the Mother’s; “you have died into life, and will die no more; you have only to keep dead.

little sigh, and I thought it meant, “But they will not believe you!” “--You know me now!” she ended, with a smile like her mother’s. “I know you!” I answered: “you are the voice that cried in the wilderness before ever the Baptist came! you are the shepherd whose wolves hunt the wandering sheep home ere the shadow rise and the night grow dark!” “My work will one day be over,” she said, “and then I shall be glad with the gladness of the great shepherd who sent me.” “All the night long the morning is at hand,” said Adam. “What is that flapping of wings I hear?” I asked. “The Shadow is hovering,” replied Adam: “there is one here whom he counts his own! But ours once, never more can she be his!” I turned to look on the faces of my father and mother, and kiss them ere we went: their couches were empty save of the Little Ones who had with love’s boldness appropriated their hospitality!

her father’s arms. “That kiss will draw her homeward, my Lona!” said Adam. “Who were her parents?” asked Lona. “My father,” answered Adam, “is her father also.” She turned and laid her hand in mine. I kneeled and humbly thanked the three for helping me to die. Lona knelt beside me, and they all breathed upon us. “Hark! I hear the sun,” said Adam. I listened: he was coming with the rush as of a thousand times ten thousand far-off wings, with the roar of a molten and flaming world millions upon millions of miles away. His approach was a crescendo chord of a hundred harmonies. The three looked at each other and smiled, and that smile went floating heavenward a three-petaled flower, the family’s morning thanksgiving. From their mouths and their faces it spread over their bodies and shone through their garments.

until the dawn of the day eternal.” I listened. Far away--as in the heart of an onian silence, I heard the clear jubilant outcry of the golden throat. It hurled defiance at death and the dark; sang infinite hope, and coming calm. It was the “expectation of the creature” finding at last a voice; the cry of a chaos that would be a kingdom! Then I heard a great flapping. “The black bat is flown!” said Mara. “Amen, golden cock, bird of God!” cried Adam, and the words rang through the house of silence, and went up into the airy regions. At his AMEN--like doves arising on wings of silver from among the potsherds, up sprang the Little Ones to their knees on their beds, calling aloud, “Crow! crow again, golden cock!”--as if they had both seen and heard him in their dreams.

and saw beside her, still asleep, two of his companions. He flew at them. “Wake up! wake up!” he cried, and pushed and pulled, now this one, now that. But soon he began to look troubled, and turned to me with misty eyes. “They will not wake!” he said. “And why are they so cold?” “They too are waiting for the princess,” I answered. He stretched across, and laid his hand on her face. “She is cold too! What is it?” he cried--and looked round in wondering dismay. Adam went to him. “Her wake is not ripe yet,” he said: “she is busy forgetting. When she has forgotten enough to remember enough, then she will soon be ripe, and wake.” “And remember?” “Yes--but not too much at once though.” “But the golden cock has crown!” argued the child, and fell again upon his companions.
