At the corner of a long, straight, brick-built artery in the far East End of London—a thoroughfare defined by its lifelessness, composed merely of two drab walls upon which the level lines of perfectly even window-sills and doorsteps stretch in a weary, hypnotic perspective from end to end, resembling petrified diagrams of dead problems—stands a house that exerts a gravitational pull upon me. Often, when least conscious of my own footsteps, I awaken to find myself hurrying through noisy, crowded boulevards where flaring naphtha lamps illuminate fierce, patient, leaden-coloured faces; through dim-lit, empty avenues where monstrous shadows dance upon close-drawn blinds; through narrow, noisome lanes where gutters swarm with children and every open doorway vomits chaos; past reeking corners and across wastelands, until I finally reach the dreary destination of my memory-driven desire. Coming to a halt beside the broken railings, I find rest.

The house, larger than its neighbours, constructed when the street was still a country lane edging the marshes, strikes a discordant note of individuality amidst the surrounding harmony of hideousness. It is enclosed on two sides by what was once a garden, though now but a barren patch of stones and dust where clothes—odd, anyone should consider washing them—hang in perpetuity; while about the door remain the remnants of a porch, exposed in all its naked insincerity by the falling stucco. Occasionally, I drift hitherward during the day, when slatternly women gossip round the area gates, and the silence is shattered by the hoarse, wailing cry of "Coals—any coals—three and sixpence a sack—co-o-o-als!" chanted in a tone that the absence of response has stamped with chronic melancholy. Yet, then the street knows me not, and my old friend of the corner, ashamed of its shabbiness under the unpitying sunlight, turns its face away, refusing to acknowledge me as I pass.

Not until the Night, merciful alone of all things to the ugly, draws her veil across its sordid features will it, like some fond old nurse sought out in after years, open wide its arms to welcome me. Then, the teeming life it currently shelters, hushed for a time within its walls, and the flickering flare from the "King of Prussia" opposite extinguished, allows it to converse with me of the past, asking many questions and reminding me of many things I had forgotten. Into the silent street come the well-remembered footsteps; in and out the creaking gate pass, unseen by me, the well-remembered faces. We talk concerning them, as two cronies turning the torn leaves of some old album where faded portraits in forgotten fashions speak together in low tones of those now dead or scattered, exchanging now a smile and now a sigh, punctuated by many an "Ah me!" or "Dear, dear!"

This bent, worn man approaches us with quick, impatient steps, which yet cease every fifty yards or so, while he pauses, leaning heavily upon his high Malacca cane. "It is a handsome face, is it not?" I ask, gazing upon it, shadow-framed. "Aye, handsome enough," answers the old House, "and handsomer still it must have been before you and I knew it, before mean care had furrowed it with fretful lines."

"I never could make out," continues the old House, musingly, "whom you took after; for they were a handsome pair, your father and your mother, though Lord! what a couple of children!"

"Children!" I say in surprise, for my father must have been past thirty-five before the House could have known him, and my mother's face is very close to mine in the darkness, so that I see the many grey hairs mingling with the bonny brown.

"Children," repeats the old House, irritably, seemingly displeased that its opinions are questioned—a failing common to old folk—"the most helpless pair of children I ever set eyes upon. Who but a child, I should like to know, would have conceived the notion of repairing his fortune by becoming a solicitor at thirty-eight, or, having conceived such a notion, would have selected the outskirts of Poplar as a likely centre in which to put up his door-plate?"

"It was considered to be a rising neighbourhood," I reply, a little resentful. No son cares to hear the family wisdom criticised, even though at the bottom of his heart he may agree with the critic. "All sorts and conditions of men, whose affairs were in connection with the sea would, it was thought, come to reside hereabout, so as to be near to the new docks; and had they, it is not unreasonable to suppose they would have quarrelled and disputed with one another, much to the advantage of a cute solicitor, convenient to their hand."

"Stuff and nonsense," retorts the old House, shortly; "why, the mere smell of the place would have been sufficient to keep a sensible man away. And"—the grim brick face before me twists itself into a goblin smile—"he, of all men in the world, as 'the cute solicitor,' giving advice to shady clients, eager to get out of trouble by the shortest way, can you fancy it! He who for two years starved himself, living on five shillings a week—that was before you came to London, when he was here alone. Even your mother knew nothing of it till years afterwards—so that no man should be a penny the poorer for having trusted his good name. Do you think the crew of chandlers and brokers, dock hustlers and freight wreckers would have found him a useful man of business, even had they come to settle here?"

I have no answer; nor does the old House wait for one, but talks on. "And your mother! Would any but a child have taken that soft-tongued wanton to her bosom, and not have seen through acting so transparent? Would any but the veriest child that never ought to have been let out into the world by itself have thought to dree her weird in such folly? Children! Poor babies they were, both of them."

"Tell me," I say—for at such times all my stock of common sense is insufficient to convince me that the old House is but clay. From its walls so full of voices, from its floors so thick with footsteps, surely it has learned to live; as a violin, long played on, comes to learn at last a music of its own. "Tell me, I was but a child to whom life speaks in a strange tongue, was there any truth in the story?"

"Truth!" snaps out the old House; "just truth enough to plant a lie upon; and Lord knows not much ground is needed for that weed. I saw what I saw, and I know what I know. Your mother had a good man, and your father a true wife, but it was the old story: a man's way is not a woman's way, and a woman's way is not a man's way, so there lives ever doubt between them."

"But they came together in the end," I say, remembering.

"Aye, in the end," answers the House. "That is when you begin to understand, you men and women, when you come to the end."

The grave face of a not too recently washed angel peeps shyly at me through the railings, then, as I turn my head, darts back and disappears. "What has become of her?" I ask.

"She? Oh, she is well enough," replies the House. "She lives close here. You must have passed the shop. You might have seen her had you looked in. She weighs fourteen stone, about; and has nine children living. She would be pleased to see you."

"Thank you," I say, with a laugh that is not wholly a laugh; "I do not think I will call." But I still hear the pit-pat of her tiny feet, dying down the long street. The faces thicken round me. A large looming, rubicund visage smiles kindly on me, bringing back into my heart the old, odd mingling of instinctive liking held in check by conscientious disapproval. I turn from it, and see a massive, clean-shaven face, with the ugliest mouth and the loveliest eyes I ever have known in a man.

"Was he as bad, do you think, as they said?" I ask of my ancient friend.

"Shouldn't wonder," the old House answers. "I never knew a worse—and a better."

The wind whisks it aside, leaving to view a little old woman, hobbling nimbly by aid of a stick. Three corkscrew curls each side of her head bob with each step she takes, and as she draws near to me, making the most alarming grimaces, I hear her whisper, as though confiding to herself some fascinating secret, "I'd like to skin 'em. I'd like to skin 'em all. I'd like to skin 'em all alive!" It sounds a fiendish sentiment, yet I only laugh, and the little old lady, with a final facial contortion surpassing all dreams, limps beyond my ken.

Then, as though choosing contrasts, follows a fair, laughing face. I saw it in the life only a few hours ago—at least, not it, but the poor daub that Evil has painted over it, hating the sweetness underlying. And as I stand gazing at it, wishing it were of the dead who change not, there drifts back from the shadows that
