To truly grasp the architecture of my impending exile from obscurity, one must first confront the absolute poverty of my artistic universe at the precise moment of my audition. It was eleven o'clock in the morning, a time usually reserved for commerce, yet here we stood at the threshold of a narrow court leading to the stage door, suspended in a limbo between potential glory and certain mediocrity. For two weeks prior, the O'Kelly—a veritable musical genius trapped within a body of nervous energy—had been coaching me. It had been a harrowing exercise for both of us, though the burden of anxiety weighed heavier upon his shoulders than mine.

Behind the closed doors of the O'Kelly household, a different kind of tyranny reigned. Mrs. O'Kelly, a thin, acid-visaged matron whom I had glimpsed only fleetingly while promenading Belsize Square, harbored a conscientious objection to all music save that of a sacred character. In a desperate bid to win her husband from his sinful tendencies, the piano had been banished, replaced by an American organ of exceptionally lugubrious tone. With this mournful instrument, we had made do. Though the O'Kelly managed to evolve from its groaning depths an accompaniment to "Sally in Our Alley" that was less misleading than might otherwise have been the case, the result was not a lightening of our labors, but a deepening of our despair. My rendering of the famous ballad consequently acquired a dolefulness entirely unintended by the composer. Sung as I sang it, the theme transformed, employing a definition since grown hackneyed in the critique of Art, into a "problem ballad." One could not help but wonder involuntarily whether the marriage depicted in the song would turn out as satisfactorily as the young man appeared to anticipate. Was there not, when one came to think of it, a melancholy, a pessimism ingrained within the temperament of the complainful hero that would ill assort with those instincts toward frivolity the careful observer could not avoid discerning in the charming yet nevertheless somewhat shallow character of Sally?

"Lighter, lighter. Not so soulful," the O'Kelly would demand, as the solemn notes rolled jerkily from the groaning instrument beneath his trembling hands.

On one occasion, we were nearly caught, Mrs. O'Kelly returning from a district visitors' committee meeting earlier than expected. Hastily, I was concealed in a small conservatory adjoining the first-floor landing, where, crouching behind flower-pots, I listened in fear and trembling to the severe cross-examination of the O'Kelly.

"William, do not prevaricate. It was not a hymn."

"My dear, so much depends upon the time. Let me give ye an example of what I mean."

"William, pray in my presence not to play tricks with sacred melodies. If you have no respect for religion, please remember that I have. Besides, why should you be playing hymns in any time at ten o'clock in the morning? It is not like you, William, and I do not credit your explanation. And you were singing. I distinctly heard the word 'Sally' as I opened the door."

"Salvation, me dear," corrected the O'Kelly, his voice rising in pitch.

"Your enunciation, William, is not usually so much at fault."

"A little hoarseness, me dear," explained the O'Kelly, feigning vulnerability.

"Your voice did not sound hoarse. Perhaps it will be better if we do not pursue the subject further."

With this, the O'Kelly appeared to agree, though the tension in the air remained thick enough to choke a horse.

"She's a lady a little difficult to get on with when ye're feeling well and strong," the O'Kelly would explain later, attempting to soothe my frayed nerves. "But if ye happen to be ill, one of the kindest, most devoted of women. When I was down with typhoid three years ago, a tenderer nurse no man could have had. I shall never forget it. And so she would be again to-morrow, if there was anything serious the matter with me."

I murmured the well-known quotation.

"Mrs. O'Kelly to a T," concurred the O'Kelly, a flicker of admiration crossing his face. "I sometimes wonder if Lady Scott may not have been the same sort of woman."

"The unfortunate part of it is," continued the O'Kelly, striking a discordant chord, "that I'm such a healthy beggar; it don't give her a chance. If I were only a chronic invalid, now, there's nothing that woman would not do to make me happy. As it is—"

We resumed our studies, the shadow of the wife's disapproval lingering over every note.

But to return to our conversation at the stage door.

"Meet me at the Cheshire Cheese at one o'clock," said the O'Kelly, shaking my hand with a grip that promised both encouragement and warning. "If ye don't get on here, we'll try something else; but I've spoken to Hodgson, and I think ye will. Good luck to ye!"

He went his way, and I mine. In a glass box just behind the door, a curved-nose, round-eyed little man, looking like an angry bird in a cage, demanded of me my business. I showed him my letter of appointment.

"Up the passage, across the stage, along the corridor, first floor, second door on the right," he instructed me in one breathless rush, and shut the window with a snap that echoed like a gavel strike.

I proceeded up the passage. It somewhat surprised me to discover that I was not in the least excited at the thought of this, my first introduction to "behind the scenes." I recalled my father asking a young soldier on his return from the Crimea what had been his sensations at the commencement of his first charge.

"Well," replied the young fellow, "I was worrying all the time, remembering I had rushed out leaving the beer tap running in the canteen, and I could not forget it."

So far as the stage itself, I found my way in safety. Pausing for a moment and glancing round, my impression was not so much disillusionment concerning all things theatrical as the realization of my worst forebodings. In that one moment, all glamour connected with the stage fell from me, nor has it since ever returned to me. From the tawdry decorations of the auditorium to the childish make-believe littered around on the stage, I saw the Theatre a painted thing of shreds and patches—the grown child's doll's-house. The Drama may improve us, elevate us, interest and teach us. I am sure it does; long may it flourish! But so likewise does the dressing and undressing of dolls, the opening of the front of the house, and the tenderly putting of them away to bed in rooms they completely fill, train our little dears to the duties and the joys of motherhood. Toys! What wise child despises them? Art, fiction, the musical glasses: are they not preparing us for the time, however distant, when we shall at last be grown up?

In a maze of ways beyond the stage, I lost myself, but eventually, guided by voices, came to a large room furnished barely with many chairs and worn settees, and here I found some twenty to thirty ladies and gentlemen already seated. They were of varying ages, sizes, and appearances, but all of them alike in having about them that impossible-to-define but impossible-to-mistake suggestion of theatricality. The men were chiefly remarkable for having no hair on their faces, but a good deal upon their heads; the ladies, one and all, were blessed with remarkably pink and white complexions and exceptionally bright eyes. The conversation, carried on in subdued but penetrating voices, was chiefly of "him" and "her." Everybody appeared to be on an affectionate footing with everybody else, the terms of address being "My dear," "My love," "Old girl," "Old chappie," Christian names—when name of any sort was needful—alone being employed. I hesitated for a minute with the door in my hand, fearing I had stumbled upon a family gathering. As, however, nobody seemed disconcerted at my entry, I ventured to take a vacant seat next to an extremely small and boyish-looking gentleman and to ask him if this was the room in which I, an applicant for a place in the chorus of the forthcoming comic opera, ought to be waiting.

He had large, fishy eyes, with which he looked me up and down. For such a length of time he remained thus regarding me in silence that a massive gentleman sitting near, who had overheard, took it upon himself to reply in the affirmative, adding that from what he knew of Butterworth we would all of us be waiting here a damned sight longer than any gentleman should keep other ladies and gentlemen waiting for no reason at all.

"I think it exceedingly bad form," observed the fishy-eyed gentleman, in deep contralto tones, "for any gentleman to take it upon himself to reply to a remark addressed to quite another gentleman."

"I beg your pardon," retorted the large gentleman. "I thought you were asleep."

"I think it very ill manners," remarked the small gentleman in the same slow and impressive tones, "for any gentleman to tell another gentleman, who happens to be wide awake, that he thought he was asleep."

"Sir," returned the massive gentleman, assuming with the help of a large umbrella a quite Johnsonian attitude, "I decline to alter my manners to suit your taste."

"If you are satisfied with them
