"Cast me upon some naked shore,
Where I may tracke
Only the print of some sad wracke,
If thou be there though the seas roare,
I shall no gentler calm implore."

He was gone. The house stood silent for the evening, stripped of its usual vibrant hues. Margaret ascended to prepare for the early tea, finding Dixon in a foul temper, his irritation stemming from the interruption a visitor had caused on such a busy day. He displayed his mood by brushing Margaret's hair with vicious haste, claiming urgency to reach Mrs. Hale. Yet, despite his haste, Margaret was forced to wait a long time in the drawing-room before her mother descended. She sat alone by the fire, unlit candles standing like silent witnesses behind her, reflecting on the day's trajectory: the joyous walk, the pleasant sketching, the cheerful dinner, followed by the miserable, uncomfortable stroll in the garden.

How vastly different men were from women! Here she was, disturbed and unhappy because her instinct had rendered a refusal impossible; while he, mere minutes after meeting with a rejection of what ought to have been the deepest, holiest proposal of his life, spoke as if briefs, success, and the superficial trappings of a good house and clever society were his sole objectives. Oh dear! How she could have loved him if he had been different, possessing a difference she felt, on reflection, went low—deep down. Then, a thought crossed her mind: perhaps his lightness was merely assumed, a mask covering a bitterness of disappointment that would have branded her own heart had she loved and been rejected.

Her mother entered before this whirlwind of thoughts could organize itself. Margaret had to shake off the recollections of the day's events and turn a sympathetic ear to Dixon's complaints about the ironing-blanket being burnt again, and to the gossip that Susan Lightfoot had been seen with artificial flowers in her bonnet, evidence of a vain and giddy character. Mr. Hale sipped his tea in abstracted silence; Margaret bore the brunt of the conversation. She wondered how her parents could be so forgetful, so careless of their companion throughout the day, failing to mention his name. She momentarily forgot that he had not yet made them an offer.

After tea, Mr. Hale rose, leaning his head on his hand with his elbow on the chimney-piece, lost in musing, sighing deeply from time to time. Mrs. Hale departed to consult with Dixon regarding winter clothing for the poor. Margaret prepared her mother's worsted work, shrinking from the prospect of the long evening and wishing for bed so she could revisit the day's events in solitude.

"Margaret!" Mr. Hale called out suddenly, in a tone of desperate urgency that made her startle. "Is that tapestry work of immediate consequence? Can you leave it and come into my study? I wish to speak to you about something very serious to us all."

"Very serious to us all." Mr. Lennox had never had the chance for private conversation with her father following her refusal, or else this would indeed be a grave affair. First, Margaret felt guilty and ashamed of having grown into a woman deemed worthy of marriage; secondly, she feared her father might be displeased that she had taken upon herself to decline Mr. Lennox's proposal. Yet, she soon realized this was not about any recent complication. He gestured for her to sit beside him, stirred the fire, snuffed the candles, and sighed several times before composing himself to speak—and it came out with a jerk nonetheless—"Margaret! I am going to leave Helstone."

"Leave Helstone, papa! But why?"

Mr. Hale remained silent for a minute or two, playing nervously with papers on the table, opening his lips to speak only to close them again without the courage to utter a word. Margaret could not bear the suspense, which distressed her father even more than herself.

"But why, dear papa? Do tell me!"

He looked up suddenly, then spoke with a slow, enforced calmness: "Because I must no longer be a minister in the Church of England."

Margaret had imagined nothing less than that some preferment her mother had so desired had finally befallen her father—something forcing him to leave beautiful, beloved Helstone for the stately, silent closes of cathedral towns. They were grand and imposing, but to leave Helstone forever would have been a sad, lingering pain. Yet, nothing compared to the shock of her father's final speech. What could he mean? It was worse for being so mysterious. The aspect of piteous distress on his face, almost imploring a merciful judgment from his child, gave her a sudden sickness. Could he be implicated in something Frederick had done? Frederick was an outlaw. Had her father, out of natural love for his son, connived at anything?

"Oh! what is it? Do speak, papa! Tell me all! Why can you no longer be a clergyman? Surely, if the bishop were told all we know about Frederick, and the hard injustice—"

"It is nothing about Frederick; the bishop would have nothing to do with that. It is all myself. Margaret, I will tell you about it. I will answer any questions this once, but after tonight, let us never speak of it again. I can meet the consequences of my painful, miserable doubts; but it is an effort beyond me to speak of what has caused me so much suffering."

"Doubts, papa! Doubts as to religion?" Margaret asked, more shocked than ever.

"No! Not doubts as to religion; not the slightest injury to that."

He paused. Margaret sighed as if standing on the verge of some new horror. He began again, speaking rapidly as if to complete a set task: "You could not understand it all if I told you—my anxiety for years past to know whether I had any right to hold my living—my efforts to quench my smouldering doubts by the authority of the Church. Oh! Margaret, how I love the holy Church from which I am to be shut out!" He could not continue for a moment or two. Margaret could not speak; it seemed to her as terribly mysterious as if her father were about to turn Mahometan.

"I have been reading today of the two thousand who were ejected from their churches," Mr. Hale continued, smiling faintly, "trying to steal some of their bravery; but it is of no use—no use—I cannot help feeling it acutely."

"But, papa, have you well considered? Oh! It seems so terrible, so shocking," Margaret said, suddenly bursting into tears. The one staid foundation of her home, of her idea of her beloved father, seemed to reel and rock. What could she say? What was to be done? The sight of her distress made Mr. Hale steel himself to try and comfort her. He swallowed down the dry, choking sobs that had been heaving up from his heart, went to his bookcase, and took down a volume he had often read lately, believing it had given him strength to embark on the course he now pursued.

"Listen, dear Margaret," he said, putting one arm around her waist. She took his hand in hers and grasped it tightly, but she could not lift her head; nor could she attend to what he read, so great was her internal agitation.

"This is the soliloquy of one who was once a clergyman in a country parish, like me; it was written by Mr. Oldfield, minister of Carsington, in Derbyshire, a hundred and sixty years ago, or more. His trials are over. He fought the good fight." These last two sentences he spoke low, as if to himself. Then he read aloud:

"When thou canst no longer continue in thy work without dishonour to God, discredit to religion, foregoing thy integrity, wounding conscience, spoiling thy peace, and hazarding the loss of thy salvation; in a word, when the conditions upon which thou must continue (if thou wilt continue) in thy employments are sinful, and unwarranted by the word of God, thou mayest, yea, thou must believe that God will turn thy very silence, suspension, deprivation, and laying aside, to His glory, and the advancement of the Gospel's interest. When God will not use thee in one kind, yet He will in another. A soul that desires to serve and honour Him shall never want opportunity to do it; nor must thou so limit the Holy One of Israel, as to think He hath but one way in which He can glorify Himself by thee. He can do it by thy silence as well as by thy preaching; the laying aside as well as thy continuance in thy work. It is not pretence of doing God the greatest service, or performing the weightiest duty, that will excuse the least sin, though that sin capacitated or gave us the opportunity for doing that duty. Thou wilt have little thanks, O my soul! if, when thou art charged with corrupting God's worship, falsifying thy vows, thou pretendest a necessity for it in order to a continuance in the ministry."

As he read this, glancing at much more which he did not read, he gained resolution for himself and felt as if he too could be brave and firm in doing what he believed to be right; but as he ceased, he heard Margaret's low, convulsive sob, and his courage sank under the keen sense of suffering.

"Margaret, dear!" he said, drawing her closer, "think of the early martyrs; think of the thousands who have suffered."

"But, father," she said, suddenly lifting her flushed, tear-wet face, "the early martyrs suffered for the truth, while you—oh! dear, dear papa!"

"I suffer for conscience' sake, my child," he said, with a dignity only tremulous from the acute sensitiveness of his character; "I must do what my conscience bids. I have borne long with self-reproach that would have roused any mind less torpid and cowardly than mine." He shook his head as he went on. "Your poor mother's fond wish, gratified at last in the mocking way in which over-fond wishes are too often fulfilled—Sodom apples as they are—has brought on this crisis, for which I ought to be, and I hope I am thankful. It is not a month since the bishop offered me another living; if I had accepted it, I should have had to make a fresh declaration of conformity to the Liturgy at my institution. Margaret, I tried to do it; I tried to content myself with simply refusing the additional preferment and stopping quietly here,—strangling my conscience now, as I had strained it before. God forgive me!"

He rose and walked up and down the room, speaking low words of self-reproach and humiliation, of which Margaret was thankful to hear but few. At last he said, "Margaret, I return to the old sad burden: we must leave Helstone."

"Yes! I see. But when?"

"I have written to the bishop—I dare say I have told you so, but I forget things just now," Mr. Hale said, collapsing into his depressed manner as soon as he came to talk of hard, matter-of-fact details, "informing him of my intention to resign this vicarage. He has been most kind; he has used arguments and expostulations, all in vain—in vain. They are but what I have tried upon myself, without avail. I shall have to take my deed of resignation, and wait upon the bishop myself to bid him farewell. That will be a trial. But worse, far worse, will be the parting from my dear people. There is a curate appointed to read prayers—a Mr. Brown. He will come to stay with us tomorrow. Next Sunday I preach my farewell sermon."

Was it to be so sudden? Margaret thought; and yet perhaps it was as well. Lingering would only add stings to the pain; it was better to be stunned into numbness by hearing of all these arrangements, which seemed nearly completed before she had been told. "What does mamma say?" she asked with a deep sigh.

To her surprise, her father began to walk about again before answering. At length he stopped and replied: "Margaret, I am a poor coward after all. I cannot bear to give pain. I know so well your mother's married life has not been all she hoped—all she had a right to expect—and this will be such a blow to her, that I have never had the heart, the power to tell her. She must be told though, now," he said, looking wistfully at his daughter. Margaret was almost overpowered by the idea that her mother knew nothing of it all, yet the affair was so far advanced!

"Yes, indeed she must," said Margaret. "Perhaps, after all, she may not—Oh yes! she will, she must be shocked"—as the force of the blow returned upon herself in trying to realize how another would take it. "Where are we to go to?" she asked at last, struck with a fresh wonder as to their future plans, if plans indeed her father had.

"To Milton-Northern," he answered with a dull indifference, for he had perceived that, although his daughter's love made her cling to him and for a moment strive to soothe him, the keenness of the pain was as fresh as ever in her mind.

"Milton-Northern! The manufacturing town in Darkshire?"

"Yes," he said in the same despondent, indifferent way.

"Why there, papa?" she asked.

"Because there I can earn bread for my family. Because I know no one there, and no one knows Helstone, or can ever talk to me about it."

"Bread for your family! I thought you and mamma had"—and then she stopped, checking her natural interest regarding their future life as she saw the gathering gloom on her father's brow. But he, with his quick intuitive sympathy, read in her face, as in a mirror, the reflections of his own moody depression, and turned it off with an effort.

"You shall be told all, Margaret. Only help me to tell your mother. I think I could do anything but that: the idea of her distress turns me sick with dread. If I tell you all, perhaps you could break it to her tomorrow. I am going out for the day to bid farmer Dobson and the poor people on Bracy Common good-bye. Would you dislike breaking it to
