"Revenge may have her own;
Roused discipline aloud proclaims their cause,
And injured navies urge their broken laws."

Margaret found herself wondering if all proposals carried the same weight of shock, the same crushing immediacy, as the two she had recently endured. An involuntary comparison between Mr. Lennox and Mr. Thornton surfaced in her mind. With Lennox, she had felt a profound regret that circumstances had dragged an expression of anything other than friendship from him; that sorrow had dominated her first encounter with a suitor. But now, the echo of Mr. Thornton's voice still lingered in the room, leaving her stunned and overwhelmed. In Lennox's case, he had seemed to slip across the threshold of love only to recoil almost instantly, driven by a regret she shared, albeit for different reasons. With Mr. Thornton, however, there had been no gentle slope of friendship to traverse. Their history had been a continuous series of clashes, their opinions colliding like stones against a wall. She had never sensed that he valued her thoughts as extensions of her own self; rather, whenever they challenged his rock-like character or his fierce passion, he dismissed them with a contempt that made her protests feel futile. And now, in this strange, wild, and passionate outburst, he had declared his love! At first, it had struck her as forced, goaded forth by his sharp compassion for her exposed vulnerability—a sentiment others might easily misunderstand. Yet, even before he departed, and certainly within five minutes, a clear conviction had dawned upon her, shining brightly: he loved her; he had loved her; he would love her. She shrank and shuddered as if under the spell of a great, repugnant power, alien to her entire previous life. She crept away, hiding from the idea, but it was useless. Parodying a line from Fairfax's *Tasso*:

"His strong idea wandered through her thought."

She disliked him all the more for having mastered her inner will. How dared he claim he would love her still, even if she shook him off with contempt? She wished she had spoken more strongly, more decisively. Sharp, resolute words thronged into her mind now that it was too late to utter them. The deep impression of the interview was like a horror in a dream that refuses to leave the room once we awaken, rub our eyes, and force a stiff, rigid smile upon our lips. It remains there—cowering and gibbering with fixed, ghastly eyes in some corner of the chamber, waiting to hear if we dare breathe of its presence to anyone. And we dare not; poor cowards that we are!

So she shuddered away from the threat of his enduring love. What did he mean? Did she not possess the power to daunt him? She would see. It seemed more daring than became a man to threaten her so. Was his claim grounded in the miserable events of yesterday? If need be, she would do the same tomorrow—by a crippled beggar, willingly and gladly—but by him, she would do it just as bravely, in spite of his deductions and the cold slime of woman's impertinence. She acted because it was right, simple, and true to save where she could save; even to try to save. *Fais ce que dois, advienne que pourra.*

Hitherto, she had not stirred from where he had left her; no outward circumstance had roused her from the trance of thought into which his last words and the look of his deep, intent, passionate eyes had plunged her, as their flames had made her own fall before them. She went to the window and threw it open to dispel the oppression hanging around her. Then she opened the door with an impetuous wish to shake off the recollection of the past hour in the company of others or through active exertion. But the house was profoundly hushed in the noonday stillness of a home where an invalid catches the unrefreshing sleep denied to the night-hours. Margaret would not be alone. What should she do? "Go and see Bessy Higgins, of course," she thought, as the memory of the message sent the night before flashed into her mind. And away she went.

When she arrived, she found Bessy lying on the settle, drawn close to the fire despite the sultry, oppressive heat. She was laid down quite flat, as if resting languidly after some paroxysm of pain. Margaret felt certain Bessy needed the greater freedom of breathing afforded by a sitting posture. Without a word, she raised her and arranged the pillows so Bessy was more at ease, though still very languid.

"I thought I should na' ha' seen yo' again," Bessy said finally, looking wistfully into Margaret's face.

"I'm afraid you're much worse. But I could not have come yesterday; my mother was so ill—for many reasons," Margaret replied, coloring.

"You'd m'appen think I went beyond my place in sending Mary for yo'. But the wraglin' and the loud voices had just torn me to pieces. I thought when father left, oh! if I could just hear her voice, reading me some words of peace and promise, I could die away into the silence and rest of God, just as a baby is hushed to sleep by its mother's lullaby."

"Shall I read you a chapter now?"

"Ay, do! M'appen I shan't listen to the sense at first; it will seem far away—but when you come to words I like, to the comforting texts, it'll seem close in my ear, going through me as it were."

Margaret began. Bessy tossed to and fro. If, by an effort, she attended for one moment, she seemed convulsed into double restlessness the next. Finally, she burst out: "Don't go on reading. It's no use. I'm blaspheming all the time in my mind, thinking angrily on what canna be helped. You'd hear of the riot yesterday at Marlborough Mills? Thornton's factory, you know."

"Your father was not there, was he?" Margaret asked, coloring deeply.

"Not he. He'd ha' given his right hand if it had never come to pass. It's that that's fretting me. He's fairly knocked down in his mind by it. It's no use telling him; fools will always break out of bounds. You never saw a man so downhearted as he is."

"But why?" Margaret asked. "I don't understand."

"Why, you see, he's a committee-man on this special strike. The Union appointed him because, though I say it as shouldn't say it, he's reckoned a deep chap, and true to the backbone. He and the other committee-men laid their plans. They were to hold together through thick and thin; whatever the majority thought, the others were to think, whether they would or no. Above all, there was to be no going against the law of the land. Folk would follow them if they saw them striving and starving with dumb patience; but if there was once any noise of fighting and struggling—even with knobsticks—all was up, as they know by the experience of many, many times before. They would try to get speech of the knobsticks, coax them, reason with them, and maybe warn them off; but whatever came, the Committee charged all members of the Union to lie down and die, if need were, without striking a blow. Then they reckoned they were sure of carrying the public with them. Besides all that, the Committee knew they were right in their demand, and they didn't want to have right mixed up with wrong till folk can't separate it, no more than I can separate the physic-powder from the jelly you gave me to mix; the jelly is much the bigger, but the powder tastes it all through. Well, I've told you at length about this, but I am tired out. You just think for yourself what it must be for father to have all his work undone by such a fool as Boucher, who must needs go right against the orders of the Committee and ruin the strike, just as bad as if he meant to be a Judas. Eh! but father gave it him last night! He went so far as to say he'd go and tell the police where they might find the ringleader of the riot; he'd give him up to the mill-owners to do what they would with him. He'd show the world that the real leaders of the strike were not such as Boucher, but steady, thoughtful men; good hands, and good citizens, friendly to law and judgment, who would uphold order; who only wanted their right wage and wouldn't work, even though they starved, till they got it, but who would ne'er injure property or life. For," dropping her voice, "they do say that Boucher threw a stone at Thornton's sister that well-nigh killed her."

"That's not true," said Margaret. "It was not Boucher that threw the stone"—she went first red, then white.

"You'd be there then, were you?" Bessie asked languidly; indeed, she had spoken with many pauses, as if speech was unusually difficult for her.

"Yes. Never mind. Go on. Only it was not Boucher that threw the stone. But what did he answer to your father?"

"He did na' speak words. He was all in such a tremble with spent passion I could na' bear to look at him. I heard his breath coming quick, and at one time I thought he were sobbing. But when father said he'd give him up to the police, he gave a great cry and struck father on the face with his closed fist, and he off like lightning. Father was stunned with the blow at first, for all Boucher was weak with passion and trembling. He sat down a bit and put his hand before his eyes; then he made for the door. I dunno' where I got strength, but I threw myself on the settle and clung to him. 'Father, father!' I said. 'Thou'll never go peach on that poor trembling man. I'll never leave thee till thou sayst thou wunnot.' 'Dunnot be a fool,' he says, 'words come readier than deeds to most men. I never thought of telling the police on him; though by G—, he deserves it, and I should na' ha' minded if someone else had done the dirty work and got him clapped up. But now he has strucken me, I could do it less nor ever, for it would be getting other men to take up my quarrel. But if ever he gets well over this trembling and is in good condition, he and I'll have an up and down fight, purring an' a', and I'll see what I can do for him.' And so father shook me off—for indeed I was low and faint enough, and his face was all clay-white where it wasn't bloody, and turned me sick to look at. And I know not if I slept or waked, or was in a dead swoon, till Mary came in; and I told her to fetch you to me. And now dunnot talk to me, but just read out the chapter. I'm easier in my mind for having spit it out; but I want some thoughts of the world that's far away to take the weary taste out of my mouth. Read me not a sermon chapter, but a story chapter; they've pictures in them which I see when my eyes are shut. Read about the New Heavens and the New Earth; and m'appen I'll forget this."

Margaret read in her soft, low voice. Though Bessy's eyes were shut, she listened for some time, for the moisture of tears gathered heavily on her eyelashes. At last, she slept, with many starts and muttered pleadings. Margaret covered her up and left her, for she had an uneasy consciousness that she might be wanted at home, and yet, until now, it seemed cruel to leave the dying girl.

Mrs. Hale was in the drawing-room on Margaret's return. It was one of her better days, and she was full of praises of the water-bed. It had been more like the beds at Sir John Beresford's than anything she had slept on since. She did not know how it was, but people seemed to have lost the art of making the same kind of beds as they used to do in her youth. One would think it was easy enough; there was the same kind of feathers to be had, and yet somehow, till this last night, she did not know when she had had a good, sound resting sleep.

Mr. Hale suggested that something of the merits of the feather-beds of former days might be attributed to the activity of youth, which gave a relish to rest; but this idea was not kindly received by his wife.

"No, indeed, Mr. Hale, it was those beds at Sir John's. Now, Margaret, you're young enough and go about in the day; are the beds comfortable? I appeal to you. Do they give you a feeling of perfect repose when you lie down upon them; or rather, don't you toss about, try in vain to find an easy position, and wake in the morning as tired as when you went to bed?"

Margaret laughed. "To tell the truth, mamma, I've never thought about my bed at all, what kind it is. I'm so sleepy at night that if I only lie down anywhere, I nap off directly. So I don't think I'm a competent witness. But then, you know, I never had the opportunity of trying Sir John Beresford's beds. I never was at Oxenham."

"Were you not? Oh, no! to be sure. It was poor darling Fred I took with me, I remember. I only went to Oxenham once after I was married—to your Aunt Shaw's wedding; and poor little Fred was the baby then. And I know Dixon did not like changing from lady's maid to nurse, and I was afraid that if I took her near her old home, amongst her own people, she might want to leave me. But poor baby was taken ill at Oxenham with his teething; and, what with my being a great deal with Anna just before her marriage and not being very strong myself, Dixon had more of the charge of him than she ever had before; and it made
