"Through cross to crown!—And though thy spirit's life
Trials untold assail with giant strength,
Good cheer! good cheer! Soon ends the bitter strife,
And thou shalt reign in peace with Christ at length."

"Ay sooth, we feel too strong in weal, to need Thee on that road;
But woe being come, the soul is dumb, that crieth not on 'God.'"

That afternoon, Margaret walked with purpose toward the Higgins's home. Mary awaited her at the door, her expression a mixture of hope and wary suspicion. Margaret offered a gentle, reassuring smile, and together they moved through the house, ascending the stairs to the quiet chamber where the dead lay. Upon entering, Margaret felt a profound relief settle over her. The face, usually etched with the fatigue of pain and the unrest of troubled thoughts, now bore the faint, soft smile of eternal rest. Slow tears welled in Margaret's eyes, yet a deep, abiding calm settled within her soul. That was death; it appeared more peaceful than life itself. Sacred verses filled her mind: "They rest from their labours," "The weary are at rest," "He giveth his beloved sleep."

Slowly, Margaret turned from the bedside. Behind her, Mary sobbed humbly. They descended the stairs in silence.

Nicholas Higgins stood in the center of the floor, his hand resting heavily on the table. His great eyes, startled wide by the news he had heard from the bustling court below, were dry and fierce. He studied the reality of her absence, forcing himself to accept that her place would know her no more. He had been so convinced of her resilience, so certain she would "pull through," that the finality of her illness had taken him completely by surprise.

Margaret felt an acute sense of intrusion, as if she had no right to be so familiar with the surroundings of death, a reality her father had only just begun to comprehend. There had been a fleeting pause on the steep, crooked stair when she first saw him, but now she attempted to slip past his abstracted gaze, leaving him to the solemn circle of his household's misery.

Mary collapsed onto the nearest chair, pulling her apron over her head as she began to weep. The sound seemed to snap Nicholas out of his trance. He seized Margaret's arm, holding her tightly until he could gather the strength to speak. His throat felt parched; his words came thick, choking, and hoarse.

"Were yo' with her? Did yo' see her die?"

"No!" Margaret replied, standing still with immense patience, now that she realized she was being observed. It took some time before he spoke again, though he maintained his grip on her arm.

"All men must die," he said finally, with a strange, heavy gravity that first suggested to Margaret he had been drinking—not enough to intoxicate, but enough to cloud his thoughts. "But she were younger than me." He continued to ponder the event, not looking at Margaret, though his grasp remained tight. Suddenly, he looked up at her with a wild, searching inquiry. "Yo're sure and certain she's dead—not in a dwam, a faint? she's been so before, often."

"She is dead," Margaret answered. She felt no fear in speaking to him, despite the pain of his grip and the wild, vacant gleams in his eyes.

"She is dead!" she repeated.

He stared at her with that searching look, which seemed to fade as he gazed. Then, abruptly, he released her. Throwing his body half across the table, he shook it and every piece of furniture in the room with violent sobs. Mary trembled forward toward him.

"Get thee gone!—get thee gone!" he cried, striking wildly and blindly at her. "What do I care for thee?" Margaret took her hand and held it softly. He tore at his hair, beat his head against the hard wood, and then lay exhausted and stuporous. Still, neither his daughter nor Margaret moved. Mary trembled from head to foot.

At last—it might have been a quarter of an hour, or perhaps an hour—he lifted himself up. His eyes were swollen and bloodshot, and he seemed to have forgotten anyone was present; he scowled at the watchers when he noticed them. He shook himself heavily, gave them one more sullen look, spoke not a word, and made for the door.

"Oh, father, father!" Mary cried, throwing herself upon his arm. "Not to-night! Any night but to-night. Oh, help me! he's going out to drink again! Father, I'll not leave yo'. Yo' may strike, but I'll not leave yo'. She told me last of all to keep yo' fro' drink!"

But Margaret stood in the doorway, silent yet commanding. He looked up at her defyingly.

"It's my own house. Stand out o' the way, wench, or I'll make yo'!" He had shaken Mary off with violence; he looked ready to strike Margaret. Yet she never moved a muscle, never took her deep, serious eyes off him. He stared back with gloomy fierceness. If she had stirred, he would have thrust her aside with even more violence than he had used against his own daughter, whose face was bleeding from her fall against a chair.

"What are yo' looking at me in that way for?" he asked finally, daunted and awed by her severe calm. "If yo' think for to keep me from going what gait I choose, because she loved yo'—and in my own house, too, where I never asked yo' to come, yo're mista'en. It's very hard upon a man that he can't go to the only comfort left."

Margaret felt that he acknowledged her power. What could she do next? He had seated himself on a chair close to the door; half-conquered, half-resenting; intending to leave as soon as she vacated her position, but unwilling to use the violence he had threatened moments before. Margaret laid her hand on his arm.

"Come with me," she said. "Come and see her!"

The voice in which she spoke was very low and solemn, yet there was no fear or doubt expressed in it, either of him or of his compliance. He sullenly rose. He stood uncertain, with dogged irresolution upon his face. She waited him there; quietly and patiently waiting for his time to move. He had a strange pleasure in making her wait, but at last he moved toward the stairs.

They stood by the corpse.

"Her last words to Mary were, 'Keep my father fro' drink.'"

"It canna hurt her now," he muttered. "Nought can hurt her now." Then, raising his voice to a wailing cry, he continued: "We may quarrel and fall out—we may make peace and be friends—we may clem to skin and bone—and nought o' all our griefs will ever touch her more. Hoo's had her portion on 'em. What wi' hard work first, and sickness at last, hoo' led the life of a dog. And to die without knowing one good piece o' rejoicing in all her days! Nay, wench, whatever hoo said, hoo can know nought about it now, and I mun ha' a sup o' drink just to steady me again sorrow."

"No," said Margaret, softening with his softened manner. "You shall not. If her life has been what you say, at any rate she did not fear death as some do. Oh, you should have heard her speak of the life to come—the life hidden with God, that she is now gone to."

He shook his head, glancing sideways up at Margaret as he did so. His pale, haggard face struck her painfully.

"You are sorely tried. Where have you been all day—not at work?"

"Not at work, sure enough," he said, with a short, grim laugh. "Not at what you call work. I were at the Committee, till I were sickened out wi' trying to make fools hear reason. I were fetched to Boucher's wife afore seven this morning. She's bed-fast, but she were raving and raging to know where her dunner-headed brute of a chap was, as if I'd to keep him—as if he were fit to be ruled by me. The d—d fool, who has put his foot in all our plans! And I've walked my feet sore wi' going about for to see men who wouldn't be seen, now the law is raised against us. And I were sore-hearted, too, which is worse than sore-footed; and if I did see a friend who ossed to treat me, I never knew hoo lay a-dying here. Bess, lass, thou'd believe me, thou wouldst—wouldstn't thou?" turning to the poor dumb form with wild appeal.

"I am sure," said Margaret, "I am sure you did not know; it was quite sudden. But, now, you see, it would be different; you do know; you do see her lying there; you hear what she said with her last breath. You will not go?"

No answer. In fact, where was he to look for comfort?

"Come home with me," she said at last, with a bold venture, half trembling at her own proposal as she made it. "At least you shall have some comfortable food, which I'm sure you need."

"Yo'r father's a parson?" he asked, with a sudden turn in his ideas.

"He was," said Margaret, shortly.

"I'll go and take a dish o' tea with him, since yo've asked me. I've many a thing I often wished to say to a parson, and I'm not particular as to whether he's preaching now, or not."

Margaret was perplexed; his drinking tea with her father, who would be totally unprepared for his visitor—her mother so ill—seemed utterly out of the question; and yet, if she drew back now, it would be worse than ever—sure to drive him to the gin-shop. She thought that if she could only get him to their own house, it was so great a step gained that she would trust to the chapter of accidents for the next.

"Good-bye, ou'd wench! We've parted company at last, we have! But thou'st been a blessin' to thy father ever sin' thou wert born. Bless thy white lips, lass,—they've a smile on 'em now! and I'm glad to see it once again, though I'm lone and forlorn for evermore."

He stooped down and fondly kissed his daughter; covered up her face, and turned to follow Margaret. She had hastily gone downstairs to tell Mary of the arrangement; to say it was the only place she could think of to keep him from the gin-palace; to urge Mary to come too, for her heart smote her at the idea of leaving the poor affectionate girl alone. But Mary had friends amongst the neighbours, she said, who would come in and sit a bit with her; it was all right; but father—

He was there by them or she would have spoken more. He had shaken off his emotion, as if he was ashamed of having ever given way to it; and had even o'erleaped himself so much that he assumed a sort of bitter mirth, like the crackling of thorns under a pot.

"I'm going to take my tea wi' her father, I am."

But he slouched his cap low down over his brow as he went out into the street, and looked neither to the right nor to the left, while he tramped along by Margaret's side; he feared being upset by the words, still more the looks, of sympathising neighbours. So he and Margaret walked in silence.

As he got near the street in which she lived, he looked down at his clothes, his hands, his shoes.

"I should m'appen ha' cleaned mysel', first."

It certainly would have been desirable, but Margaret assured him he should be allowed to go into the yard, and have soap and towel provided; she would not let him slip out of her hands just then.

While he followed the house-servant along the passage, and through the kitchen, stepping cautiously on every dark mark in the pattern of the oil-cloth, in order to conceal his dirty foot-prints, Margaret ran upstairs. She met Dixon on the landing.

"How is mamma?—where is papa?"

Missus was tired, and gone into her own room. She had wanted to go to bed, but Dixon had persuaded her to lie down on the sofa, and have her tea brought to her there; it would be better than getting restless by being too long in bed.

So far, so good. But where was Mr. Hale? In the drawing-room. Margaret went in half breathless with the hurried story she had to tell. Of course, she told it incompletely; and her father was rather "taken aback" by the idea of the drunken weaver awaiting him in his quiet study, with whom he was expected to drink tea, and on whose behalf Margaret was anxiously pleading. The meek, kind-hearted Mr. Hale would have readily tried to console him in his grief, but, unluckily, the point Margaret dwelt upon most forcibly was the fact of his having been drinking, and her having brought him home with her as a last expedient to keep him from the gin-shop. One little event had come out of another so naturally that Margaret was hardly conscious of what she had done, till she saw the slight look of repugnance on her father's face.

"Oh, papa! he really is a man you will not dislike—if you won't be shocked to begin with."

"But, Margaret, to bring a drunken man home—and your mother so ill!"

Margaret's countenance fell. "I am sorry, papa. He is very quiet—he is not tipsy at all. He was only rather strange at first, but that might be the shock of poor Bessy's death." Margaret's eyes filled with tears. Mr. Hale took hold of her sweet pleading face in both his hands, and kissed her forehead.

"It is all right,
