"The steps of the bearers, heavy and slow,
The sobs of the mourners, deep and low."

At the hour appointed the day before, Margaret and Mr. Hale set forth on their walk to visit Nicholas Higgins and his daughter. The recent loss weighed heavily upon them, manifesting in a peculiar shyness regarding their new attire and the fact that it had been many weeks since they had deliberately ventured out together. Yet, they drew close, bound by an unspoken sympathy.

Nicholas sat by the fireside in his usual corner, yet without his customary pipe. Leaning his head upon his hand, his arm resting on his knee, he did not rise when they entered, though Margaret perceived the welcome in his gaze.

"Sit ye down, sit ye down. Fire's welly out," he muttered, poking the embers vigorously as if to divert attention from his own state. He appeared disordered, sporting a black, unshaven beard of several days' growth that rendered his pale face even paler, clad in a jacket that would have benefited greatly from patching.

"We thought we should have a good chance of finding you, just after dinner-time," Margaret said.

"We have had our sorrows too, since we saw you," Mr. Hale replied.

"Ay, ay. Sorrows are more plentiful than dinners just now; I reckon, my dinner hour stretches all o'er the day; you're pretty sure of finding me."

"Are you out of work?" Margaret asked.

"Ay," he replied shortly. After a moment's silence, he looked up. "I'm not wanting brass. Dunno you think it. Bess, poor lass, had a little stock under her pillow, ready to slip into my hand at the last moment, and Mary is fustian-cutting. But I'm out of work a' the same."

"We owe Mary some money," Mr. Hale said, before Margaret's sharp pressure on his arm could arrest the words.

"If hoo takes it, I'll turn her out o' doors. I'll bide inside these four walls, and she'll bide out. That's a'."

"But we owe her many thanks for her kind service," Mr. Hale began again.

"I ne'er thanken your daughter theer for her deeds o' love to my poor wench. I ne'er could find th' words. I'll have to begin to try now, if you start making an ado about what little Mary could serve you."

"Is it because of the strike you're out of work?" Margaret asked gently.

"Strike's ended. It's o'er for this time. I'm out o' work because I ne'er asked for it. And I ne'er asked for it, because good words is scarce, and bad words is plentiful."

He was in a mood to take a surly pleasure in giving answers that were like riddles, yet Margaret sensed he desired an explanation.

"And good words are—"

"Asking for work. I reckon them's almost the best words that men can say. 'Gi' me work' means 'and I'll do it like a man.' Them's good words."

"And bad words are refusing you work when you ask for it."

"Ay. Bad words is saying 'Aha, my fine chap! You've been true to your order, and I'll be true to mine. You did the best you could for them as wanted help; that's your way of being true to your kind: and I'll be true to mine. You've been a poor fool, as knowed no better nor be a true faithful fool. So go and be d—d to you. There's no work for you here.' Them's bad words. I'm not a fool; and if I was, folk ought to ha' taught me how to be wise after their fashion. I could m'appen ha' learnt, if any one had tried to teach me."

"Would it not be worth while," said Mr. Hale, "to ask your old master if he would take you back again? It might be a poor chance, but it would be a chance."

He looked up again, with a sharp glance at the questioner; and then tittered a low and bitter laugh.

"Measter! if it's no offence, I'll ask you a question or two in my turn."

"You're quite welcome," said Mr. Hale.

"I reckon you'n some way of earning your bread. Folk seldom lives i' Milton just for pleasure, if they can live anywhere else."

"You are quite right. I have some independent property, but my intention in settling in Milton was to become a private tutor."

"To teach folk. Well! I reckon they pay you for teaching them, dunnot they?"

"Yes," replied Mr. Hale, smiling. "I teach in order to get paid."

"And them that pays you, dun they tell you whatten to do, or whatten not to do wi' the money they gives you in just payment for your pains—in fair exchange like?"

"No; to be sure not!"

"They dunnot say, 'You may have a brother, or a friend as dear as a brother, who wants this here brass for a purpose both you and he think right; but you mun promise not give it to him. You may see a good use, as you think, to put your money to; but we don't think it good, and so if you spend it a-thatens we'll just leave off dealing with you.' They dunnot say that, dun they?"

"No: to be sure not!"

"Would you stand it if they did?"

"It would be some very hard pressure that would make me even think of submitting to such dictation."

"There's not the pressure on all the broad earth that would make me," said Nicholas Higgins. "Now you've got it. You've hit the bull's eye. Hampers—that's where I worked—makes their men pledge themselves they'll not give a penny to help the Union or keep turn-outs from clemming. They may pledge and make pledge," he continued scornfully, "they nobbut make liars and hypocrites. And that's a less sin, to my mind, to make men's hearts so hard that they'll not do a kindness to them as needs it, or help on the right and just cause, though it goes against the strong hand. But I'll ne'er forswear myself for all the work the king could give me. I'm a member o' the Union; and I think it's the only thing to do the workmen any good. And I've been a turn-out, and known what it was to clem; so if I get a shilling, sixpence shall go to them if they axe it from me. Consequence is, I dunnot see where I'm to get a shilling."

"Is that rule about not contributing to the Union in force at all the mills?" Margaret asked.

"I cannot say. It's a new regulation at ours; and I reckon they'll find that they cannot stick to it. But it's in force now. By-and-by they'll find out, tyrants makes liars."

There was a little pause. Margaret hesitated whether she should say what was in her mind; she was unwilling to irritate one who was always gloomy and despondent enough. At last, it came out. But in her soft tones, and with her reluctant manner, showing that she was unwilling to say anything unpleasant, it did not seem to annoy Higgins, only to perplex him.

"Do you remember poor Boucher saying that the Union was a tyrant? I think he said it was the worse tyrant of all. And I remember, at the time I agreed with him."

It was a long while before he spoke. He was resting his head on his two hands, looking down into the fire, so she could not read the expression on his face.

"I'll not deny but what the Union finds it necessary to force a man into his own good. I'll speak truth. A man leads a dreary life who's not in the Union. But once in the Union, his interests are taken care of better than he could do it for himself, or by himself, for that matter. It's the only way working men can get their rights, by all joining together. More the members, more chance for each one separate man having justice done him. Government takes care of fools and madmen; and if any man is inclined to do himself or his neighbour a hurt, it puts a bit of a check on him, whether he likes it or no. That's all we do in the Union. We can't clap folk into prison; but we can make a man's life so heavy to be borne, that he's obliged to come in, and be wise and helpful in spite of himself. Boucher were a fool all along, and ne'er a worse fool than at the last."

"He did you harm?" Margaret asked.

"Aye, that did he. We had public opinion on our side, till he and his sort began rioting and breaking laws. It were all o'er with the strike then."

"Then would it not have been far better to have left him alone, and not forced him to join the Union? He did you no good; and you drove him mad."

"Margaret," said her father, in a low and warning tone, for he saw the cloud gathering on Higgins's face.

"I like her," said Higgins, suddenly. "She speaks plain out what's in her mind. She doesn't comprehend the Union for all that. It's a great power: it's our only power. I ha' read a bit o' poetry about a plough going o'er a daisy, as made tears come into my eyes, afore I'd other cause for crying. But the chap ne'er stopped driving the plough, I'll warrant, for all he was pitiful about the daisy. He'd too much mother-wit for that. The Union's the plough, making ready the land for harvest-time. Such as Boucher—'twould be setting him up too much to liken him to a daisy; he's liker a weed lounging over the ground—mun just made up their mind to be put out o' the way. I'm sore vexed with him just now. So m'appen, I dunnot speak him fair. I could go o'er him with a plough myself, with all the pleasure in life."

"Why? What has he been doing? Anything fresh?"

"Ay, to be sure. He's ne'er out o' mischief, that man. First of all he must go raging like a mad fool, and kick up yon riot. Then he'd to go into hiding, where he'd a been yet, if Thornton had followed him out as I'd hoped he would ha' done. But Thornton, having got his own purpose, didn't care to go on with the prosecution for the riot. So Boucher slunk back again to his house. He ne'er showed himself abroad for a day or two. He had that grace. And then, where think ye that he went? Why, to Hampers'. Damn him! He went with his mealy-mouthed face, that turns me sick to look at, asking for work, though he knowed well enough the new rule, of pledging themselves to give nought to the Unions; nought to help the starving turn-out! Why he'd a clemmed to death, if the Union had na helped him in his pinch. There he went, vowing to promise aught, and pledge himself to aught—to tell all he knew on our proceedings, the good-for-nothing Judas! But I'll say this for Hamper, and thank him for it at my dying day, he drove Boucher away, and would na listen to him—ne'er a word—though folk standing by, says the traitor cried like a babby!"

"Oh! how shocking! how pitiful!" exclaimed Margaret. "Higgins, I don't know you to-day. Don't you see how you've made Boucher what he is, by driving him into the Union against his will—without his heart going with it. You have made him what he is!"

Made him what he is! What was he?

Gathering, gathering along the narrow street, came a hollow, measured sound; now forcing itself on their attention. Many voices were hushed and low: many steps were heard, not moving onwards, at least not with any rapidity or steadiness of motion, but as if circling round one spot. Yes, there was one distinct, slow tramp of feet, which made itself a clear path through the air, and reached their ears; the measured, laboured walk of men carrying a heavy burden. They were all drawn towards the house-door by some irresistible impulse; impelled thither—not by a poor curiosity, but as if by some solemn blast.

Six men walked in the middle of the road, three of them being policemen. They carried a door, taken off its hinges, upon their shoulders, on which lay some dead human creature; and from each side of the door there were constant droppings. All the street turned out to see, and, seeing, to accompany the procession, each one questioning the bearers, who answered almost reluctantly at last, so often had they told the tale.

"We found him i' th' brook in the field beyond there."

"The brook!—why there's not water enough to drown him!"

"He was a determined chap. He lay with his face downwards. He was sick enough o' living, choose what cause he had for it."

Higgins crept up to Margaret's side, and said in a weak, piping kind of voice: "It's not John Boucher? He had na spunk enough. Sure! It's not John Boucher! Why, they are all looking this way! Listen! I've a singing in my head, and I cannot hear."

They put the door down carefully upon the stones, and all might see the poor drowned wretch—his glassy eyes, one half-open, staring right upwards to the sky. Owing to the position in which he had been found lying, his face was swollen and discoloured; besides, his skin was stained by the water in the brook, which had been used for dyeing purposes. The fore part of his head was bald; but
