"The meanest thing to which we bid adieu,
Loses its meanness in the parting hour."

Mrs. Shaw harbored a dislike for Milton that was as vehement as her gentle nature allowed. To her, the town was a cacophony of noise and smoke; the poor walked the streets in filth, the wealthy ladies were overdressed, and not a single man, regardless of station, wore clothes that fitted him. She was certain Margaret would never reclaim her lost strength while remaining in Milton, and she herself feared a recurrence of her own nervous ailments. Margaret must return with her immediately. With such urgency, she pressed her point until the weary, broken-spirited Margaret reluctantly promised to depart as soon as Wednesday concluded. She would leave Dixon to manage the final arrangements: settling bills, disposing of furniture, and securing the house.

Before that mournful Wednesday—when Mr. Hale was to be interred far from the homes he had known, and far from the wife who lay lonely among strangers—a letter arrived from Mr. Bell.

"MY DEAR MARGARET:—I intended to return to Milton on Thursday, but unluckily, one of those rare occasions has arisen when we, as Plymouth Fellows, are summoned to perform a duty, and I cannot be absent from my post. Captain Lennox and Mr. Thornton are here. The former appears to be a smart, well-meaning man; he has proposed visiting Milton to assist you in searching for the will. Of course, there is none, or you would have found it by now if you had followed my instructions. Then the Captain declares he must take you and his mother-in-law home; given his wife's current state, I see no way you can expect him to stay away longer than Friday. However, your Dixon is trusty and can hold her—or your own—until I arrive. I shall entrust matters to my Milton attorney if no will exists, for I doubt this smart Captain possesses great business acumen. Nevertheless, his moustachios are splendid. A sale will be necessary, so select what items you wish reserved, or send a list later.

Two more points, and I am finished. You know, or if you do not, your poor father did, that you are to receive my money and goods upon my death. Not that I intend to die soon; I mention this merely to clarify the arrangement. These Lennoxes seem very fond of you now; perhaps they will continue to be, perhaps not. Therefore, it is best to establish a formal agreement: you shall pay them two hundred and fifty pounds annually as long as you and they find it pleasant to live together. (Do mind you are not cajoled into paying more for Dixon.) Thus, you will not be cast adrift if the Captain eventually desires his house for himself, though you may carry yourself and your two hundred and fifty pounds elsewhere; unless, indeed, I have not already claimed you to come and keep house for me. Regarding dress, Dixon, personal expenses, and confectionery (all young ladies consume until wisdom arrives with age), I shall consult a lady of my acquaintance to determine how much remains from your father before finalizing this.

Now, Margaret, have you flown out before reading this far, wondering what right the old man has to settle your affairs so cavalierly? I make no doubt you have. Yet the old man has a right. He has loved your father for thirty-five years; he stood beside him on his wedding day; he closed his eyes in death. Moreover, he is your godfather. Since he cannot do you much spiritual good, possessing a hidden consciousness of your superiority in such matters, he would fain do you the poor good of endowing you materially. Furthermore, the old man has no known relations on earth. 'Who is there to mourn for Adam Bell?' His whole heart is bent on this one thing, and Margaret Hale is not the girl to say him nay. Write by return if only two lines to tell me your answer. But _no thanks_."

Margaret took up a pen and scrawled with a trembling hand, "Margaret Hale is not the girl to say him nay." In her weakened state, she could conceive of no other words, yet she was vexed to use them. However, she was so fatigued even by this slight exertion that if she had thought of another form of acceptance, she could not have sat up to write a single syllable of it. She was obliged to lie down again and try not to think.

"My dearest child! Has that letter vexed or troubled you?"

"No!" said Margaret feebly. "I shall be better when tomorrow is over."

"I feel sure, darling, you won't be better until I get you out of this horrid air. How you have borne it these two years I cannot imagine."

"Where could I go? I could not leave papa and mamma."

"Well, do not distress yourself, my dear. I dare say it was all for the best, only I had no conception of how you were living. Our butler's wife lives in a better house than this."

"It is sometimes very pretty—in summer; you cannot judge by what it is now. I have been very happy here," and Margaret closed her eyes to stop the conversation.

The house now teemed with comfort compared to its previous state. The evenings were chilly, and by Mrs. Shaw's direction, fires were lit in every bedroom. She petted Margaret in every possible way, buying every delicacy or soft luxury in which she herself would have burrowed for comfort. Yet Margaret remained indifferent to these things; if they forced themselves upon her attention, it was merely as causes for gratitude to her aunt, who was putting herself so much out of her way to think of her. She was restless, though weak. All day long, she kept herself from thinking of the ceremony occurring at Oxford by wandering from room to room, languidly setting aside articles she wished to retain. Dixon followed her by Mrs. Shaw's desire, ostensibly to receive instructions, but with a private injunction to soothe her into repose as soon as possible.

"These books, Dixon, I will keep. All the rest you will send to Mr. Bell? They are of a kind that he will value for themselves, as well as for papa's sake. This... I should like you to take this to Mr. Thornton after I am gone. Stay; I will write a note with it." And she sat down hastily, as if afraid of thinking further, and wrote:

"DEAR SIR,—The accompanying book I am sure will be valued by you for the sake of my father, to whom it belonged.

Yours sincerely,

She set out again upon her travels through the house, turning over articles known to her from childhood with a sort of caressing reluctance to leave them—old-fashioned, worn, and shabby as they might be. But she hardly spoke again; and Dixon's report to Mrs. Shaw was that she doubted whether Miss Hale heard a word of what she said, though she talked the whole time in order to divert her intention. The consequence of being on her feet all day was excessive bodily weariness in the evening, and a better night's rest than she had had since hearing of Mr. Hale's death.

At breakfast time the next day, she expressed her wish to go and bid one or two friends goodbye. Mrs. Shaw objected:

"I am sure, my dear, you can have no friends here with whom you are sufficiently intimate to justify you in calling upon them so soon, before you have been at church."

"But today is my only day; if Captain Lennox comes this afternoon, and if we must—if I must really go tomorrow—"

"Oh, yes, we shall go tomorrow. I am more and more convinced that this air is bad for you, and makes you look so pale and ill; besides, Edith expects us; and she may be waiting for me; and you cannot be left alone, my dear, at your age. No; if you must make these calls, I will go with you. Dixon can get us a coach, I suppose?"

So Mrs. Shaw went to take care of Margaret and took her maid with her to manage the shawls and air-cushions. Margaret's face was too sad to lighten into a smile at all this preparation for paying two visits that she had often made by herself at all hours of the day. She was half afraid of owning that one place to which she was going was Nicholas Higgins'; all she could do was to hope her aunt would be indisposed to get out of the coach and walk up the court, and at every breath of wind have her face slapped by wet clothes hanging out to dry on ropes stretched from house to house.

There was a little battle in Mrs. Shaw's mind between ease and a sense of matronly propriety; but the former gained the day. With many injunctions to Margaret to be careful of herself and not catch any fever, such as was always lurking in such places, her aunt permitted her to go where she had often been before without taking any precaution or requiring any permission.

Nicholas was out; only Mary and one or two of the Boucher children were at home. Margaret was vexed with herself for not having timed her visit better. Mary had a very blunt intellect, although her feelings were warm and kind; and the instant she understood Margaret's purpose in coming to see them, she began to cry and sob with so little restraint that Margaret found it useless to say any of the thousand little things which had suggested themselves to her as she came along in the coach. She could only try to comfort her a little by suggesting the vague chance of their meeting again, at some possible time, in some possible place, and bid her tell her father how much she wished, if he could manage it, that he should come to see her when he had done his work in the evening.

As she was leaving the place, she stopped and looked around; then hesitated a little before she said:

"I should like to have some little thing to remind me of Bessy."

Instantly Mary's generosity was keenly alive. What could they give? And on Margaret singling out a little common drinking-cup, which she remembered as the one always standing by Bessy's side with a drink for her feverish lips, Mary said:

"Oh, take summat better; that only cost fourpence!"

"That will do, thank you," said Margaret; and she went quickly away, while the light caused by the pleasure of having something to give yet lingered on Mary's face.

"Now to Mrs. Thornton's," thought she to herself. "It must be done." But she looked rather rigid and pale at the thought of it, and had hard work finding the exact words to explain to her aunt who Mrs. Thornton was and why she should go to bid her farewell.

They—for Mrs. Shaw alighted here—were shown into the drawing-room, in which a fire had only just been kindled. Mrs. Shaw huddled herself up in her shawl and shivered.

"What an icy room!" she said.

They had to wait some time before Mrs. Thornton entered. There was some softening in her heart toward Margaret now that she was going away out of her sight. She remembered her spirit, as shown at various times and places, even more than the patience with which she had endured long and wearing cares. Her countenance was blander than usual as she greeted her; there was even a shade of tenderness in her manner as she noticed the white, tear-swollen face and the quiver in the voice which Margaret tried to make so steady.

"Allow me to introduce my aunt, Mrs. Shaw. I am going away from Milton tomorrow; I do not know if you are aware of it, but I wanted to see you once again, Mrs. Thornton, to—to apologize for my manner the last time I saw you; and to say that I am sure you meant kindly—however much we may have misunderstood each other."

Mrs. Shaw looked extremely perplexed by what Margaret had said. Thanks for kindness! and apologies for failure in good manners! But Mrs. Thornton replied:

"Miss Hale, I am glad you do me justice. I did no more than I believed to be my duty in remonstrating with you as I did. I have always desired to act the part of a friend to you. I am glad you do me justice."

"And," said Margaret, blushing excessively as she spoke, "will you do me justice, and believe that though I cannot—I do not choose—to give explanations of my conduct, I have not acted in the unbecoming way you apprehended?"

Margaret's voice was so soft, and her eyes so pleading, that Mrs. Thornton was for once affected by the charm of manner to which she had hitherto proved herself invulnerable.

"Yes, I do believe you. Let us say no more about it. Where are you going to reside, Miss Hale? I understood from Mr. Bell that you were going to leave Milton. You never liked Milton, you know," said Mrs. Thornton, with a sort of grim smile; "but for all that, you must not expect me to congratulate you on quitting it. Where shall you live?"

"With my aunt," replied Margaret, turning toward Mrs. Shaw.

"My niece will reside with me in Harley Street. She is almost like a daughter to me," said Mrs. Shaw, looking fondly at Margaret; "and I am glad to acknowledge my own obligation for any kindness that has been shown to her. If you and your husband ever come to the town, my son and daughter, Captain and Mrs. Lennox, will, I am sure, join with me in wishing to do anything in our power to show you attention."

Mrs. Thornton thought in her own mind that Margaret had not taken much care to enlighten her aunt as to the relationship between the Mr. and Mrs. Thornton, toward whom the fine-lady aunt was extending her soft patronage; so she answered shortly,

"My husband is dead. Mr. Thornton is my son. I never go to London; so I am not likely to be able to avail myself of your polite offers."

At this instant Mr. Thornton entered the room; he had only just returned from Oxford. His mourning suit spoke of the reason that had called him there.

"John," said his mother, "this lady is Mrs. Shaw, Miss Hale's aunt. I am sorry to say that Miss Hale's call is to wish us goodbye."

"You are going
