The ceremony was a spectacle of hollow grandeur. The sentence had been read, the name of Phorenice, the Empress, adored with the fervor of a thousand years, and the new Viceroy installed amidst the ponderous pomp that had defined the age. Formally, I had surrendered the reins of government; formally, Tatho had seated himself upon the snake-throne, the heavy chain of gems clinking around his neck as the symbol of supreme office. Then, amidst the clamor of drums and trumpets, he rose to his feet to begin his first state progress around the gilded council chamber as Viceroy of the Province of Yucatan.

With folded arms and a bowed head, I followed him between the glittering lines of soldiers and the brilliant throng of courtiers and chiefs. The roof-beams quivered under the cries of "Long Live Tatho!" and "Flourish the Empress!" which echoed as a duty-bound refrain. The new ruler acknowledged the welcome with stately inclinations, moving in turn to the three lesser thrones of the eastern, northern, and southern governors to receive their homage. I, the man whose departure had precipitated this change, followed in his train with the prescribed meekness.

It was a hard task, yet those who hold high office learn to wear a passionless mask before the people. Twenty years prior, these same fine obeisances had been made to me. Now, the Gods had seen fit to turn the wheel of fortune. As I walked bent and humbly behind the heels of Tatho, though etiquette forbade any noisy salutation to myself, I could not suppress the warmth of kindly glances falling upon me from every soldier, courtier, and chief present in that gilded hall. It is rare for the fallen to meet such tender looks.

The custom dictates that on such great ceremonial days of changing rulers, the people may bring forward petitions, accuse their retiring head with immunity from vengeance, or propose theories for the future governance of the State. I confess to a touch of vanity in recording that not a single voice was raised against me, nor against any item of my twenty years of rule. Nor did anyone speak out for alterations in the future. Even as we circled the three prescribed times, all present offered their approval in a generous, suffocating silence.

Then, one behind the other, the new Viceroy and the old marched with formal steps over the golden tiles of the council hall beneath the pyramid. The great officers of state left their stations to join our train, and at the far wall, we arrived at the door of the private chambers that had been mine just an hour before.

Ah, well! I had no home now in any of those wondrous cities of Yucatan. A bitterness rose in my chest, though I should have been thankful enough to return to the Continent of Atlantis with my head still in its proper station.

Tatho gave his formal summons, "Open ye to the Viceroy," which the ritual commands. The slaves within sent the massive stone valves of the door gaping wide. Tatho entered, I at his heels; the others halted, sending their valedictions from the threshold, and the valves clanged shut behind us. We passed into the chamber beyond, and then, for the first time alone together and free from the forced etiquette of the courts, the new Viceroy turned with meekly folded arms and bowed low before me.

"Deucalion," he said, "believe me that I have not sought this office. It was thrust upon me. Had I not accepted, my head would have paid forfeit, and another man—your enemy—would have been sent out as Viceroy in your place. The Empress does not permit that her will shall ever be questioned."

"My friend," I answered, "my brother in all but blood, there is no man living in all Atlantis or her territories to whom I would rather hand over my government. For twenty years I have ruled this country of Yucatan and Mexico beyond, first under the old King and then as minister to this new Empress. I know my colony like a book. I am intimate with all her wonderful cities, their palaces, pyramids, and people. I have hunted the beasts and savages in the forests, built roads, and made the rivers carry shipping. I have fostered the arts and crafts like a merchant and discoursed the cult of the Gods three times daily with my own lips. Through evil and good years I have ruled here, striving only for the prosperity of the land and the strengthening of Atlantis, and I have grown to love the peoples like a father. To you I bequeath them, Tatho, with tender supplications for their interests."

"It is not I that can carry on Deucalion's work with Deucalion's power," Tatho replied softly. "But rest content, my friend, that I shall do my humble best to follow exactly in your footsteps. Believe me, I came out to this government with a thousand regrets. I would have died sooner than take your place had I known how vigorously the supplanting would trouble you."

"We are alone here," I said, stepping away from the shadows of the door. "Away from the formalities of assemblies, a man may give vent to his natural self without fear of tarnishing a ceremony. Your coming was something of the suddenest. Till an hour ago, when you demanded audience, I had thought to rule longer; and even now I do not know for what cause I am deposed."

"The proclamation said: 'We relieve our well-beloved Deucalion of his present service, because we have great need of his powers at home in our kingdom of Atlantis.'"

"A mere formality."

Tatho looked uneasily around the hangings of the chamber, drew me with him to its center, and lowered his voice.

"I do not think so," he whispered. "I believe she has need of you. There are troublous times on hand, and Phorenice wants the ablest men in the kingdom ready to her call."

"You may speak openly," I said, "and without fear of eavesdroppers. We are in the heart of the pyramid here, built in every way by a man's length of solid stone. Myself, I oversaw the laying of every course. Besides, here in Yucatan, we have not the niceties of your old-world diplomacy, and we do not listen, because we count it shame to do so."

Tatho shrugged. "I acted only according to my education. At home, a loose tongue makes a loose head, and there are those whose trade it is to carry tales. Still, what I say is this: The throne shakes, and Phorenice sees the need of sturdy props. So she has sent this proclamation."

"But why come to me? It is twenty years since I sailed to this colony, and from that day I have not returned to Atlantis once. I know little of the old country's politics. What small parcel of news drifts out to us across the ocean reads with slender interest here. Yucatan is another world, my dear Tatho, with new interests, new people, new everything. To us here, Atlantis is only a figment, a shadow far away across the waters. It is for this new world of Yucatan that I have striven through all these years."

"If Deucalion has small time to spare from his government for brooding over his fatherland, Atlantis, at least, has found leisure to admire the deeds of her brilliant son. Why, sir, over yonder at home, your name carries magic with it. When you and I were lads together, it was the custom in the colleges to teach that the men of the past were the greatest this world has ever seen; but to-day this teaching is changed. It is Deucalion who is held up as the model and example. Mothers name their sons Deucalion, as the most valuable birth-gift they can make. Deucalion is a household word. Indeed, there is only one name that is near to it in familiarity."

"You trouble me," I said, frowning. "I have tried to do my duty for its own sake and for the country's sake, not for the pettings and fondlings of the vulgar. And besides, if there are names to be in everyone's mouth, they should be the names of the Gods."

Tatho shrugged again. "The Gods? They occupy us very little these latter years. With our modern science, we have grown past the tether of the older Gods, and no new one has appeared. No, my Lord Deucalion, if it were merely the Gods who were your competitors on men's lips, your name would be a thousand times the better known."

"Of mere human names," I said, "the name of this new Empress should come first in Atlantis, our lord the old King being now dead."

"She certainly would have it so," replied Tatho, and there was something in his tone which made me see that more was meant behind the words. I drew him to one of the marble seats and bent myself familiarly towards him. "I am speaking," I said, "not to the new Viceroy of Yucatan, but to my old friend Tatho, a member of the Priests' Clan, like myself, with whom I worked side by side in a score of the smaller home governments, in hamlets, in villages, in smaller towns, in greater towns, as we gained experience in war and knowledge in the art of ruling people, and so tediously won our promotion. I am speaking in Tatho's private abode, that was mine own not two hours since, and I would have an answer with that plainness which we always then used to one another."

The new Viceroy sighed whimsically. "I almost forget how to speak in plain words now," he said. "We have grown so polished in these latter days that mere bald truth would be hissed as indelicate. But for the memory of those early years, when we expended as much law and thought over the ownership of a hay-byre as we should now over the fate of a rebellious city, I will try and speak plain to you even now, Deucalion. Tell me, old friend, what is it?"

"What of this new Empress?"

He frowned. "I might have guessed your subject," he said.

"Then speak upon it. Tell me of all the changes that have been made. What has this Phorenice done to make her throne unstable in Atlantis?"

Tatho frowned still. "If I did not know you to be as honest as our Lord the Sun, your questions would carry mischief with them. Phorenice has a short way with those who are daring enough to discuss her policies for other purpose than politely to praise them."

"You can leave me ignorant if you wish," I said with a touch of chill. This Tatho seemed to be different from the Tatho I had known at home—the Tatho my workmate, the Tatho who had read with me in the College of Priests, who had run with me in many a furious charge, who had labored with me so heavily that the peoples under us might prosper. But he was quick enough to see my change of tone.

"You force me back to my old self," he said with a half-smile, "though it is hard enough to forget the caution one has learned during the last twenty years, even when speaking with you. Still, whatever may have happened to the rest of us, it is clear to see that you at least have not changed. Old friend, I am ready to trust you with my life if you ask it. In fact, you do ask me that very thing when you tell me to speak all I know of Phorenice."

I nodded. This was more like the old times, when there was full confidence between us. "The Gods will it now that I return to Atlantis," I said. "And what happens after that the Gods alone know. But it would be of service to me if I could land on her shores with some knowledge of this Phorenice, for at present I am as ignorant concerning her as some savage from Europe or mid-Africa."

"What would you have me tell?"

"Tell all. I know only that she, a woman, reigns, whereby the ancient law of the land—a man should rule—is broken; that she is not even of the Priestly Clan from which the law says all rulers must be drawn; and that, from what you say, she has caused the throne to totter. The throne was as firm as the everlasting hills in the old King's day, Tatho."

"History has moved with pace since then, and Phorenice has spurred it. You know her origin?"

"I know only the exact little I have told you."

"She was a swineherd's daughter from the mountains, though this is never even whispered now, as she has declared herself to be a daughter of the Gods, with a miraculous birth and upbringing. As she has decreed it a sacrilege to question this parentage, and has ordered to be burnt all those that seem to recollect her more earthly origin, the fable passes current for truth. You see the faith I put in you, Deucalion, by telling you what you wish to learn."

"There has always been trust between us."

"I know; but this habit of suspicion is hard to cast off, even with you. However, let me put your good faith between me and the torture further. Zaemon, you remember, was governor of the swineherd's province, and Zaemon's wife saw Phorenice and took her away to adopt and bring up as her own. It is said that the swineherd and his woman objected; perhaps they did; anyway, I know they died; and Phorenice was taught the arts and graces, and brought up as a daughter of the Priestly Clan."

"But still she was an adopted daughter only," I objected.

"The omission of the 'adopted' was her will at an early age," said Tatho dryly. "And she learnt early to have her wishes carried into fact. It was notorious that before she had grown to fifteen years she ruled not only the women of the household, but Zaemon also, and the province that was beyond Zaemon."

"Zaemon was learned," I said, "and a devout follower
