I had not known the luxury of sleep for some time, so when the day finally yielded to night, I allowed myself to rest deeply, watched over by Nais. Our plan was simple: I would remain hidden within the temple's sanctum until the camp fell into a heavy slumber, granting me the cover of darkness to reach the sea undetected.

Night descended wet, a drizzle soaking the earth. Through the narrow slits in the temple walls, we observed the campfires below, tended with care by men and women huddled in skins and rags. Steam rose from their bodies as the heat struggled against the chill. Folk forced into such discomfort are notoriously sharp-tongued and cruel in spirit, and Nais frowned as she watched the misery of the weather.

"A fine night," she murmured. "I would have sent my lord back to the city without a soul here being the wiser; but in this cold, people sleep sourly. We must wait until the hour drugs them sounder."

Thus we waited, sitting together on a pavement rarely touched by worshippers. Little was spoken aloud, yet there was a comfort in the silence of good company.

But as the hours stretched, the night lost its quietude. From the distance, a horn or shell began to blow a harsh, raucous note that persisted and grew louder. Voices erupted from the fires, railing against the disturber. Soon, the sound halted, and we stood up to see through the wall-slits the camp waking in unease, clustering around a figure speaking from the pedestal of a war engine.

We could not hear his words, nor did our curiosity burn brightly. Given that everyone awake seemed weary of this fellow, as Nais whispered, my escape should have been simple.

We were counting without the inevitable busybody. A dozen pairs of feet splashed through the mud to the temple's side, shouting that Nais must join the audience. She possessed a tongue of eloquence, and they feared the speaker on the war engine would sow schism unless a skilled refuter stood against him.

Now, I felt I was being dragged into a skirmish by the most unexpected chance. Yet Nais was resolved that there should be no fight if her courage could avert it. "Come out with me," she whispered urgently. "Keep distant from the light of the fires."

"But how explain my presence here?"

"There is no need to explain anything," she replied bitterly. "They will assume you are my lover. It is the custom here. But oh, why did the Gods not grant you a beard, curled as other men wear theirs? Then you could have departed safely two hours ago."

"A smooth chin pleases me better."

"So it does me," I heard her murmur as she leaned on the stone threshold and pushed it open. "Your chin."

The ragged men outside—accompanied by women—did not linger to inspect me closely. Coarse jokes flew, ones I could have met with a sword-thrust, before they stepped back into the darkness, glancing back only to ensure we followed. Everywhere else, black shadows pressed in the same direction. The rain spat noisily on the campfires as we passed, and from behind us came a tide of others. No sleepers remained; all were rushing to hear the preacher on the war engine. Had we tried to swerve, we would have been marked instantly.

We pressed on through the darkness until we were within earshot.

At first, we caught little of the preacher's words. "Who are your chiefs?" the question rang out at the climax of a fervid harangue, immediately drowning all rational discourse in uproar. "We have no chiefs!" the people shouted. "We are done with chiefs; we are all equal here. Take away your silly magic. You may kill us with magic if you choose, but rule us you shall not. Nor shall the other priests rule. Nor Phorenice. Nor anybody. We are done with rulers."

The press bore us closer to the man on the war engine. He was old, with white hair tumbling over his shoulders and a long, untrimmed white beard. Save for a wisp of rag around his loins, his body was naked, glistening in the wet. In his hand, however, he held the mark of his caste. With it, he punctuated his sentences, sometimes whirling it to bathe his wet, naked form in a halo of light. It was a wand whose tip burned with unconsuming fire, glowing and blazing like a star sent down from the high heavens. It was the Symbol of our Lord the Sun, a credential no one could forge, upon which no civilized man would cast a doubt.

Indeed, the ragged, frantic crew did not question for a moment that he belonged to the Clan of Priests, the lineage that had long ruled the land. Even in their loudest clamors, they freely acknowledged his powers. "You may kill us with your magic, if you choose," they screamed. Yet stubbornly, they refused to return to their old allegiance. "We have suffered too many things these later years," they cried. "We are done with rulers now, forever."

In my own heart, I viewed the old man with a different emotion. Here was Zaemon, father to Nais, the man I had seen yesterday seated at Phorenice's elbow, who today could denounce me as Deucalion if he chose. These rebels had expended a navy in their wish to kill me four days prior. If they knew of my proximity, even with Nais as my advocate, her cold reasoning would find little audience now. The High Gods who hold the tether of our lives hide their secrets well, but I did not think it impious to believe mine was very near the cutting edge.

The beautiful woman saw this too. She went so far as to twine her fingers in mine, pressing them as a farewell, and I pressed hers in return, sorrowful not to see her more. Still, I could not help letting my thoughts travel with a grim gloating over the fine mound of dead I would build before these ragged, unskilled rebels pulled me down. It was inevitable. For of all emotions that ferment in the human heart, the joy of strife is keenest, and none but an old fighter, face to face with what must necessarily be his final battle, can tell how deep this lust is embroidered into the foundations of his being.

For the moment, Zaemon did not see me, too wrapped in his outcry, leaving me free to listen to the burning words he spread around him and gauge their effect.

The theme he preached was not new. He declared that since the beginning of history, the Gods had set apart one Clan to rule and serve as Priests. Until the coming of Phorenice, they had fulfilled their duties with exactitude and justice. They had fought invaders, waged war against beasts, and studied earth-movements to foretell earthquakes and eruptions, spreading warnings so the people might escape devastation. They were no self-seekers; their aim was always to further the interest of Atlantis, honoring the kingdom favored by the High Gods. Under the Priestly Clan, Atlantis had reached the pinnacle of human prosperity and happiness.

"But," cried the old man, waving the Symbol until his wet body glistened in a halo of light, "the people grew fat and careless with their easy life. They began to have a conceit that their good fortune was earned by their own puny brains and thews, and was no gift from the Gods above. Presently, the cult of these Gods became neglected, and Their temples were barren of gifts and worshippers. Followed a punishment. The Gods, in Their inscrutable way, decreed that a wife of one of the Priests—a governor of no inconsiderable province—should see a woman child by the wayside and take it for adoption. That child the Gods, in their infinite wisdom, fashioned into a scourge for Atlantis. You who have felt the weight of Phorenice's hand know with what completeness the High Gods can fashion their instruments."

"Yet, even as they set up, so can they throw down, and those that shall debase Phorenice are even now appointed. The old rule is to be re-established; but not till you who have sinned are sufficiently chastened to cry to it for relief." He waved the mysterious glowing Symbol before him. "See," he cried in his high, old, quavering voice, "you know the unspeakable Power of which that is the sign, and for which I am the mouthpiece. It is for you to make decision now. Are the Gods to throw down this woman who has scorned Them and so cruelly trodden on you? Or are you to be still further purged of your pride before you are ripe for deliverance?"

The old priest broke off with a gesture, his ragged white beard sinking onto his chest. Promptly, a young man, skin-clad and carrying his weapon, elbowed up through the press of listeners and jumped onto the platform beside him. "Hear me, brethren!" he bellowed in his strong young voice. "We are done with tyrants. Death may come, and we all here have shown how little we fear it. But own rulers again we will not, and that is our final say. My lord," he said, turning to the old man with a brave face, "I know it is in your power to kill me by magic if you choose, but I have said my say, and can stand the cost if needs be."

"I can kill you, but I will not," said Zaemon. "You have said your silliness. Now go you to the ground again."

"We have free speech here. I will not go till I choose."

"Aye, but you will," said the old man, and turned on him with a sudden tightening of the brows. No blow was passed; even the Symbol, which glowed like a star against the night, was not lifted in warning. But the young man tried to retort, and finding himself smitten with sudden dumbness, turned with a spasm of fear and jumped back whence he had come. The crowd thrilled expectantly, and when no further portent was given, they began to shout that a miracle should be shown them, and then perhaps they would be persuaded back to the old allegiance.

The old man stooped and glowered at them in fury. "You dogs," he cried, "you empty-witted dogs! Do you ask that I should degrade the powers of the Higher Mysteries by dancing them out before you as though they were a mummers' show? Do you tickle yourselves that you are to be tempted back to your allegiance? It is for you to woo the Gods who are so offended. Come in humility, and I take it upon myself to declare that you will receive fitting pardon and relief. Remain stubborn, and the scourge, Phorenice, may torment you into annihilation before she in turn is made to answer for the evil she has put upon the land. There is the choice for you to pick at."

The turmoil of voices rose again into the wetness of the night, and weapons were upraised menacingly. It was clear that the party for independence had by far the greater weight, both in numbers and vigor; and those who might, from sheer weariness of strife, have been willing for surrender, withheld their word through terror of the consequence. It was a fine comment on the freedom of speech, about which these unruly fools had made their boast. With a sly malice, I could not help whispering a word on this to Nais as she stood at my elbow. But Nais clutched at my hand, imploring me for caution. "Oh, be silent, my lord," she whispered back, "or they will tear you in pieces. They are on fire for mischief now."

"Yet a few hours back you were for killing me yourself," I could not help reminding her.

She turned on me with a hot look. "A woman can change her mind, my lord. But it becomes you little to remind her of her fickleness."

A man in the press beside me wrenched round with an effort, staring at me searchingly through the darkness. "Oh!" he said. "A shaved chin. Who are you, friend, that you should cut a beard instead of curling it? I can see no wound on your face."

I answered him civilly enough that, with "freedom" for a watchword, the fashion of my chin was a matter of mere private concern. But as that did not satisfy him, and as he seemed to be one of those quarrelsome fellows that are the bane of every community, I took him suddenly by the throat and the shoulder, and bent his neck with the old, quick turn until I heard it crack. I had unhanded him before any of his neighbors had seen what had befallen. The fierce press of the crowd held him from slipping to the ground, so he stood there where he was, with his head nodded forward, as though he had fallen asleep through heaviness or fainted through the crushing of his fellows. I had no desire to begin that last fight of mine in a place like this, where there was no room to swing a weapon, nor chance to clear a battle ring.

All this time, the lean preacher from the mountains was sending forth his angry anathemas, still holding the strained attention of the people. Next, he set forth before them the cult of the Gods in the ancient form as prescribed, and they, with old habit returning to them, made response in the words and places where the old ritual enjoins. It was a weird enough sight, that time-honored service of adoration, forced upon these wild people after so long a period of irreligion.

They warmed to the old words as the high, shrill voice of the priest cried them forth. As they listened, and realized how intimate was the care of the Gods for the travails and sorrows of their daily lives, so much warmer grew their responses.

"... WHO STILLED THE BURNING OF THE MOUNTAINS, AND MADE COOL PLACES ON THE EARTH FOR US TO LIVE!--PRAISE TO THE MOST HIGH GODS.

"WHO GAVE US MASTERY OVER THE LESSER BEASTS AND SKILL OF TEN TIMES TO PREVAIL!--PRAISE TO THE MOST HIGH GODS...."

"It thrilled one to hear their earnestness; it sorrowed one to know that they would
