The passage, though cunningly concealed by human artifice, was one of the ancient veins where the fiery blood of our Mother, the Earth, once coursed. Centuries had passed since lava streamed through its depths, yet the air remained warm and thick with sulfur. There was no reason to linger in such a transit. I lit a lamp from a niche and hurried along, coughing violently, wishing desperately for the simples that could soothe a catarrhal throat. Alas, the packet of medicines I had salvaged from the Vice-Royalty of Yucatan had been lost in the naval engagement with Dason's fleet. Since landing in Atlantis, there had been scant time to indulge in the refinements of medicine.

The network of subterranean channels branched wildly. Had any of the Seven Priests but one stumbled into these recesses by chance, they would have perished hopelessly in the labyrinthine windings or fallen into the pits leading to the boiling depths below. Fortunately, I carried the chart of the true course etched clearly in my mind, a memory from my initiation twenty years prior. Back then, as an appointed Viceroy, I was raised to the highest degree known to our Clan, entrusted with its secrets and working implements.

The journey was arduous; the floor was monstrously uneven, and the air foul. I knew that by the time the signs indicated I had passed beneath the city walls and entered its precincts, the day would be far spent. Here, the vow of the Seven hampered my progress: under no circumstances, regardless of stress, was egress permitted from this passage before a mortal eye. Branch after branch I tried, only to find loiterers near the exits. I had hoped to emerge via the path inside the royal pyramid, but the place hummed like a hive; there was no chance of going up unobserved. The same held true for the five subsequent outlets. The city was agog with a strange, feverish excitement.

Finally, I reached the temple of a lesser God and stood behind the image to observe. The place was empty; the dust robed the floors and the seats of the worshippers, indicating a vacancy long endured. I moved the necessary items, stepped out, and sealed the entry behind me. A broom lay unnoticed on a pew. With it, I quickly disguised all traces of my footprints and approached the temple door. It was shut. Though a priest, the secret of its opening was beyond me. Only the attendant priests of the temple could move the mechanism controlling the massive stone that filled the doorway. If everyone had gone out to witness whatever spectacle stirred the city, I was no closer to my goal than before.

There was no sound of life within the temple precincts. Decay and disuse were evident everywhere. Yet, by ancient law, there should have been at least one watchman in the priests' dwellings. Down the passages leading to them I made my way, expecting to find them deserted. It would have surprised me little. I knew the old order had changed, but I was only beginning to realize the ruthlessness with which it had been swept away and replaced by the new.

However, even in an age of general apostasy, some faithful men remained. Reaching the door of the dwelling—which lay in the roof of the temple—I gave the call. Presently, it opened. The man who peered dully through the gloom had at least remained constant to his vows, and I greeted him with respect.

His name was Ro, and I remembered him well. We had passed through the sacred college together, always known as the dullard. He possessed little capacity for the cult of the Gods, less for the arts of ruling, and least of all for the handling of arms. Appointed to a lowly office in this obscure temple, he had risen to become its second priest and one of its two custodians merely through the desertion of all his colleagues. It was not pleasant to think that a fool should remain true where cleverer men abandoned the old beliefs.

Ro performed the greater obeisance. His beard was curled in the prevailing fashion, though poorly done. His clothing was ill-fitting and unbrushed; he was always a slovenly fellow. "The temple door is shut," he said, "and I alone hold the secret of its opening. My lord comes here by the secret way, as one of the Seven. I am my lord's servant."

"Then I ask this small service of you. Tell me, what stirs the city?"

"That impious Phorenice has declared herself Goddess," Ro replied, his voice trembling with a mixture of awe and hatred. "She declares she will light the sacrifice with her own divine fire. She will do it, too. She does everything. But I pray the flames may burn her when she calls them down. This new Empress is the bane of our Clan, Deucalion, these latter days. The people neglect us; they bring no offerings. And now, since these rebels have been hammering at the walls, I might have gone hungry if I had not a small store of my own. Oh, tell you, the cult of the true Gods is well-nigh oozed quite out of the land."

"My brother, it comes to my mind that the Priests of our Clan have been limp in their service to let these things come to pass."

"I suppose we did our best. At least, we did as we were taught. But if the people will not come to hear your exhortations, and neglect to adore the God, what hold have you over their religion? But I tell you, Deucalion, that the High Gods try our own faith hard. Come into the dwelling. Look there on my bed."

I saw the shape of a man, untidily swathed in reddened bandages.

"This is all that remains of the poor priest who was my immediate superior in this cure," Ro said, his voice hollow. "It was his turn yesterday to celebrate the weekly sacrifice to our Lord the Sun with the circle of His great stones. Faugh! Deucalion, you should have seen how he was mangled when they brought him back to me."

"Did the people rise on him? Has it come to that?"

"The people stayed passive," Ro said bitterly, "what few of them had interest to attend. But our Lord the Sun saw fit to try His minister somewhat harshly. The wood was laid; the sacrifice was disposed upon it according to the prescribed rites. The procession had formed round the altar, and the drums and trumpets were sounding, to let all men know that presently the smoke of their prayer would be wafted up towards Those that sit in the great places in the heavens. But then, above the noise of the ceremony, there came the rushing sound of wings. From out of the sky flew one of those great featherless man-eating birds, of a bigness such as seldom before has been seen."

"An arrow shot in the eye, or a long-shafted spear receives them best."

"Oh, all men know what they were taught as children, Deucalion; but these priests were unarmed, according to the rubric, which ordains that they shall intrust themselves completely to the guardianship of the High Gods during the hours of sacrifice. The great bird swooped down, settling on the wood pyre, and attacked the sacrifice with beak and talon. My poor superior here, still strong in his faith, called loudly on our Lord the Sun to lend power to his arm, and sprang up on the altar with naught but his teeth and his bare arms for weapons. It may be that he expected a miracle—he has not spoken since, poor soul, in explanation—but all he met were blows from leathery wings and rakings from talons which went near to disembowelling him. The bird brushed him away as easily as we could sweep aside a fly, and there he lay bleeding on the pavement beside the altar, whilst the sacrifice was torn and eaten in the presence of all the people. And then, when the bird was glutted, it flew away again to the mountains."

"And the people gave no help?"

"They cried out that the thing was a portent," Ro continued, his bitterness deepening. "That our Lord the Sun was a God no longer if He had not power or thought to guard His own sacrifice. Some cried that there was no God remaining now, and others claimed a new God had come to weigh on the country, taking the form of a common man-eating bird. But a few began to shout that Phorenice stood for all the Gods now in Atlantis. That cry was taken up until the stones of the great circle rang with it. Some may have made proclamations because they were convinced; many because the cry was new and pleased them; but I am sure there were not a few who joined in because it was dangerous to leave such an outburst unwelcomed. The Empress can be hard enough to those who neglect to give her adulation."

"The Empress is Empress," I said formally. "Her name carries respect. It is not for us to question her doings."

"I am a priest," Ro said, defending his position with the rigidity of his training. "I speak as I have been taught, and defend the Faith as I have been commanded. Whether there is a Faith any longer, I am beginning to doubt. But, anyway, it yields a poor enough livelihood nowadays. There have been no offerings at this temple for five months past. If I had not a few jars of corn put by, I might have starved for anything the pious of this city cared. And I do not think the affair of that sacrifice is likely to put new enthusiasm into our cold votaries."

"When did it happen?"

"Twenty hours ago. Today Phorenice conducts the sacrifice herself. That has caused the stir you spoke of. The city is in the throes of getting ready for one of her pageants."

"Then I must ask you to open the temple doors and give me passage. I must go and see this thing for myself."

"It is not for me to offer advice to one of the Seven," Ro said doubtfully.

"It is not."

"But they say that the Empress is not overpleased at your absence," he mumbled. "I should not like harm to come in your way, Deucalion," he said aloud.

"The future is in the hands of the Most High Gods, Ro, and I at least believe that They will deal out our fates to each of us as They, in Their infinite wisdom, see best, though you seem to have lost your faith. And now I must be your debtor for a passage out through the doors. Plagues! Man, it is no use your holding out your hand to me. I do not own a coin in all the world."

He mumbled something about "force of habit" as he led the way down toward the door, and I responded tartly about the unpleasantness of his begging customs. "If it were not for your sort and your customs, the Priests' Clan would not be facing this crisis today."

"One must live," he grumbled, pressing his levers. The massive stone in the doorway swung ajar.

"If you had been a more capable man, I might have seen the necessity," I said, passing into the open and leaving him behind. I could never bring myself to like Ro.

A motley crowd filled the street running past the front of the obscure temple, all hurrying in one direction. Given what I had been told, it required little art to guess that the great stone circle of our Lord the Sun was their destination. It grieved me to think of how many venerable centuries that great fane had stood before the weather and earth tremors without witnessing such profanation. A dark thought occurred to me: *Was our Great Lord above drawing this woman on to her destruction? Would He take some vast and final act of vengeance when she consummated her final sacrilege?*

But the crowd pressed on, thrilled and excited, thinking little (as crowds are wont) of the deeper matters beneath the bare spectacle. From one quarter of the city walls, the din of an attack from the besiegers made itself clearly heard over the houses and intervening palaces, yet no one heeded it. They had grown callous to the battering of rams and the flight of fire-darts. Their nerves, hunger, and desperation were strung to such a pitch that little short of an actual storm could stir them into new excitement over the siege.

All were armed. The naked carried weapons in the hope of overcoming someone to rob them; those with possessions walked ready to fight for their ownership. There was no security, no trust. The lesson of civilization had dropped away from these common people as mud is washed from feet by rain. In their new habits and thoughts, they had regressed to the grade from which savages like those of Europe have never yet emerged. It was a grim commentary on the success of Phorenice's rule.

The crowd merged me into their ranks without question. With them, I pressed forward down the winding streets, once clean and trim, now foul and mud-strewn. Men and women had died of hunger in these streets in recent years, rotting where they lay, and we trod their bones underfoot as we walked. Yet rising out of this squalor and misery were great pyramids and palaces, the like of which for splendour and magnificence had never been seen before. It was a jarring admixture.

In time, we came to the open space in the center of the city, the only area Phorenice had not dared to encroach upon with her ambitious building schemes. We stood on the secular ground surrounding the most ancient, the most grand, and the breast of all this world's temples.

Since the beginning of time, when man first emerged amongst the beasts, our Lord the Sun has always been his chiefest God. Legend says He raised this circle of stones Himself to be a place where votaries should offer Him worship. Moderns often do not take these old tales too literally, but for myself, this one satisfies me. By our wits, we can lift blocks weighing six hundred men and set them as capstones of our pyramids. But to rear the stones of that great circle would be beyond all our art, and much more impossible today to transport them from their distant quarries across the rugged mountains.

There were ninety-four stones, alternating with spaces, set in an accurate circle. Across their tops, other stones were set, equally huge. The stones were
