The decree of Empress Phorenice moved through the city of Atlantis with the speed of a falling stone. Her philosophy was absolute: the existence of the realm served solely her will, and no price was too steep to pay for her desires. Having issued the command for the living burial of Nais, she had specified that I, Deucalion, should construct the throne of stone. Though the edict named me the builder, the unspoken understanding was that the labor would be performed by the city's hands.

Heralds proclaimed the order in every ward. Immediately, masons, laborers, stonecutters, sculptors, engineers, and architects abandoned their current tasks to converge at the rendezvous. An architect was chosen as chief, directing the lesser architects and engineers. Any material within the city walls bearing their seal was seized instantly, without payment or compensation. To accommodate the monstrous blocks of stone required, entire buildings were demolished to clear the path.

I have noted the modern obsession with erecting new palaces and pyramids. Even as an army of rebels battered the city walls with war engines, the building guilds worked steadily. Their skill, aided by Phorenice's marvelous inventions, increased constantly. While they could not move the massive blocks planted by the early Gods for the sacred circle of the Sun, they possessed rams, trucks, and cranes capable of handling amazing bulks.

The throne was to be erected in the open square before the royal pyramid. Seven tiers of stone formed the groundwork, each knee-height deep and cut in the front with three steps. In the uppermost layer lay a cavity designed to hold Nais's body, poised above which was the vast block forming the seat of the throne itself.

Throughout the night, under the light of torches, relay after relay of stonecutters, masons, and sweating laborers toiled to bring up the stone, dress it into shape, and lay it in due position. Engineers built machines for lifting, and architects verified that each stone rested in its just and perfect place. Whips cracked, and men fainted from the labor, but as soon as one became incapable, another pressed forward. No delay was brooked when Phorenice had spoken her wish.

Finally, as the square began to fill with spectators drawn to the pageant, the chippings and scaffolding were cleared away, along with the bodies of some half-score of workmen who had died from accidents or exertion. There stood the throne, splendid in its carvings and ready for completion. The lower part stood more than two man-heights above the ground; no stone of its courses weighed less than twenty men. The upper part was double the weight of any of these, carved so that a royal snake encircled the chair, its great hooded head overshadowing it. At present, however, the upper part was not on its bed, held high by lifting rams, for what purpose all men knew.

It was to face this scene that I emerged from the royal pyramid at the summons of the chamberlains in the cool of the next morning. Each great man who had come before me was accompanied by banner-bearers and trumpeters; the middle classes wore all their bravery of apparel; and even poor, squalid creatures, with ribs of hunger showing through their dusty skins, had turbans and wisps of color wrapped about their heads to mark the gaiety of the day.

Trumpets proclaimed my coming, and the people shouted welcome. With the gorgeous chamberlains walking backwards in advance, I crossed to a scarlet awning prepared for me and took my seat upon the cushions beneath it.

Then came Phorenice, my bride for that day, fresh from sleep and glorious in her splendid beauty. She was borne out from the pyramid in an open litter of gold and ivory by fantastic savages from Europe, her own refinement of feature thrown into higher relief by contrast with their brutish ugliness. One could hear the people draw a deep breath of delight as their eyes first fell upon her; it was easy to believe there was not a man in that throng who did not envy me her choice, nor was there a soul present—unless Ylga was there somewhere veiled—who could imagine that I was not overjoyed in winning so lovely a wife.

For myself, I summoned all the iron of my training to guard the expression of my face. We were here for ceremony; a ghastly enough affair throughout its acts, but still ceremonial. I was minded to show Phorenice a grand manner that would leave her nothing to cavil at. After all that had been endured, I did not intend a great scheme to be shattered by letting my agony show itself in a shaking hand or a twitching cheek. When it came to the point, I told myself, I would lay the living body of my love in the hollow beneath the stone as calmly, and with as little outward emotion, as though I were a mere priest carrying out the burial of some dead stranger. She, on her part, would not, I knew, betray our secret. With her, too, it was truly "Before all Atlantis."

I think it spared a pang to find that there was to be no mockery or flippancy in what went forward. All was solemn and impressive. Though a certain grandeur and sombreness which bit deep into my breast was lost to the vulgar crowd, I fancied that the outward shape of the double sacrifice they witnessed that day would not be forgotten by any of them, although the inner meaning remained completely hidden from their minds. When it suited her fancy, none could be more strict on the ritual of a ceremony than this many-mooded Empress, and it appeared that on this occasion she had commanded all things be carried out with the rigid exactness and pomp of the older manner.

So she was borne up by her Europeans to the scarlet awning, and I handed her to the ground. She seated herself on the cushions and beckoned me to her side, entwining her fingers with mine as has always been the custom with rulers of Atlantis and their consorts. Before us, a body of soldiery marched up, opening out to show Nais in their midst. She wore a collar of metal round her neck, with chains depending from it firmly held by a brace of guards so that she should not run into the spears of the escort and thus get a quick and easy death, which is often the custom for those condemned to lingering punishments.

It was pleasant to see that she still wore her clothing. Raiment, whether of fabric or skin, has its value, and custom has always given the garments of the condemned to the soldiers guarding them. Since Nais was not stripped, I could not but see that someone had given money to the guards as recompense, and in this I thought I saw the hand of Ylga, feeling a gratitude toward her.

The soldiers brought her forward to the edge of the pavilion's shade. She was bidden to prostrate herself before the Empress, and she wisely did so, avoiding rough handling and force. Her face was pale but showed neither fear nor defiance; her eyes were calm and natural. She was remembering what was due to Atlantis, and I was thrilled with love and pride as I watched her.

Outwardly, I too was impassive as a man of stone. Though I knew Phorenice's eye was on my face, there was never anything on it from first to last that I would not have had her see.

"Nais," said the Empress. "You have eaten from my platter when you were fan-girl, and drunk from my cup, and what was yours I gave you. You should have had more than gratitude; you should have had knowledge also that the arm of the Empress is long and her hand consummately heavy. But it seems you have neither of these things. Moreover, you have tried to take a certain matter that the Empress has set apart for herself. You were offered pardon, on terms, and you rejected it. You were foolish. But it is a day now when I am inclined to clemency. Presently, seated on that carved throne of granite which he has built me yonder, I shall take my Lord Deucalion to husband. Give me a plain word that you are sorry, girl, and name a man whom you would choose, and I will remember the brightness of the occasion; you shall be pardoned and wed before we rise from these cushions."

"I will not wed," she said quietly.

"Think for the last time, Nais, of what is the other choice. You will be taken, warm, and quick, and beautiful as you stand there this minute, and laid in the hollow place that is made beneath the throne-stone. Deucalion, that is to be my husband, will lay you in that awful bed, as a symbol that so shall perish all Phorenice's enemies, and then he will release the rams and lower the upper stone into place, and the world shall see your face no more. Look at the bright sky, Nais, fill your chest with the sweet warm air, and then think of what this death will mean. Believe me, girl, I do not want to make you an example unless you force me."

"I will not wed," said the prisoner quietly.

The Empress loosed her fingers from my arm and lay back against the cushions. "If the girl presumes on our old familiarity, or thinks that I jest, show her now, Deucalion, that I do not."

"The Empress is far from jesting," I said. "I will do this thing because it is the wish of the Empress that it should be done, and because it is the command of the Empress that a symbol of it shall remain forever as an example for others. Lead your prisoner to the place."

The soldiers wheeled, and the two guards with the chains of the collar on Nais's neck prepared to use force to drag her up the steps. But she walked with them willingly, with a color unchanged. I rose from my seat, made obeisance to the Empress, and followed them.

Before those ten thousand eyes, we two made no display of emotion then, not only for Atlantis' sake but also because both Nais and I had a nicety and a pride in our natures. We were not as Phorenice to flaunt endearments before others.

Yet, when I had bidden the guards unhasp the collar holding the prisoner's neck and clapped my arms around her, showing all the roughness of one who has no mind that his captive shall escape or even unduly struggle, a thrill gushed through me so potent that I was like to have fainted. It was only by supreme strain of will that I held unbrokenly on with the ceremonial. I, who had never embraced a woman with aught but the arm of roughness before, now held pressed to me one whom I loved with an infinite tenderness, and the revelation of how love can come out and link with love was almost my undoing. Outwardly, Nais made no sign, but lay half-strangled in my arms, as any woman does that is being borne away by a spoiler.

I trod with her to the uppermost step, the vast throne-stone overhanging us. Then, so that all those gazing from the sides of the pyramids and the roofs of the buildings round might see, though we were beyond Phorenice's view, I used a force that was brutal in dragging her across the level and putting her down into the hollow. And yet the girl resisted me with no one effort whatever.

So that the victim might not struggle out and be crushed, gaining an easy death when the stone descended, there were brazen clamps to fit into grooves of the stones above the hollow where she lay. These I fitted in place above her and fastened one by one, doing this butcher's work with one hand, and still fiercely holding her down by the other. Gods! The sweat of agony dripped from me onto the thirsty stone as I worked. I could not keep that in.

I clamped and locked the last two bars in place and took my brute's hand away from her throat.

The hateful fingermarks showed as bloodless furrows in the whiteness of her skin. For the life of me, yes, even for the fate of Atlantis, I could not help dropping my glance upon her face. But she was stronger than I. She gave me no last look. She kept her eyes steadfastly fixed on the cruel stone above, and so I left her, knowing that it was best not to tarry longer.

I came out from under the stone and gave the sign to the engineers who stood by the rams. The fires were taken away from their sides, and the metal in them began to contract. Slowly, the vast bulk of the throne-stone began to creep down toward its bed.

But ah, so slowly! Gods! How my soul was torn as I watched and waited.

Yet I kept my face impassive, overlooking as any officer might a piece of work which others were carrying out under his direction, on which his credit rested. I stood gravely in my place till the rams had let the stone come down on its final resting place and had been carried away by the engineers. Then I went round with the master architect, who, with his plumbline and level, tested this last piece of the building and declared it perfect.

It was a useless form, this last, seeing that by calculation they knew exactly how the stone must rest. But the guilds have their forms and customs, and on occasions of high ceremonial, they are punctiliously carried out because these middle-class people wish always to appear mysterious and impressive to the poor vulgar folk who are their inferiors. Perhaps I am hard there on them. A man who is needlessly taken round to plumb and duly level the tomb where his love lies buried living may perhaps be excused by the assessors on high a little spirit of bitterness.

I had gone up the steps to do my hateful work a man full of grief, though outwardly unmoved. As I came down again, I had a feeling of incompleteness; it seemed as though half my inwards had been left behind with Nais in the hollow of the stone, their place taken by a void which ached wearily. Still, I carried a passive face, and memory that before all these private matters stood the command of the High Council, which sat before the Ark of the Mysteries.

So I went and stood before Phorenice and said the words which the ancient forms prescribed concerning the carrying out
