Dawning Hopes.

When Maso opened the door again to admit the two visitors, Nello, performing a deep reverence to Romola, gently pushed Tito forward and stepped ahead to greet her father.

"Messer Bardo," he announced in a tone of measured respect, "I have the honor of presenting to you a Greek scholar. He has long sought an audience with you, driven not only by the report I made regarding your learning and priceless collections, but by the urgent need for your patronage following a shipwreck that has reduced him to destitution. His name is Tito Melema, at your service."

Romola's astonishment was profound. The barber had omitted any mention of the stranger's age or appearance; among her father's scholarly guests, she had rarely seen anyone but middle-aged or grey-haired men. Yet, one image remained vividly etched in her mind: the face of her brother, who had once taken her on his knee and never returned—a fair visage with sunny hair like her own. But her mind's habitual defense, a proud self-reliance hardened by her father's complaints against the world's injustice, stood like a snowy embankment against the rushing tide of admiration. Tito's bright face displayed a rich, untarnished beauty, unmarred by the shadows of age, his black *sajo* and knee-length tunic framing a countenance like a wreath of spring dropped suddenly into her young but wintry life. This life had inherited only memories: of a dead mother, a lost brother, and a blind father's happier times—memories of distant light and love buried in dark mines of books, waiting to be kindled by the torch of known joy.

Nevertheless, she returned Tito's bow with the same pale, proud expression she always wore. Yet, as he approached, the snow seemed to melt. When he glanced toward her while Nello spoke, a pink flush overspread her face, vanishing almost instantly as if her imperious will had recalled it. Tito's gaze, however, held a gentle, beseeching admiration, the most propitiating appeal to a shy, proud woman, perhaps the only atonement a man can offer for being too handsome. His entire demeanor radiated a finished fascination born of an absence of demand or assumption. It was the grace of a fleet, soft-coated animal that delights not by bounding away in indifference, but by unexpectedly resting its chin on your palm and looking up, desiring to be stroken—as if it loved you.

"Mesere, I give you welcome," said Bardo, with a note of condescension. "Misfortune wedded to learning, especially Greek learning, is a letter of credit that should win the ear of every instructed Florentine. As you are doubtless aware, since the time when your countryman, Manuelo Crisolora, diffused the light of his teaching nearly a century ago, no man is deemed worthy of the title of scholar who possesses merely the transplanted literature of the Latins. Such inert students are stigmatized as *opici* or barbarians, as the Romans themselves phrased it, who frankly replenished their urns at the fountain-head. I am, as you perceive, and as Nello has forewarned you, totally blind. A calamity to which we Florentines are especially liable, whether due to the cold winds from the Apennines, the sudden transition from our house's gloom to the summer sun's brilliance—which the *Lippi* attribute to their own lineage—or some occult cause eluding our surmises. But pray, be seated. Nello, my friend, be seated."

Bardo waited until his fine ear confirmed that the visitors were settling, noting that Romola took her usual chair at his right hand. Then he asked, "From what part of Greece do you come, Messere? I had thought your unhappy country had been almost exhausted of sons capable of cherishing images of her original glory, though the barbarous Sultans have lately shown themselves disposed to graft their precious vine onto their wild stock."

"I sailed last from Nauplia," Tito replied. "But I have resided in Constantinople and Thessalonica, and traveled in regions little visited by Western Christians since the triumph of Turkish arms. However, Messere, I was not born in Greece, but at Bari. I spent my first sixteen years in Southern Italy and Sicily."

As Tito spoke, a subtle emotion passed across Bardo's delicate features. He leaned forward, extending his right hand toward Romola and turning his head as if to address her, but then corrected himself, turning away instead to speak in a subdued voice. "Excuse me; is it not true—you are young?"

"I am three-and-twenty," Tito answered.

"Ah," Bardo murmured, his tone charged with subdued excitement, "and you had, doubtless, a father who cared for your early instruction—who, perhaps, was himself a scholar?"

A slight pause preceded Tito's reply. For Romola and Nello, it began with a shock that seemed to ripple through him, causing a momentary quiver of the lip, doubtless reviving a supremely painful memory.

"Yes," he replied, "at least a father by adoption. He was a Neapolitan, accomplished in both Latin and Greek. But," he added after another brief pause, "he is lost to me—lost on a voyage he too rashly undertook to Delos."

Bardo sank back, too delicate to probe a sorrow he divined to be recent. Romola, knowing the fibers Tito's voice had stirred in her father, felt that this new acquaintance had with wonderful suddenness breached the barrier separating them from the alien world. Nello, sensing the check placed on the conversation offered a graceful opportunity to relieve the silence, remarked, "In truth, it is as clear as Venetian glass that this fine young man has received the best training. The two Cennini have already set him to work on their Greek sheets; they are not men to begin cutting before feeling the edge of their tools. They tested him well beforehand. If there are two things not to be hidden—love and a cough—I say there is a third, and that is ignorance, once a man is obliged to do something besides wagging his head. The *tonsor inequalis* is inevitably betrayed when he takes the shears in his hand. Is it not true, Messer Bardo? I speak as a barber, but as Luigi Pulci says—"

"Nay, my good Nello," Bardo interrupted with friendly severity, "you are not altogether illiterate and might have made more respectable progress if you had abstained somewhat from the *cicalata* and gossip of the street-corner, to which our Florentines are excessively addicted; and even more if you had not clogged your memory with those frivolous productions of which Luigi Pulci has furnished the most peccant exemplar—a compendium of extravagances and incongruities far removed from the models of a pure age, resembling rather the *grylli* or conceits of a period when mystic meaning was held a warrant for monstrosity of form. With this difference, that while the monstrosity is retained, the mystic meaning is absent, in contemptible contrast with the great poem of Virgil, who, as I long held with Filelfo before Landino took upon himself to expound the same opinion, embodied the deepest lessons of philosophy in a graceful and well-knit fable. I cannot but regard the multiplication of these babbling, lawless productions, albeit countenanced by the patronage and example of Lorenzo himself, otherwise a friend to true learning, as a sign that the glorious hopes of this century are to be quenched in gloom. Nay, that they have been the delusive prologue to an age worse than that of iron—the age of tinsel and gossamer, in which no thought has substance enough to be molded into consistent and lasting form."

"Once more, pardon," Nello said, opening his palms and shrugging his shoulders. "I find myself knowing so many things in good Tuscan before I have time to think of the Latin for them; and Messer Luigi's rhymes are always slipping off the lips of my customers—that is what corrupts me. And indeed, talking of customers, I have left my shop and my reputation too long in the custody of my slow Sandro, who does not deserve even to be called a *tonsor inequalis*, but rather to be pronounced simply a bungler in the vulgar tongue. So, with your permission, Messer Bardo, I will take my leave—well understood that I am at your service whenever Maso calls upon me. It seems a thousand years till I dress and perfume the damigella's hair, which deserves to shine in the heavens as a constellation, though indeed it were a pity for it ever to go so far out of reach."

Three voices formed a fugue of friendly farewells as Nello retreated with a bow to Romola and a beck to Tito. The acute barber saw that the pretty youngster, who had crept into his liking by some strong magic, was well launched in Bardo's favorable regard. Satisfied that his introduction had not miscarried, he felt the propriety of retiring.

The little burst of wrath provoked by Nello's unlucky quotation had diverted Bardo's mind from the feelings that had previously hemmed in further speech. He now addressed Tito again with his ordinary calmness. "Ah! young man, you are happy in having united the advantages of travel with those of study, and you will be welcome among us as a bringer of fresh tidings from a land which has become sadly strange to us, except through the agents of a now restricted commerce and the reports of hasty pilgrims. For those days are in the far distance which I myself witnessed, when men like Aurispa and Guarino went out to Greece as to a storehouse, and came back laden with manuscripts which every scholar was eager to borrow—and, be it owned with shame, not always willing to restore. Nay, even the days when erudite Greeks flocked to our shores for refuge seem far-off now—farther off than the on-coming of my blindness. But doubtless, young man, research after the treasures of antiquity was not alien to the purpose of your travels?"

"Assuredly not," said Tito. "On the contrary, my companion—my father—was willing to risk his life in his zeal for the discovery of inscriptions and other traces of ancient civilization."

"And I trust there is a record of his researches and their results," Bardo said eagerly, "since they must be even more precious than those of Ciriaco, which I have diligently availed myself of, though they are not always illuminated by adequate learning."

"There *was* such a record," Tito replied, "but it was lost, like everything else, in the shipwreck I suffered below Ancona. The only record left is such as remains in our—in my memory."

"You must lose no time in committing it to paper, young man," Bardo said, his interest growing. "Doubtless you remember much, if you aided in transcription; for when I was your age, words wrought themselves into my mind as if fixed by the tool of the graver; wherefore I constantly marvel at the capriciousness of my daughter's memory, which grasps certain objects with tenacity and lets fall all those minutiae whereon depends accuracy, the very soul of scholarship. But I apprehend no such danger with you, young man, if your will has seconded the advantages of your training."

When Bardo made this reference to his daughter, Tito ventured to turn his eyes toward her. At the accusation against her memory, his face broke into its brightest smile, which was reflected as inevitably as sudden sunbeams in Romola's. Conceive the soothing delight of that smile to her! Romola had never dreamed that there was a scholar in the world who would smile at a deficiency for which she was constantly made to feel herself a culprit. It was like the dawn of a new sense to her—the sense of comradeship. They did not look away from each other immediately, as if the smile had been stolen; they looked and smiled with frank enjoyment.

"She is not really so cold and proud," Tito thought.

"Does *he* forget too, I wonder?" Romola thought, "Yet I hope not, else he will vex my father."

But Tito was obliged to turn away to answer Bardo's question. "I have had much practice in transcription," he said. "But in the case of inscriptions copied in memorable scenes, rendered doubly impressive by the sense of risk and adventure, it may have happened that my retention of written characters has been weakened. On the plain of the Eurotas, or among the gigantic stones of Mycenae and Tyrins—especially when the fear of the Turk hovers over one like a vulture—the mind wanders, even though the hand writes faithfully what the eye dictates. But something doubtless I have retained," he added with a modesty that was not false, though he was conscious it was politic, "something that might be of service if illustrated and corrected by a wider learning than my own."

"That is well spoken, young man," Bardo said, delighted. "And I will not withhold from you such aid as I can give, if you like to communicate with me concerning your recollections. I foresee a work which will be a useful supplement to the 'Isolario' of Christoforo Buondelmonte, and which may take rank with the 'Itineraria' of Ciriaco and the admirable Ambrogio Traversari. But we must prepare ourselves for calumny, young man," Bardo went on with energy, as if the work were already growing so fast that the time of trial was near; "if your book contains novelties you will be charged with forgery; if my elucidations should clash with any principles of interpretation adopted by another scholar, our personal characters will be attacked, we shall be impeached with foul actions; you must prepare yourself to be told that your mother was a fish-woman, and that your father was a renegade priest or a hanged malefactor. I myself, for having shown error in a single preposition, had an invective written against me wherein I was taxed with treachery, fraud, indecency, and even hideous crimes. Such, my young friend—such are the flowers with which the glorious path of scholarship is st
