A Face in the Crowd.

To the northern soul, the dawn of Midsummer is merely a season of dew upon the grass, fresh shoots among the oaks, and a view of the shorn meadow. They rise to greet the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist with the casual indifference of men who measure time by the turning of the wheel rather than the turning of the page. Not so the Florentine, and not so the Florentine of the fifteenth century. To him, the eastern sun breaking over the Arno possessed a specific, electric quality; the bells did not merely ring—they articulated a declaration, announcing the great summer festival of Florence, the day of San Giovanni.

San Giovanni had been the patron of Florence for eight centuries, a lineage stretching back to the Lombard Queen Theodolinda, and according to the chronicler Villani, perhaps even to the days of Constantine and Sylvester. In those ancient times, the Florentines had been so prudent that they did not discard their old idol, Mars, with contempt. Instead, they had consecrated their temple to God and the "Beato Messere Santo Giovanni" while placing Mars respectfully upon a high tower near the river, fearing that if the god of the spear and shield were broken, the city itself would suffer mutation and ruin. But by the fifteenth century, such superstitious caution had vanished. The defences of the Republic were no longer found in the spear and shield, but in craft and coffers. For spear and shield could be hired with gold florins, and on every gold florin, the image of San Giovanni shone.

Much good had come to Florence since that struggle between the old patron and the new. There had been the inevitable quarrels and bloodshed between Guelf and Ghibelline, Black and White, orthodox and heretic; there had been floods, famine, and pestilence. Yet, amidst the chaos, there had been immense wealth and glory. Florence had conquered walled cities mightier than itself, notably Pisa, whose marble buildings and honored masts were now overshadowed by the Florentine name. That name had grown prouder in the courts of Europe and Africa, built upon purest gold coinage, finest dyes, pre-eminent scholarship, and wits of the most serviceable sort for statesmanship and banking. A Pope with a turn for epigram had once called Florentines "the fifth element." And for this high destiny, though it might partly depend on the stars and the Madonna dell'Impruneta, the praise was largely due to San Giovanni, whose image crowned the fair gold florins.

Therefore, it was fitting that the day of San Giovanni should be a day of peculiar rejoicing, ushered in by a vigil kept in strict old Florentine fashion. This vigil involved dancing, street jesting, perhaps some stone-throwing and window-breaking, but above all, sights provided by a city that employed a clever engineer named Cecca. By Cecca's hand, the saints, surrounded by almond-shaped glory and floating clouds with winged cherubs, seemed to bring a piece of heaven down into the narrow streets. More wonderfully, saints of gigantic size, with attendant angels, moved in a slow, mysterious manner along the thoroughfares, like a procession of colossal figures descended from the high domes. The clouds were woven of fine stuff; the saints were mortals supported by firm bars; and those mysterious giants were men of steady brains balancing themselves on stilts, enlarged by huge masks and stuffed shoulders. To the unimaginative Florentine, this was impiety, for in the images of sacred things lay some of the virtue of the sacred things themselves. Yet, the Tuscan mind slipped from the devout to the burlesque as readily as water round an angle. After the saints had done their turn before the gates of San Giovanni, a company of merry black demons, armed with claws and thongs, would perform impromptu farces of bastinadoing and clothes-tearing. That was their way of keeping vigil, and they, too, had descended from the domes.

On the morrow, the great day, the tributary symbols paid by all dependent cities and villages were offered at the shrine of San Giovanni in the octagonal baptistery. Every Florentine, from the white-haired man to the lisping child, would be clothed in their best to honor the great sight. When the sun sloped and the streets cooled, there would be the glorious race or *Corso*, where unsaddled horses, clothed in rich trappings, would run from the Porta al Prato to the Porta Santa Croce. There, the richest *Palii*—velvet and brocade banners with silk linings and gold fringe—would await the winner on a triumphal car. And thereafter, more dancing, weddings, and grand gatherings, with piping, music, and song, so much gladness and ornament that the earth might be mistaken for Paradise.

In this year of 1492, however, it was perhaps a little less easy to make that mistake. Lorenzo the Magnificent was dead, replaced by an arrogant and incautious Piero, an evil change for Florence unless, indeed, the wise horse prefers the bad rider, as he is more easily thrown. Regrets for Lorenzo were giving way to murmured desires for a broader government, one where corruption might be arrested and free play given to everyone's jealousy and ambition. Lorenzo was dead; Pope Innocent was dying; a troublesome Neapolitan succession and an intriguing Milan threatened to set Italy by the ears. The times were likely to be difficult. Still, there was all the more reason for the Republic to keep its religious festivals.

Midsummer morning in 1492 was not less bright than usual. Betimes, the symbolic offerings were assembled at the Piazza della Signoria, where stood the massive Palazzo Vecchio and the spacious Loggia built by Orcagna. The sky made a fairest blue tent, and the bells swung so vigorously that every evil spirit with sense enough to be formidable must have taken flight. Windows and terraced roofs were alive with human faces; sombre stone houses were bright with hanging draperies. The boldly soaring palace tower, the older square tower of the Bargello, and the spire of the neighboring Badia seemed to keep watch above. Below, on the broad polygonal flags of the piazza, was the glorious show of banners, horses with rich trappings, and gigantic *ceri*, or tapers, fitly called towers—strangely aggrandized descendants of the torches by whose faint light the Church worshipped in the Catacombs.

But where the procession was to pause, the magnificent city had provided another tent than the sky. The whole of the Piazza del Duomo, from the octagonal baptistery to the façade of the cathedral, was covered at a height of forty feet or more with blue drapery adorned with yellow lilies and coats of arms. Sheaves of many-colored banners drooped beneath this superincumbent blue, creating a gorgeous, rainbow-lit shelter for the waiting spectators.

One of these spectators was Tito Melema. Bright, in the midst of brightness, he sat at the window of the room above Nello's shop. His right elbow rested on the red drapery hanging from the window-sill, his head supported in a backward position by the right hand, which pressed the curls against his ear. His face wore that bland liveliness, far removed from excitability or gloom, which marks the companion popular alike amongst men and women—the companion who is never obtrusive or noisy from uneasy vanity, and whose brow is never contracted by resentment. He showed no other change from the two months since his first appearance in the weather-stained tunic and hose than an added radiance of good fortune, like the just-perceptible perfecting of a flower after it has drunk a morning's sunbeams.

Close behind him stood the slim figure of Nello in holiday suit, and at his left the younger Cennini—Pietro, the erudite corrector of proof-sheets, not Domenico the practical. Tito looked alternately down on the scene below and upward at the knot of gazers around him. Piero di Cosimo was raising a laugh among them by his grimaces and anathemas at the noise of the bells, declaring that he would bury himself in the most solitary spot of the Valdarno if he were not condemned, as a painter, to lie in wait for the secrets of color caught from the floating of banners.

Tito had just turned his laughing face away from the whimsical painter to look down at the small drama among the checkered border of spectators when, at the angle of the marble steps in front of the Duomo, nearly opposite Nello's shop, he saw a man's face upturned towards him. It fixed on him a gaze that seemed to have more meaning than the ordinary passing observation of a stranger. It was a face with a tonsured head, rising above the black mantle and white tunic of a Dominican friar—a common sight in Florence. But the glance had something peculiar in it for Tito. There was a faint suggestion, certainly not of an unpleasant kind. Yet, what pleasant association had he ever had with monks? None. The glance and the suggestion hardly took longer than a flash of lightning.

"Nello!" said Tito, hastily, but immediately added, in a tone of disappointment, "Ah, he has turned round. It was that tall, thin friar who is going up the steps. I wanted you to tell me if you knew aught of him?"

"One of the Frati Predicatori," said Nello, carelessly; "you don't expect me to know the private history of the crows."

"I seem to remember something about his face," said Tito. "It is an uncommon face."

"What? You thought it might be our Fra Girolamo? Too tall; and he never shows himself in that chance way."

"Besides, that loud-barking 'hound of the Lord' is not in Florence just now," said Francesco Cei, the popular poet; "he has taken Piero de' Medici's hint to carry his railing prophecies on a journey for a while."

"The Frate neither rails nor prophesies against any man," said a middle-aged personage seated at the other corner of the window; "he only prophesies against vice. If you think that an attack on your poems, Francesco, it is not the Frate's fault."

"Ah, he's gone into the Duomo now," said Tito, who had watched the figure eagerly. "No, I was not under that mistake, Nello. Your Fra Girolamo has a high nose and a large under-lip. I saw him once—he is not handsome; but this man..."

"Truce to your descriptions!" said Cennini. "Hark! See! Here come the horsemen and the banners. That standard, carried on the horse with white trappings—that with the red eagle holding the green dragon between his talons, and the red lily over the eagle—is the Gonfalon of the Guelf party, and those cavaliers close round it are the chief officers of the Guelf party. That is one of our proudest banners, grumble as we may; it means the triumph of the Guelfs, which means the triumph of Florentine will, which means triumph of the popolani."

"Nay, go on, Cennini," said the middle-aged man, "which means triumph of the fat popolani over the lean, which again means triumph of the fattest popolano over those who are less fat."

"Cronaca, you are becoming sententious," said the printer. "Fra Girolamo's preaching will spoil you, and make you take life by the wrong handle. Trust me, your cornices will lose half their beauty if you begin to mingle bitterness with them; that is the *maniera Tedesca* which you used to declaim against when you came from Rome."

"That is a goodly show of cavaliers," said Tito, who had learned by this time the best way to please Florentines; "but are there not strangers among them? I see foreign costumes."

"Assuredly," said Cennini; "you see there the Orators from France, Milan, and Venice, and behind them are English and German nobles; for it is customary that all foreign visitors of distinction pay their tribute to San Giovanni in the train of that gonfalon. For my part, I think our Florentine cavaliers sit their horses as well as any of those cut-and-thrust northerners, whose wits lie in their heels and saddles; and for yon Venetian, I fancy he would feel himself more at ease on the back of a dolphin. We ought to know something of horsemanship, for we excel all Italy in the sports of the Giostra, and the money we spend on them. But you will see a finer show of our chief men by-and-by, Melema; my brother himself will be among the officers of the Zecca."

"The banners are the better sight," said Piero di Cosimo, forgetting the noise in his delight at the winding stream of color as the tributary standards advanced. "The Florentine men are so-so; they make but a sorry show at this distance with their patch of sallow flesh-tint above the black garments; but those banners with their velvet, and satin, and minever, and brocade, and their endless play of delicate light and shadow!—*Va*! your human talk and doings are a tame jest; the only passionate life is in form and colour."

"Ay, Piero, if Satanasso could paint, thou wouldst sell thy soul to learn his secrets," said Nello. "But there is little likelihood of it, seeing the blessed angels themselves are such poor hands at chiaroscuro, if one may judge from their *capo-d'opera*, the Madonna Nunziata."

"There go the banners of Pisa and Arezzo," said Cennini. "Ay, Messer Pisano, it is no use for you to look sullen; you may as well carry your banner to our San Giovanni with a good grace. 'Pisans false, Florentines blind'—the second half of that proverb will hold no longer. There come the ensigns of our subject towns and signories, Melema; they will all be suspended in San Giovanni until this day next year, when they will give place to new ones."

"They are a fair sight," said Tito; "
