Under the Plane-Tree.

Three weeks had passed since Tito handed his florins to Cennini, and as he set out toward the Via de' Bardi, he wore the outward marks of a mind entirely at ease. How could it be otherwise? His nature was too buoyant, too unburdened by foresight, for the hidden dangers or distant terrors of the world to seize him. Turning from the hot sun into the cool shadow of a narrow street, he removed his black cloth cap, pushing back his brown curls to court the breeze. There was no deceit upon his brow, nor any trace of naive simplicity; it was merely a finely formed, smooth young forehead. His slow, absent glance at the upper windows of the houses possessed neither cunning nor innocence, but simply the wide, unwearying breadth of a youthful gaze, framed by dark lashes and a cerulean-white angle of the eye. Did his face attract or repel depending on the observer's mood? Was he a cipher with many keys? The strong, unmistakable expression of his entire person was a negative one, perfectly truthful, declaring an absence of restless vanity or uneasy claims. It commanded a willing tribute of admiration from the holiday-makers crowding the streets.

By now, the stir of the Festa was felt even in the smallest alleys. The throng, once concentrated for the procession, now streamed in all directions, chasing new distractions. These intervals of a festival are precisely when the vague animal spirits of a crowd become petulant, ready to sacrifice a stray individual for the greater happiness of the many. As Tito entered the neighborhood of San Martino, he found the crowd denser. Near the hostelry of the *Bertucce*, or Baboons, a knot of people had gathered around some arresting object. Tito prepared to turn aside when, amidst loud laughter, his ear caught a distressed childish voice crying, "Loose me! Holy Virgin, help me!" This sound determined him to push his way into the knot of gazers.

He perceived the voice came from a young peasant girl, her white hood fallen off in her struggle to free her hands from the grasp of a man in the parti-colored dress of a *cerretano*, or conjuror. The conjuror made laughing attempts to soothe and cajole her, carrying with him the amused sympathy of the spectators, who argued with the girl against her obstinacy using various terms for "simpleton" rich in the Florentine dialect. At first, the girl's face was turned away, revealing only her light-brown hair plaited with a long silver pin. But the struggle brought her face opposite Tito's, and he saw the baby features of Tessa, her blue eyes filled with tears and her lower lip quivering. Tessa saw *him*, and through the mist of her swelling tears, a sudden hope beamed in her face, like that of a child held by a stranger who spots a familiar hand reaching out.

In an instant, Tito pushed through the barrier of bystanders, whose curiosity made them step aside at his sudden interference. He grasped Tessa's waist and said, "Loose this child! What right have you to hold her against her will?"

The conjuror—a man with a face where the angles of the eyes, eyebrows, nostrils, and jaw all tended upward—showed his small, regular teeth in an impish but not ill-natured grin. He released Tessa's hands, stretching his own backward, shrugging his shoulders in a half-apologetic, half-protesting manner.

"I mean the ragazza no evil in the world, Messere: ask this respectable company," the conjuror said. "I was only going to show them a few samples of my skill, in which this little damsel might have helped me the better because of her kitten face, which would have assured them of open dealing; and I had promised her a lapful of confetti as a reward. But what then? Messer has doubtless better confetti at hand, and she knows it."

A general laugh among the bystanders accompanied these words, raised probably by the look of relief and confidence with which Tessa clung to Tito's arm as he drew her close. She cared only for the laugh as she might have cared for the roar of wild beasts from which she was escaping, attaching no meaning to it. But Tito, having no sooner got her on his arm than he foresaw some embarrassment in the situation, hastened to clear himself from observers who, having been despoiled of an expected amusement, were sure to re-establish the balance by jests.

"See, see, little one! here is your hood," said the conjuror, throwing the bit of white drapery over Tessa's head. "*Orsù*, bear me no malice; come back to me when Messere can spare you."

"Ah! Maestro Vaiano, she'll come back presently, as the toad said to the harrow," called out one of the spectators, seeing how Tessa started and shrank at the action.

Tito pushed vigorously toward the corner of a side-street, a little vexed at this delay in his progress to the Via de' Bardi, intending to get rid of the poor little contadina as soon as possible. But the next street had its own passengers inclined to make holiday remarks on so unusual a pair. They had no sooner entered it than he said, in a kind but hurried manner, "Now, little one, where were you going? Are you come by yourself to the Festa?"

"Ah, no!" said Tessa, looking frightened and distressed again; "I have lost my mother in the crowd—her and my father-in-law. They will be angry—he will beat me. It was in the crowd in San Pulinari—somebody pushed me along and I couldn't stop myself, so I got away from them. Oh, I don't know where they're gone! Please, don't leave me!"

Her eyes swelled with tears again, and she ended with a sob.

Tito hurried along; the Church of the Badia was not far off. They could enter it by the cloister that opened at the back, and in the church he could talk to Tessa—perhaps leave her. No! it was an hour when the church was not open. They paused under the shelter of the cloister, and he said, "Have you no cousin or friend in Florence, my little Tessa, whose house you could find; or are you afraid of walking by yourself since you have been frightened by the conjuror? I am in a hurry to get to Oltrarno, but if I could take you anywhere near—"

"Oh, I *am* frightened: he was the devil—I know he was. And I don't know where to go. I have nobody: and my mother meant to have her dinner somewhere, and I don't know where. Holy Madonna! I shall be beaten."

The corners of her pouting mouth went down piteously, and the poor little bosom with the beads on it above the green serge gown heaved so that a loud sob *would* come, and the big tears fell as if making up for lost time. Here was a situation! It would have been brutal to leave her, and Tito's nature was all gentleness. He wished at that moment that he had not been expected in the Via de' Bardi. As he saw her lifting up her holiday apron to catch the hurrying tears, he laid his hand on the apron, rubbed one of her cheeks, and kissed the baby-like roundness.

"My poor little Tessa! leave off crying. Let us see what can be done. Where is your home—where do you live?"

There was no answer, but the sobs began to subside a little and the drops to fall less quickly.

"Come! I'll take you a little way, if you'll tell me where you want to go."

The apron fell, and Tessa's face began to look as contented as a cherub's budding from a cloud. The diabolical conjuror, the anger, and the beating seemed a long way off.

"I think I'll go home, if you'll take me," she said, in a half whisper, looking up at Tito with wide blue eyes and something sweeter than a smile—with a childlike calm.

"Come, then, little one," said Tito, in a caressing tone, putting her arm within his again. "Which way is it?"

"Beyond Peretola—where the large pear-tree is."

"Peretola? Out at which gate, pazzarella? I am a stranger, you must remember."

"Out at the Por del Prato," said Tessa, moving along with a very fast hold on Tito's arm.

He did not know all the turnings well enough to venture on an attempt at choosing the quietest streets; and besides, it occurred to him that where the passengers were most numerous there was, perhaps, the most chance of meeting with Monna Ghita and finding an end to his knight-errant-ship. So he made straight for Porta Rossa and on to Ognissanti, showing his usual bright propitiatory face to the mixed observers who threw their jests at him and his little heavy-shod maiden with much liberality. Mingled with the more decent holiday-makers were frolicsome apprentices, rather envious of his good fortune; bold-eyed women with the badge of the yellow veil; beggars who thrust forward their caps for alms in derision at Tito's evident haste; dicers, sharpers, and loungers of the worst sort; boys whose tongues were used to wag in concert at the most brutal street games. For the streets of Florence were not always a moral spectacle in those times, and Tessa's terror at being lost in the crowd was not wholly unreasonable.

When they reached the Piazza d'Ognissanti, Tito slackened his pace. They were both heated with their hurried walk, and here was a wider space where they could take breath. They sat down on one of the stone benches frequent against the walls of old Florentine houses.

"Holy Virgin!" said Tessa; "I am glad we have got away from those women and boys; but I was not frightened, because you could take care of me."

"Pretty little Tessa!" said Tito, smiling at her. "What makes you feel so safe with me?"

"Because you are so beautiful—like the people going into Paradise: they are all good."

"It is a long while since you had your breakfast, Tessa," said Tito, seeing some stalls near with fruit and sweetmeats upon them. "Are you hungry?"

"Yes, I think I am—if you will have some too."

Tito bought some apricots, cakes, and comfits, and put them into her apron.

"Come," he said, "let us walk on to the Prato, and then perhaps you will not be afraid to go the rest of the way alone."

"But you will have some of the apricots and things," said Tessa, rising obediently and gathering up her apron as a bag for her store.

"We will see," said Tito aloud; and to himself he said, "Here is a little contadina who might inspire a better idyl than Lorenzo de' Medici's 'Nencia da Barberino,' that Nello's friends rave about; if I were only a Theocritus, or had time to cultivate the necessary experience by unseasonable walks of this sort! However, the mischief is done now: I am so late already that another half-hour will make no difference. Pretty little pigeon!"

"We have a garden and plenty of pears," said Tessa, "and two cows, besides the mules; and I'm very fond of them. But my father-in-law is a cross man: I wish my mother had not married him. I think he is wicked; he is very ugly."

"And does your mother let him beat you, poverina? You said you were afraid of being beaten."

"Ah, my mother herself scolds me: she loves my young sister better, and thinks I don't do work enough. Nobody speaks kindly to me, only the Pievano (parish priest) when I go to confession. And the men in the Mercato laugh at me and make fun of me. Nobody ever kissed me and spoke to me as you do; just as I talk to my little black-faced kid, because I'm very fond of it."

It seemed not to have entered Tessa's mind that there was any change in Tito's appearance since the morning he begged the milk from her, and that he looked now like a personage for whom she must summon her little stock of reverent words and signs. He had impressed her too differently from any human being who had ever come near her before, for her to make any comparison of details; she took no note of his dress. He was simply a voice and a face to her, something come from Paradise into a world where most things seemed hard and angry; and she prattled with as little restraint as if he had been an imaginary companion born of her own lovingness and the sunshine.

They had now reached the Prato, which at that time was a large open space within the walls, where the Florentine youth played at their favorite *Calcio*—a peculiar kind of football—and otherwise exercised themselves. At this mid-day time it was forsaken and quiet to the very gates, where a tent had been erected in preparation for the race. On the border of this wide meadow, Tito paused and said—

"Now, Tessa, you will not be frightened if I leave you to walk the rest of the way by yourself. Addio! Shall I come and buy a cup of milk from you in the Mercato to-morrow morning, to see that you are quite safe?"

He added this question in a soothing tone, as he saw her eyes widening sorrowfully and the corners of her mouth falling. She said nothing at first; she only opened her apron and looked down at her apricots and sweetmeats. Then she looked up at him again and said complainingly—

"I thought you would have some, and we could sit down under a tree outside the gate, and eat them together."

"Tessa, Tessa, you little siren, you would ruin me," said Tito, laughing, and kissing both her cheeks. "I ought to have been in the Via de' Bardi long ago. No!
