Messer Bernardo del Nero remained as steadfast in his counsel as Romola had anticipated: the marriage must wait until Easter. In this, Bardo yielded entirely to the guidance of his wise and pragmatic friend. Yet, even Bernardo, though immune to the personal charm Tito exerted over others, could not wholly ignore the seductive argument of success that holds sway among men of the world. Tito was ascending rapidly through the highest circles. He had won the favor of the young Cardinal Giovanni de' Medici, who had even hinted at inviting him into his learned retinue for an upcoming journey to Rome. This bright Greek, whose tongue was ever ready yet never quarrelsome, became a cherished presence at the lavish suppers of the Via Larga and at Florentine games where he did not claim to excel, yet admired the incomparable skill of Piero de' Medici with the utmost grace. Through an unbroken sequence of events, Tito's reputation as an agreeable companion in "magnificent" society rendered his learning and talent all the more radiant; he possessed genuine accomplishment sufficient to prevent any exaggerated estimation from proving hazardous. Messer Bernardo, burdened by old prejudices and attachments, found these arguments slowly dismantling his newer, weaker reservations regarding the young Greek stranger, who was perhaps a little too supple. To the aged Florentine, it became impossible to disregard the recommendation of standing well with the most distinguished families. Since Tito was now fully received into that circle whose views constituted the unquestioned standard of social value, it seemed irrational to deny that there was no longer any obstacle to satisfaction in the prospect of such a son-in-law for Bardo, and such a husband for Romola.

It was undeniable that Tito's arrival had marked the dawn of a new life for both father and daughter, surpassing even the first promise. The blind old scholar—whose proud truthfulness would never descend into the commerce of feigned and preposterous admiration that formed the fabric of learned intercourse, varied only by a corresponding excess in vituperation—had fallen into neglect even among his fellow citizens. When mentioned, it was usually said that, while his blindness and the loss of his son were pitiable misfortunes, he was tiresome in contending for the value of his own labors; that his discontent was somewhat inconsistent in a man who had once been openly indifferent to religious rites and who, in days past, had refused offers from various quarters on the slight condition that he take orders, without which it was difficult for patrons to support a scholar. But since Tito's coming, the monotony of thought surrounding Bardo's name had vanished. The old man was understood to have ceased his plaints, and the fair daughter was no longer to be confined in dowerless pride, waiting for a *parentado*. The winning manners and growing favor of the handsome Greek, expected to enter into the dual relation of son and husband, helped transform the new interest into something thoroughly friendly. It was no longer rare for a visitor to enliven the quiet library. Elderly men came from an indefinite prompting to renew former intercourse that arises when an old acquaintance begins to be newly talked about; and young men whom Tito had asked permission to bring once found it easy to return when they overtook him on his way to the Via de' Bardi, resting their hands on his shoulder and falling into easy chat with him. For it was pleasant to behold Romola's beauty; to see her, like the type of womanly majesty described by old Firenzuola, "sitting with a certain grandeur, speaking with gravity, smiling with modesty, and casting around, as it were, an odour of queenliness;" and she seemed to unfold like a strong white lily under this genial breath of admiration and homage. It mattered little to her amidst her new bright life in Tito's love.

Tito had even become the instrument of strengthening the hope in Bardo's mind that he might, before his death, receive the longed-for security concerning his library: that it should not be merged into another collection, nor transferred to a body of monks to bear the name of a monastery, but should remain forever the Bardi Library, for the use of the Florentines. For the old habit of trusting in the Medici could not die out while their influence remained the strongest lever in the State; and Tito, once possessing the ear of Cardinal Giovanni de' Medici, might accomplish more even than Messer Bernardo towards winning the desired interest, for he could demonstrate to a learned audience the peculiar value of Bardi's collection. Tito himself spoke sanguinely of such a result, eager to cheer the old man, and conscious that Romola repaid those gentle words to her father with a sort of adoration that no direct tribute to herself could have won.

This question of the library became the subject of numerous discussions between Bernardo del Nero and Romola as Christmas passed and the prospect of the marriage drew near—but always out of Bardo's hearing. For Bardo nursed a vague belief, which they dared not disturb, that his property, apart from the library, was adequate to meet all demands. He would not even, except under a momentary pressure of angry despondency, admit to himself that the will by which he had disinherited Dino would leave Romola the heir of nothing but debts; or that he needed anything from patronage beyond the security that a separate locality should be assigned to his library, in return for a deed of gift by which he made it over to the Florentine Republic.

"My opinion is," said Bernardo to Romola during a consultation beneath the loggia, "that since you are to be married, and Messer Tito will have a competent income, we should begin to wind up affairs and ascertain exactly the sum necessary to save the library from being touched, instead of letting the debts accumulate any longer. Your father needs nothing but his shred of mutton and his macaroni every day, and I think Messer Tito may engage to supply that for the years that remain; he can let it be in place of the *morgen-cap*."

"Tito has always known that my life is bound up with my father's," said Romola. "And he is better to my father than I am; he delights in making him happy."

"Ah, he is not made of the same clay as other men, is he?" said Bernardo, smiling. "Thy father has thought of shutting woman's folly out of thee by cramming thee with Greek and Latin; but thou hast been as ready to believe in the first pair of bright eyes and the first soft words that have come within reach of thee, as if thou couldst say nothing by heart but Paternosters, like other Christian men's daughters."

"Now, godfather," said Romola, shaking her head playfully, "as if it were only bright eyes and soft words that made me love Tito! You know better. You know I love my father and you because you are both good, and I love Tito too because he is so good. I see it, I feel it, in everything he says and does. And if he is handsome, too, why should I not love him the better for that? It seems to me beauty is part of the finished language by which goodness speaks. You know *you* must have been a very handsome youth, godfather"—she looked up with one of her happy, loving smiles at the stately old man—"you were about as tall as Tito, and you had very fine eyes; only you looked a little sterner and prouder, and—"

"And Romola likes to have all the pride to herself?" said Bernardo, not inaccessible to this pretty coaxing. "However, it is well that in one way Tito's demands are more modest than those of any Florentine husband of fitting rank that we should have been likely to find for you; he wants no dowry."

Thus it was settled between Messer Bernardo del Nero, Romola, and Tito. Bardo assented with a wave of the hand when Bernardo told him that he thought it would be well now to begin to sell property and clear off debts; being accustomed to think of debts and property as a sort of thick wood that his imagination never even penetrated, still less got beyond. And Tito set about winning Messer Bernardo's respect by inquiring, with his ready faculty, into Florentine money-matters, the secrets of the *Monti* or public funds, the values of real property, and the profits of banking.

"You will soon forget that Tito is not a Florentine, godfather," said Romola. "See how he is learning everything about Florence."

"It seems to me he is one of the *demoni*, who are of no particular country, child," said Bernardo, smiling. "His mind is a little too nimble to be weighted with all the stuff we men carry about in our hearts."

Romola smiled too, in happy confidence.
