The Avenger's Secret.

It was the first time Baldassarre had ventured into the Piazza del Duomo since his flight. A fierce longing pulled him toward the pulpit where the remarkable monk preached, yet he recoiled from returning to the very spot where he had stood half-naked, hair unkempt, a rope around his throat, branded a madman. The sting of Tito's words—"some madman, surely"—was not merely in their cruelty; it was in the sudden, bitter realization that he might indeed be powerless to prove them false. Alongside his burning desire for vengeance rose a cold, paralyzing doubt: could he actually achieve it? It felt as though Tito had been guided by a diabolical prompter who had whispered Baldassarre's deepest shame into the traitor's ear. He was not mad; he carried the pitiful mark of sanity, the clear awareness of his own shattered faculties. He measured his own feebleness. With the first surge of vindictive rage came a vague caution, like that of a wild beast fierce yet weak, or an insect pausing in a tremor of distrust because its footing had failed. This distrust, this refusal to take any step that might betray his condition, had driven him to reject Piero di Cosimo's friendly overtures.

He had exercised equal caution at the hospital, answering the brethren's questions only that he had been captured by the French on his way from Genoa. Yet his age, and the peculiar cadence of his speech, marked him as different from the ordinary mendicants and poor travelers sheltered there. The monks, moved by pity, offered him extra charity: a coarse woolen tunic against the chill, a pair of peasant shoes, and a few *danari*, the smallest Florentine coins, to aid his journey. He departed for the road to Arezzo early in the morning, but halted at the first small town. There, he spent a couple of coins to be shaved and to have his tangled hair cut short, restoring it to its former style. The barber possessed a small hand-mirror of bright steel. It had been years since Baldassarre had looked upon his reflection. Now, as his gaze fell upon the glass, a new thought pierced his mind. "Was he so altered that Tito truly did not know him?" The thought arrested his impetuous currents with a painful shock; his hand trembled like a leaf as he reached for the mirror. He needed to see himself before shaving. The barber, noting his shakiness, held the glass steady.

No, he was not so changed. He recognized the wrinkles he had known three years prior; they were merely deeper now. The same rough, clumsy skin formed little superficial bosses on his brow, like cipher-marks; it was only yellower, resembling a lifeless rind. That shaggy white beard was no disguise to eyes that had scrutinized him for sixteen years, eyes that should have searched for him with the expectation of finding him transformed, as one searches for a beloved among bodies cast up by the sea. There was a difference in his glance, but it was a difference that should only have made recognition more startling; for is not a known voice all the more thrilling when heard as a cry? Yet the doubt was folly; he felt Tito knew him. He pushed the mirror away. The strong currents rushed on again, and the energies of hatred and vengeance reawakened.

He retraced his steps toward Florence but refused to enter the city until dusk. Turning aside from the highroad, he sat by a small pool shadowed on one side by alder bushes still sprinkled with yellow leaves. It was a calm November day, and the sight of the pool's still surface suggested itself as a mirror. He wanted to contemplate himself slowly, something he had dared not do before the barber. Sitting on the pool's edge, he bent forward to study his image.

Was there something wandering and imbecile in his face—something mirroring the chaos within his mind?

Not now. When he examined himself with eager inquiry, there was an intense purpose in his eyes. But at other times? Yes, undoubtedly. In the long hours of vague aching for an unremembered past, when he sat in dark loneliness visited by whispers that died mockingly as he strained to catch them, and by forms that approached and floated away as he reached futilely for them, his glance must have been filled with frustration and amazement. More horribly, when the thick cloud parted for a moment and he sprang forward with hope, only to see it roll shut again, leaving him helpless as before, there must have been a blank confusion in his face, like a man suddenly struck blind.

Could he prove anything? Could he even begin to allege a case with the confidence that his train of thought would not break? Would anyone believe he had once possessed a mind filled with rare knowledge, busy with close thoughts, ready with varied speech? That laboriously gathered store had slipped away. Was it utterly and forever gone, like waters from an urn lost in the wide ocean? Or was it still within him, imprisoned by some obstruction that might one day shatter?

It might be so; he clung to this hope. Since the day he had first walked feebly from his straw couch and felt a new darkness within him under the sunlight, his mind had undergone changes, partly gradual and persistent, partly sudden and fleeting. As his bodily strength returned, so had his self-command and the energy of his will; he had recovered the memory of that part of his life closely enwrought with his emotions. But he felt more and more constantly and painfully the uneasy sense of lost knowledge. Yet, once or twice, when strongly excited, he had seemed momentarily to possess his past self entirely, as old men doze for an instant and regain the consciousness of their youth. He seemed again to see Greek pages and understand them, again to feel his mind moving unbenumbed among familiar ideas. It had been but a flash, and the closing darkness seemed the more horrible; but might not the same thing happen again, for longer periods? If it would only come and stay long enough for him to achieve revenge—devise an exquisite suffering that a mere right arm could never inflict!

Raising himself from his stooping posture, he folded his arms and attempted to concentrate all his mental force on the plan he must immediately pursue. He had to wait for knowledge and opportunity, and while waiting, he needed means of living without begging. What he dreaded above all was that anyone should think him a foolish, helpless old man. No one must know that half his memory was gone; the lost strength might return. If it were only for a little while, that might be enough.

He knew how to begin gathering information about Tito. He had repeated the words "Bratti Ferravecchi" so constantly after they were uttered to him that they never slipped from his mind for long. A man in Genoa, on whose finger he had seen Tito's ring, had told him that the ring was bought in Florence from a young Greek, well-dressed with a handsome dark face, in the shop of a *rigattiere* named Bratti Ferravecchi, located in the street also called Ferravecchi. This discovery caused a violent agitation in Baldassarre. Until then, he had clung with the tenacity of his fervent nature to his faith in Tito, never believing himself wilfully forsaken. At first, he had thought, "My bit of parchment has never reached him; that is why I am still toiling at Antioch. But he is searching; he knows where I was lost: he will trace me out and find me at last." Then, when taken to Corinth, he induced his owners, by assuring them he would be sought and ransomed, to secure against any inquiries regarding him at Antioch. At Corinth, he thought joyfully, "Here, at last, he must find me. Here he is sure to touch, whichever way he goes." But before another year had passed, the illness came, rising with body and mind so shattered that he was worse than worthless to his owners, except for the sake of the ransom that never arrived. Sitting helpless in the morning sunlight, he began to think, "Tito has been drowned, or they have made *him* a prisoner too. I shall see him no more. He set out after me, but misfortune overtook him. I shall see his face no more." Sitting in his new feebleness and despair, supporting his head between his hands with blank eyes and lips moving uncertainly, he looked so much like a hopelessly imbecile old man that his owners were content to be rid of him, allowing a Genoese merchant, who had compassion on him as an Italian, to take him aboard his galley. In a voyage of many months through the Archipelago and along the seaboard of Asia Minor, Baldassarre recovered his bodily strength, but upon landing at Genoa, he felt such a weary sense of desolation that he almost wished he had died of that illness at Corinth. There was just one possibility hindering this wish: that Tito might not be dead, but living in a state of imprisonment or destitution. If he lived, there was still a hope for Baldassarre—faint, perhaps, and likely to be long deferred, but still a hope, that he might find his child, his cherished son again; might yet again clasp hands and meet face to face with the one being who remembered him as he had been before his mind was broken. In this state of feeling, he had chanced to meet the stranger who wore Tito's onyx ring. Though Baldassarre would have been unable to describe the ring beforehand, the sight of it stirred the dormant fibers, and he recognized it. That Tito, nearly a year after his father had been parted from him, should be living in apparent prosperity at Florence, selling the gem which he ought not to have sold till the last extremity, was a fact Baldassarre shrank from trying to account for. He was glad to be stunned and bewildered by it, rather than to have any distinct thought; he tried to feel nothing but joy that he should behold Tito again. Perhaps Tito had thought his father dead; somehow the mystery would be explained. "But at least I shall meet eyes that will remember me. I am not alone in the world."

And now again Baldassarre said, "I am not alone in the world; I shall never be alone, for my revenge is with me."

It was as the instrument of that revenge, as something merely external and subservient to his true life, that he bent down again to examine himself with hard curiosity—not, he thought, because he cared for a withered, forsaken old man, whom nobody loved, whose soul was like a deserted home where the ashes were cold upon the hearth and the walls were bare of all but the marks of what had been. It is in the nature of all human passion, the lowest as well as the highest, that there is a point where it ceases to be properly egoistic, and becomes like a fire kindled within our being to which everything else in us is mere fuel.

He looked at the pale, black-browed image in the water until he identified it with that self from which his revenge seemed a thing apart; and he felt as if the image too heard the silent language of his thought.

"I was a loving fool—I worshipped a woman once, and believed she could care for me; and then I took a helpless child and fostered him; and I watched him as he grew, to see if he would care for me only a little—care for *me* over and above the good he got from me. I would have torn open my breast to warm him with my life-blood if I could only have seen him care a little for the pain of my wound. I have labored, I have strained to crush out of this hard life one drop of unselfish love. Fool! men love their own delights; there is no delight to be had in me. And yet I watched till I believed I saw what I watched for. When he was a child he lifted soft eyes towards me, and held my hand willingly: I thought, this boy will surely love me a little: because I give my life to him and strive that he shall know no sorrow, he will care a little when I am thirsty—the drop he lays on my parched lips will be a joy to him... Curses on him! I wish I may see him lie with those red lips white and dry as ashes, and when he looks for pity I wish he may see my face rejoicing in his pain. It is all a lie—this world is a lie—there is no goodness but in hate. Fool! not one drop of love came with all your striving: life has not given you one drop. But there are deep draughts in this world for hatred and revenge. I have memory left for that, and there is strength in my arm—there is strength in my will—and if I can do nothing but kill him—"

But Baldassarre's mind rejected the thought of that brief punishment. His whole soul had been thrilled into immediate, unreasoning belief in that eternity of vengeance where he, an undying hate, might clutch forever an undying traitor, and hear that fair, smiling hardness cry and moan with anguish. But the primary need and hope was to see a slow revenge under the same sky and on the same earth where he himself had been forsaken and had fainted with despair. And as soon as he tried to concentrate his mind on the means of attaining his end, the sense of his weakness pressed upon him like a frosty ache. This despised body, which was to be the instrument of a sublime vengeance, must be nourished and decently clad. If he had to wait, he must labor, and his labor must be of a humble sort, for he had no skill. He wondered whether the sight of written characters would so stimulate his faculties that he might venture to try finding work as a copyist; *that* might win him some credence for his past scholarship. But no! He dared trust neither hand nor brain. He must be content to do the work most like that of a beast of burden: in this mercantile city, many porters must be wanted, and he could at least carry weights. Thanks to the justice that struggled in this confused world in behalf of vengeance, his limbs had regained some of their old sturdiness. He was stripped of all else that men would give coin for.

But the new urgency of this habitual thought brought a new suggestion. There was something
