The winter days drifted past Romola with the silent, uniform tread of white ships passing a lone watcher on the shore. Each vessel carried a hidden cargo of impending change, though none announced its arrival. Tito's whispered warnings had woven a thread of dread into her curiosity regarding public affairs, leading her to prefer ignorance to knowledge. The threatening German Emperor had vanished, and Florence's precarious position seemed momentarily eased; yet the underlying distress remained so profound that Romola's active duties showed little diminution. In these relentless tasks, her mind found its only sanctuary from the gnawing doubts that plagued her.

She dared not allow herself the joy that the relief arrived in extremity, seemingly validating the Frate's party, had brought to Francesco Valori. The hot-tempered chieftain of the Piagnoni had been elected Gonfaloniere at the start of the year, eager to imprint his liberal will upon the city during his brief two-month tenure. On the surface, this appeared as a triumph for the faction most devoted to liberty and a shield for Savonarola. But Romola's spirit was now attuned to every shadow that suggested the present was merely an unconscious incubation of mixed germs, destined one day to bloom into tragedy. By Carnival time, shortly after mid-February, her foreboding crystallized into certainty: the Medici had ceased their passive stance and were actively maneuvering to secure the election of Bernardo del Nero as the new Gonfaloniere.

On the final day of the Carnival, between the tenth and eleventh hour, Romola walked toward the Corso degli Albizzi, fulfilling her promise to meet her cousin Brigida. They intended to depart from the Via de' Bardi in the early afternoon, securing their places at a window Tito had reserved in the Piazza della Signoria. A spectacle of unprecedented strangeness awaited them there, drawing the gaze of every Florentine eye. The Piagnoni were exercising their newfound authority over the manner of celebrating the festival. Despite the efforts of Dolfo Spini and his companions to revive the traditional masques and practical jokes—seasoned with the indecency of the past—such frivolities were deemed incompatible with a city that had declared Christ its King.

Romola set forth with a languid detachment, the mood of one entering a long day of sightseeing solely to gratify a child or a cherished friend. The day marked an epoch in the keeping of Carnival, yet this phase of reform failed to ignite her enthusiasm. She remained unaware that it was also an epoch in her own life, when another destiny would cease to be secretly entwined with hers and become visibly so.

Choosing to traverse the great Piazza alone, she sought a preliminary survey of the unparalleled sight. Entering from the south, she beheld a monstrous, multi-colored structure resembling a pyramid or a colossal fir-tree, sixty feet high. Its shelves widened toward the base until they spanned a circumference of eighty yards. The square teemed with life: slender youths in white garments, crowned with olive wreaths, moved to and fro around the base, carrying baskets brimming with bright objects. Maturer figures, clad in monastic robes or the loose tunics and dark-red caps of artists, assisted, examined, or retreated to vantage points to survey the wondrous whole. Among a considerable group standing on the marble steps of Orgagna's Loggia, Romola recognized Piero di Cosimo, who seemed to stand aloof in a posture of discontent and scorn.

Drawing nearer, she paused to inspect the multifarious objects ranged in gradation from the base to the summit. There were tapestries and brocades of immodest design, pictures and sculptures likely to incite vice. Boards and tables for every game lay alongside printing blocks, dice, and other apparatus for gambling. Worldly music-books and instruments of all varieties—lutes, drums, cymbals, trumpets—filled the air. Masks and costumes from old Carnival shows were displayed, alongside handsome copies of Ovid, Boccaccio, Petrarch, Pulci, and other works of vanity or impurity. Implements of feminine vanity abounded: rouge-pots, false hair, mirrors, perfumes, powders, and transparent veils designed to provoke inquisitive glances. At the very apex stood the unflattering effigy of a mythical Venetian merchant, rumored to have offered a heavy sum for this collection of marketable abominations. Soaring above him in surpassing ugliness was the symbolic figure of the old, debauched Carnival.

This was the preparation for a new kind of bonfire—the Burning of Vanities. Hidden within the pyramid's interior was a plentiful store of dry fuel and gunpowder. On the evening of this last festival day, the pile was to be ignited to the sound of trumpets, sending the ugly old Carnival tumbling into the flames amidst songs of reforming triumph.

Such a crowning act could hardly have been prepared without a peculiar organization initiated by Savonarola two years prior. The mass of Florentine boyhood and youth was no longer left to its own promptings toward street mischief and crude dissoluteness. Under the training of Fra Domenico, Savonarola's lieutenant, lads and striplings—the hope of Florence—were to speak only pure words, possess a zeal for the Unseen Good that would shame the lukewarmness of their elders, and know no pleasures save those of an angelic sort: singing divine praises and walking in white robes. It was for them that the ranges of seats had been raised high against the walls of the Duomo, where they had learned to hear Savonarola appeal to them as the future glory of a city specially appointed to execute God's work.

These fresh-cheeked troops were the chief agents in the regenerated merriment of the new Carnival, a sacred parody of the old. Had there been bonfires in times past? Now, there would be a bonfire to consume impurity from the earth. Had there been symbolic processions? Now, there were processions bearing white robes, red crosses, and olive wreaths—emblems of peace and innocent gladness—while banners and images proclaimed the triumphs of goodness. Had there been dancing in a ring under the open sky to the sound of choral voices chanting loose songs? Now, there was dancing of monks and laity in fraternal love and divine joy, accompanied by the music of hymns. The collections from street passengers would be greater than ever, not for gross suppers, but for the hungry and needy, alongside the gathering of the *Anathema*, the vanities destined for the great pyramidal bonfire.

Troops of young inquisitors went from house to house on this exciting business, demanding the surrender of the Anathema. Perhaps, after the more avowed vanities were yielded, the Madonna of the household still possessed little reddened balls brought from the Levant, intended to produce a sudden, ingenuous falsity upon a sallow cheek? If so, she was to bring them down and cast them into the basket of doom. Or perhaps she had ringlets and coils of "dead hair"? Then she was to bring them to the street door, not upon her head, but in her hands, publicly renouncing the Anathema that hid the respectable signs of age under a ghastly mockery of youth. In reward, she would hear fresh young voices pronounce a blessing upon her and her house.

The beardless inquisitors, organized into little regiments, undoubtedly took to their work with willingness. To coerce people by shame or spiritual pelting into parting with things they would otherwise cherish was a form of piety to which the boyish mind was readily converted. If some obstinately wicked men grew enraged and threatened the whip or the cudgel, this too added to the excitement. Savonarola himself evidently felt the difficulty weighing on all minds with noble yearnings toward great ends, yet possessing that imperfect perception of means which forces a resort to supernatural constraining influence as the only sure hope. The Florentine youth had harbored very evil habits and foul tongues; it seemed at first an unmixed blessing when they shouted "Viva Gesù!" But Savonarola was eventually forced to declare from the pulpit, "There is a little too much shouting of 'Viva Gesù!' This constant utterance of sacred words brings them into contempt. Let me have no more of that shouting till the next Festa."

Nevertheless, as the long stream of white-robed youthfulness, adorned with little red crosses and olive wreaths, had gone to the Duomo at dawn to receive communion from Savonarola's hands, it was a sight of beauty. Doubtless, many of those young souls were laying up memories of hope and awe that might save them from ever resting in a merely vulgar view of their work as men and citizens. There is no kind of conscious obedience that does not represent an advance on lawlessness, and these boys became the generation of men who fought greatly and endured greatly in the Republic's final struggle. Now, in the intermediate hours between early communion and dinner, they made their last perambulations to collect alms and vanities, which was why Romola saw the slim white figures moving to and fro about the base of the great pyramid.

"What think you of this folly, Madonna Romola?" a brusque voice asked close to her ear. "Your Piagnoni will make *l'inferno* a pleasant prospect to us if they are to carry things their own way on earth. It is enough to fetch a cudgel over the mountains to see painters, like Lorenzo di Credi and young Baccio there, helping to burn color out of life in this fashion."

"My good Piero," Romola replied, looking up and smiling at the grim man, "even you must be glad to see some of these things burnt. Look at those gewgaws, wigs, and rouge-pots. I have heard you talk as indignantly against them as Fra Girolamo himself."

"What then?" Piero turned on her sharply. "I never said a woman should make a black patch of herself against the background. Va! Madonna Antigone, it is a shame for a woman with your hair and shoulders to run into such nonsense—leave it to women who are not worth painting. What! The most holy Virgin herself has always been dressed well; that is the doctrine of the Church: talk of heresy, indeed! And I should like to know what the excellent Messer Bardo would have said to the burning of the divine poets by these Frati, who are no better an imitation of men than if they were onions with the bulbs uppermost. Look at that Petrarch sticking up beside a rouge-pot: do the idiots pretend that the heavenly Laura was a painted harridan? And Boccaccio, now: do you mean to say, Madonna Romola—you who are fit to be a model for a wise Saint Catherine of Egypt—that you have never read the stories of the immortal Messer Giovanni?"

"It is true I have read them, Piero," Romola said. "Some of them a great many times over, when I was a little girl. I used to get the book down when my father was asleep so that I could read to myself."

"Ebbene?" Piero asked in a fiercely challenging tone.

"There are some things in them I do not want ever to forget," Romola replied. "But you must confess, Piero, that a great many of those stories are only about low deceit for the lowest ends. Men do not want books to make them think lightly of vice, as if life were a vulgar joke. And I cannot blame Fra Girolamo for teaching that we owe our time to something better."

"Yes, yes, it is very well to say so now you've read them," Piero said bitterly, turning on his heel and walking away.

Romola, too, walked on, smiling at Piero's innuendo with a sort of tenderness toward the old painter's anger, knowing that her father would have felt something similar. For herself, she was conscious of no inward collision with the strict and sombre view of pleasure that tended to repress poetry in the attempt to repress vice. Sorrow and joy each possess their peculiar narrowness; and a religious enthusiasm like Savonarola's, which ultimately blesses mankind by giving the soul a strong propulsion toward sympathy with pain, indignation against wrong, and the subjugation of sensual desire, must always incur the reproach of a great negation. Romola's life had granted her an affinity for sadness that inevitably made her unjust toward merriment. That subtle result of culture we call Taste was subdued by the need for a deeper motive; just as the nicer demands of the palate are annihilated by urgent hunger. Moving habitually among scenes of suffering and carrying woman's heaviest disappointment in her heart, the severity that allied itself with self-renouncing beneficent strength found no dissonance within her.
