Tessa Abroad and at Home.

Another figure, easily recognized by those who knew the city's shifting tides, approached the Piazza that morning. She wore not the somber black of mourning, but the vibrant red, green, and white of the carnival season. She came from a different direction now; Tessa no longer dwelt on the hill of San Giorgio. Following the turmoil with Baldassarre, Tito had deemed it prudent to relocate her, seeking a new sanctuary within a quiet, airy quarter. Her new home bordered the expansive gardens north of the Porta Santa Croce, a place of relative safety and seclusion.

Tessa had not ventured out for sightseeing without explicit permission. The evening before, Tito had accompanied her, and she had held back a plea swelling in her throat until she saw him in a state of radiant ease. With one arm around the sturdy Lillo and the other resting gently on her shoulder as she steadied the tiny Ninna on her legs, Tito appeared transformed. The weariness that had previously weighed upon his brow and lips had completely melted away. Tessa, quick to learn the subtle languages of her household, had mastered small stratagems to avoid vexing Naldo while securing her own desires. She could read little else, but she had learned to decipher the landscape of her husband's face with surprising accuracy.

Indeed, the charm of that bright, gentle-humored Tito who had awakened beneath the Loggia de' Cerchi five years prior—untainted by deceit—had never returned so fully as in the person of Naldo, seated in the straight-backed, carved armchair provided for his comfort. Tito himself was surprised by the growing sense of relief these moments brought him. No guile was required toward Tessa; she was too innocent and ignorant to suspect him of anything. The little voices calling him "Babbo" were sweet in his ears for the brief duration he heard them. When he considered leaving Florence, he never imagined leaving Tessa and the children behind. He was deeply fond of these round-cheeked, wide-eyed creatures who clung to him, knowing no evil. Wherever affection springs, it is like a green leaf or a blossom—pure and breathing purity, regardless of the soil in which it grows. Poor Romola, with all her self-sacrificing efforts, was inadvertently hardening Tito's nature, chilling it with a positive dislike that had once seemed impossible. Yet, Tessa kept the fountains of kindness flowing.

"Ninna is very good without me now," Tessa began, feeling her request rising high in her throat, and allowed Ninna to sit on the floor. "I can leave her with Monna Lisa anytime, and if she cries in the cradle, Lillo is as sensible as can be—he goes and thumps Monna Lisa."

Lillo, whose great dark eyes appeared even darker against his light-brown curls, jumped off Babbo's knee and immediately demonstrated his intelligence by thumping Monna Lisa, who shook her head slowly over her spinning at the far end of the room. "A wonderful boy!" Tito laughed. "Isn't he?" Tessa asked eagerly, moving slightly closer. "And might I go to see the Carnival tomorrow, just for an hour or two, mightn't I?"

"Oh, you wicked pigeon!" Tito said, pinching her cheek. "Those are your longings, are they? What have you to do with carnivals now that you are an old woman with two children?"

"But old women like to see things," Tessa replied, her lower lip trembling slightly. "Monna Lisa said she would like to go, only she is so deaf she cannot hear what is behind her, and she thinks we could not take care of both the children."

"No, indeed, Tessa," Tito said, his expression turning grave. "You must not think of taking the children into the crowded streets, or I shall be angry."

"But I have never been into the Piazza without leave," Tessa pleaded in a frightened tone, "since the Holy Saturday, and I think Nofri is dead, for you know the poor madre died; and I shall never forget the Carnival I saw once; it was so pretty—all roses and a king and queen under them—and singing. I liked it better than the San Giovanni."

"But there is nothing like that now, my Tessa. They are going to make a bonfire in the Piazza—that is all. But I cannot let you go out by yourself in the evening."

"Oh no, no! I do not want to go in the evening. I only want to see the procession by daylight. There *will* be a procession, is it not true?"

"Yes, after a sort," Tito said. "As lively as a flight of cranes. You must not expect roses and glittering kings and queens, my Tessa. However, I suppose any string of people to be called a procession will please your blue eyes. And there is a thing they have raised in the Piazza de' Signori for the bonfire. You may like to see that. But come home early, and look like a grave little old woman; and if you see any men with feathers and swords, keep out of their way: they are very fierce, and like to cut old women's heads off."

"Santa Madonna! where do they come from? Ah! you are laughing; it is not so bad. But I will keep away from them. Only," Tessa whispered, leaning her lips near Naldo's ear, "if I might take Lillo with me! He is very sensible."

"But who will thump Monna Lisa then, if she doesn't hear?" Tito said, finding it difficult not to laugh, though he maintained a serious demeanor. "No, Tessa, you could not take care of Lillo if you got into a crowd, and he is too heavy for you to carry."

"It is true," Tessa said, rather sadly, "and he likes to run away. I forgot that. Then I will go alone. But now look at Ninna—you have not looked at her enough."

Ninna was a blue-eyed thing at the tottering, tumbling age—a fair solid object that, like a loaded die, found its base with a constancy that warranted prediction. Tessa snatched her up, and when Babbo paid due attention to the recent teeth and other marvels, she whispered, "And shall I buy some confetti for the children?"

Tito drew some small coins from his scarsella and poured them into her palm.

"That will buy no end," Tessa said, delighted at this abundance. "I shall not mind going without Lillo so much, if I bring him something."

Thus, Tessa set out in the morning toward the great Piazza where the bonfire was to be. She did not consider the February breeze cold enough to demand more than her green woolen dress. A mantle would have been oppressive, for it would have hidden a new necklace and a new clasp, mounted with silver—the only ornamental presents Tito had ever made her. Tessa did not think of showing her figure, for no one had ever told her it was pretty; but she was quite sure her necklace and clasp were of the finest sort ever worn by the richest contadina. She arranged her white hood over her head so that the front of her necklace might be well displayed. These ornaments, she considered, must inspire respect for her as the wife of someone who could afford to buy them.

She tripped along cheerily in the February sunshine, thinking much of the purchases for the little ones to fill her small basket, and thinking not at all of anyone who might be observing her. Yet her descent from her upper storey into the street had been watched, and she was kept in sight by a person who had often waited in vain to see if it were Tessa who lived in that house to which he had more than once dogged Tito. Baldassarre was carrying a package of yarn; he was constantly employed in that way as a means of earning his scanty bread and keeping the sacred fire of vengeance alive. He had come out of his way this morning, as he had often done before, to pass by the house to which he had followed Tito in the evening. His long imprisonment had intensified his timid suspicion and his belief in some diabolic fortune favoring Tito, so much so that he had not dared to pursue him except under the cover of a crowd or darkness. He felt, with instinctive horror, that if Tito's eyes fell upon him, he would again be held up to obloquy, again be dragged away; his weapon would be taken, and he cast helpless into a prison cell. His fierce purpose had become as stealthy as a serpent's, depending for its prey on one dart of the fang. Justice was weak and unfriended; he could not hear again the voice that pealed the promise of vengeance in the Duomo. He had been there again and again, but that voice, too, had apparently been stifled by cunning, strong-armed wickedness. For a long while, Baldassarre's ruling thought was to ascertain whether Tito still wore the armor, for now at last his fainting hope would have been contented with a successful stab on this side the grave; but he would never risk his precious knife again. It was a weary time he had had to wait for the chance of answering this question by touching Tito's back in the press of the street. Since then, the knowledge that the sharp steel was useless, and that he had no hope but in some new device, had fallen with leaden weight on his enfeebled mind. A dim vision of winning one of those two wives to aid him came before him continually, and continually slid away. The wife who had lived on the hill was no longer there. If he could find her again, he might grasp some thread of a project and work his way to more clearness.

And this morning he had succeeded. He was quite certain now where this wife lived, and as he walked, bent a little under his burden of yarn, yet keeping the green and white figure in sight, his mind dwelt upon her and her circumstances as feeble eyes dwell on lines and colors, trying to interpret them into consistent significance.

Tessa had to pass through various long streets without seeing any other sign of the Carnival than unusual groups of country people in their best garments, and that disposition in everybody to chat and loiter which marks the early hours of a holiday before the spectacle begins. Presently, in her disappointed search for remarkable objects, her eyes fell on a man with a pedlar's basket before him, who seemed to be selling nothing but little red crosses to all the passengers. A little red cross would be pretty to hang up over her bed; it would also help to keep off harm, and would perhaps make Ninna stronger. Tessa went to the other side of the street to ask the pedlar the price of the crosses, fearing they would cost a little too much for her to spare from her purchase of sweets. The pedlar's back had been turned toward her hitherto, but when she came near him she recognized an old acquaintance of the Mercato, Bratti Ferravecchi. Accustomed to feel that she was to avoid old acquaintances, she turned away again and passed to the other side of the street. But Bratti's eye was too well practiced in looking out at the corner after possible customers for her movement to have escaped him, and she was presently arrested by a tap on the arm from one of the red crosses.

"Young woman," Bratti said as she unwillingly turned her head, "you come from some castello a good way off, it seems to me, else you'd never think of walking about, this blessed Carnival, without a red cross in your hand. Santa Madonna! Four white quattrini is a small price to pay for your soul—prices rise in purgatory, let me tell you."

"Oh, I should like one," Tessa said hastily, "but I couldn't spare four white quattrini."

Bratti had at first regarded Tessa too abstractedly as a mere customer to look at her with any scrutiny, but when she began to speak he exclaimed, "By the head of San Giovanni, it must be the little Tessa, and looking as fresh as a ripe apple! What! you've done none the worse, then, for running away from father Nofri? You were in the right of it, for he goes on crutches now, and a crabbed fellow with crutches is dangerous; he can reach across the house and beat a woman as he sits."

"I'm married," Tessa said rather demurely, remembering Naldo's command that she should behave with gravity; "and my husband takes great care of me."

"Ah, then, you've fallen on your feet! Nofri said you were good-for-nothing vermin; but what then? An ass may bray a good while before he shakes the stars down. I always said you did well to run away, and it isn't often Bratti's in the wrong. Well, and so you've got a husband and plenty of money? Then you'll never think much of giving four white quattrini for a red cross. I get no profit; but what with the famine and the new religion, all other merchandise is gone down. You live in the country where the chestnuts are plenty, eh? You've never wanted for polenta, I can see."

"No, I've never wanted anything," Tessa said, still on her guard.

"Then you can afford to buy a cross. I got a Padre to bless them, and you get blessing and all for four quattrini. It isn't for the profit; I hardly get a danaro by the whole lot. But then they're holy wares, and it's getting harder and harder work to see your way to Paradise: the very Carnival is like Holy Week, and the least you can do to keep the Devil from getting the upper hand is to buy a cross. God guard you! think what the Devil's tooth is! You've seen him biting the man in San Giovanni, I should hope?"

Tessa felt much teased and frightened. "Oh, Bratti," she said with a discomposed face, "I want to buy a great many confetti: I've got little Lillo and Ninna at home. And nice colored sweet things cost a great deal. And they will not like the cross so well, though I know it would be good to have it."

"Come, then," Bratti said, fond of laying up a store of merits by imagining possible extortions and
