CHAPTER LXVI. In which we go a-courting


Some of my amiable readers no doubt are in the custom of visiting that
famous garden in the Regent's Park, in which so many of our finned,
feathered, four-footed fellow-creatures are accommodated with board and
lodging, in return for which they exhibit themselves for our instruction
and amusement: and there, as a man's business and private thoughts
follow him everywhere, and mix themselves with all life and nature round
about him, I found myself, whilst looking at some fish in the aquarium,
still actually thinking of our friends the Virginians.

One of the most beautiful motion-masters I ever beheld, sweeping through
his green bath in harmonious curves, now turning his black glistening
back to me, now exhibiting his fair white chest, in every movement
active and graceful, turned out to be our old homely friend the
flounder, whom we have all gobbled up out of his bath of water souchy at
Greenwich, without having the slightest idea that he was a beauty.

As is the race of man, so is the race of flounders. If you can but see
the latter in his right element, you may view him agile, healthy, and
comely: put him out of his place, and behold his beauty is gone, his
motions are disgraceful: he flaps the unfeeling ground ridiculously
with his tail, and will presently gasp his feeble life out. Take him
up tenderly, ere it be too late, and cast him into his native Thames
again----But stop: I believe there is a certain proverb about fish out
of water, and that other profound naturalists have remarked on them
before me. Now Harry Warrington had been floundering for ever so long
a time past, and out of his proper element. As soon as he found it,
health, strength, spirits, energy, returned to him, and with the tap of
the epaulet on his shoulder he sprang up an altered being. He delighted
in his new profession; he engaged in all its details, and mastered them
with eager quickness. Had I the skill of my friend Lorrequer, I would
follow the other Harry into camp, and see him on the march, at the
mess, on the parade-ground; I would have many a carouse with him and his
companions; I would cheerfully live with him under the tents; I would
knowingly explain all the manoeuvres of war, and all the details of the
life military. As it is, the reader must please, out of his experience
and imagination, to fill in the colours of the picture of which I can
give but meagre hints and outlines, and, above all, fancy Mr. Harry
Warrington in his new red coat and yellow facings, very happy to bear
the King's colours, and pleased to learn and perform all the duties of
his new profession.

As each young man delighted in the excellence of the other, and
cordially recognised his brother's superior qualities, George, we may be
sure, was proud of Harry's success, and rejoiced in his returning good
fortune. He wrote an affectionate letter to his mother in Virginia,
recounting all the praises which he had heard of Harry, and which his
brother's modesty, George knew, would never allow him to repeat. He
described how Harry had won his own first step in the army, and how
he, George, would ask his mother leave to share with her the expense of
purchasing a higher rank for him.

Nothing, said George, would give him a greater delight, than to be able
to help his brother, and the more so, as, by his sudden return into
life, as it were, he had deprived Harry of an inheritance which he had
legitimately considered as his own. Labouring under that misconception,
Harry had indulged in greater expenses than he ever would have thought
of incurring as a younger brother; and George thought it was but fair,
and as it were, as a thank-offering for his own deliverance, that he
should contribute liberally to any scheme for his brother's advantage.

And now, having concluded his statement respecting Harry's affairs,
George took occasion to speak of his own, and addressed his honoured
mother on a point which very deeply concerned himself. She was aware
that the best friends he and his brother had found in England were the
good Mr. and Mrs. Lambert, the latter Madam Esmond's schoolfellow of
earlier years. Where their own blood relations had been worldly and
unfeeling, these true friends had ever been generous and kind. The
General was respected by the whole army, and beloved by all who knew
him. No mother's affection could have been more touching than Mrs.
Lambert's for both Madam Esmond's children; and now, wrote Mr. George,
he himself had formed an attachment for the elder Miss Lambert, on which
he thought the happiness of his life depended, and which he besought his
honoured mother to approve. He had made no precise offers to the young
lady or her parents; but he was bound to say that he had made little
disguise of his sentiments, and that the young lady, as well as her
parents, seemed favourable to him. She had been so admirable and
exemplary a daughter to her own mother, that he felt sure she would do
her duty by his. In a word, Mr. Warrington described the young lady as a
model of perfection, and expressed his firm belief that the happiness
or misery of his own future life depended upon possessing or losing her.
Why do you not produce this letter? haply asks some sentimental reader,
of the present Editor, who has said how he has the whole Warrington
correspondence in his hands. Why not? Because 'tis cruel to babble the
secrets of a young man's love; to overhear his incoherent vows and
wild raptures, and to note, in cold blood, the secrets--it may be,
the follies--of his passion. Shall we play eavesdropper at twilight
embrasures, count sighs and hand-shakes, bottle hot tears: lay our
stethoscope on delicate young breasts, and feel their heart-throbs? I
protest, for one, love is sacred. Wherever I see it (as one sometimes
may in this world) shooting suddenly out of two pair of eyes; or
glancing sadly even from one pair; or looking down from the mother to
the baby in her lap; or from papa at his girl's happiness as she is
whirling round the room with the captain; or from John Anderson, as his
old wife comes into the room--the bonne vieille, the ever peerless among
women; wherever we see that signal, I say, let us salute it. It is not
only wrong to kiss and tell, but to tell about kisses. Everybody who
has been admitted to the mystery,--hush about it. Down with him qui Deae
sacrum vulgarit arcanae. Beware how you dine with him, he will print
your private talk: as sure as you sail with him, he will throw you over.

Whilst Harry's love of battle has led him to smell powder--to rush upon
reluctantes dracones, and to carry wounded comrades out of fire, George
has been pursuing an amusement much more peaceful and delightful to
him; penning sonnets to his mistress's eyebrow, mayhap; pacing in the
darkness under her window, and watching the little lamp which shone upon
her in her chamber; finding all sorts of pretexts for sending little
notes which don't seem to require little answers, but get them; culling
bits out of his favourite poets, and flowers out of Covent Garden
for somebody's special adornment and pleasure; walking to St. James's
Church, singing very likely out of the same Prayer-book, and never
hearing one word of the sermon, so much do other thoughts engross him;
being prodigiously affectionate to all Miss Theo's relations--to her
little brother and sister at school; to the elder at college; to Miss
Hetty, with whom he engages in gay passages of wit; and to mamma, who is
half in love with him herself, Martin Lambert says; for if fathers are
sometimes sulky at the appearance of the destined son-in-law, is it not
a fact that mothers become sentimental and, as it were, love their own
loves over again?

Gumbo and Sady are for ever on the trot between Southampton Row and
Dean Street. In the summer months all sorts of junketings and
pleasure-parties are devised; and there are countless proposals to go
to Ranelagh, to Hampstead, to Vauxhall, to Marylebone Gardens, and what
not. George wants the famous tragedy copied out fair for the stage, and
who can write such a beautiful Italian hand as Miss Theo? As the sheets
pass to and fro they are accompanied by little notes of thanks, of
interrogation, of admiration, always. See, here is the packet, marked
in Warrington's neat hand, “T's letters, 1758-9.” Shall we open them and
reveal their tender secrets to the public gaze? Those virgin words were
whispered for one ear alone. Years after they were written, the
husband read, no doubt, with sweet pangs of remembrance, the fond lines
addressed to the lover. It were a sacrilege to show the pair to public
eyes: only let kind readers be pleased to take our word that the young
lady's letters are modest and pure, the gentleman's most respectful and
tender. In fine, you see, we have said very little about it; but, in
these few last months, Mr. George Warrington has made up his mind that
he has found the woman of women. She mayn't be the most beautiful. Why,
there is Cousin Flora, there is Coelia, and Ardelia, and a hundred
more, who are ever so much more handsome: but her sweet face pleases him
better than any other in the world. She mayn't be the most clever, but
her voice is the dearest and pleasantest to hear; and in her company he
is so clever himself; he has such fine thoughts; he uses such eloquent
words; he is so generous, noble, witty, that no wonder he delights in
it. And, in regard to the young lady,--as thank Heaven I never thought
so ill of women as to suppose them to be just, we may be sure that there
is no amount of wit, of wisdom, of beauty, of valour, of virtue with
which she does not endow her young hero.

When George's letter reached home, we may fancy that it created no small
excitement in the little circle round Madam Esmond's fireside. So he was
in love, and wished to marry! It was but natural, and would keep him
out of harm's way. If he proposed to unite himself with a well-bred
Christian young woman, Madam saw no harm.

“I knew they would be setting their caps at him,” says Mountain. “They
fancy that his wealth is as great as his estate. He does not say whether
the young lady has money. I fear otherwise.”

“People would set their caps at him here, I dare say,” says Madam
Esmond, grimly looking at her dependant, “and try and catch Mr. Esmond
Warrington for their own daughters, who are no richer than Miss Lambert
may be.”

“I suppose your ladyship means me!” says Mountain. “My Fanny is poor, as
you say; and 'tis kind of you to remind me of her poverty!”

“I said people would set their caps at him. If the cap fits you, tant
pis! as my papa used to say.”

“You think, madam, I am scheming to keep George for my daughter? I thank
you, on my word! A good opinion you seem to have of us after the years
we have lived together!”

“My dear Mountain, I know you much better than to suppose you could ever
fancy your daughter would be a suitable match for a gentleman of Mr.
Esmond's rank and station,” says Madam, with much dignity.

“Fanny Parker was as good as Molly Benson at school, and Mr. Mountain's
daughter is as good as Mr. Lambert's!” Mrs. Mountain cries out.

“Then you did think of marrying her to my son! I shall write to
Mr. Esmond Warrington, and say how sorry I am that you should be
disappointed!” says the mistress of Castlewood. And we, for our parts,
may suppose that Mrs. Mountain was disappointed, and had some ambitious
views respecting her daughter--else, why should she have been so angry
at the notion of Mr. Warrington's marriage?

In reply to her son, Madam Esmond wrote back that she was pleased with
the fraternal love George exhibited; that it was indeed but right in
some measure to compensate Harry, whose expectations had led him to
adopt a more costly mode of life than he would have entered on had he
known he was only a younger son. And with respect to purchasing his
promotion, she would gladly halve the expense with Harry's elder
brother, being thankful to think his own gallantry had won him his first
step. This bestowal of George's money, Madam Esmond added, was at least
much more satisfactory than some other extravagances to which she would
not advert.

The other extravagance to which Madam alluded was the payment of the
ransom to the French captain's family, to which tax George's mother
never would choose to submit. She had a determined spirit of her own,
which her son inherited. His persistence she called pride and obstinacy.
What she thought of her own pertinacity, her biographer, who lives so
far from her time, does not pretend to say. Only I dare say people
a hundred years ago pretty much resembled their grandchildren of the
present date, and loved to have their own way, and to make others follow
it.

Now, after paying his own ransom, his brother's debts, and half the
price for his promotion, George calculated that no inconsiderable
portion of his private patrimony would be swallowed up: nevertheless
he made the sacrifice with a perfect good heart. His good mother always
enjoined him in her letters to remember who his grandfather was, and
to support the dignity of his family accordingly. She gave him various
commissions to purchase goods in England, and though she as yet had sent
him very trifling remittances, she alluded so constantly to the exalted
rank of the Esmonds, to her desire that he should do nothing unworthy of
that illustrious family; she advised him so peremptorily and frequently
to appear in the first society of the country, to frequent the court
where his ancestors had been accustomed to move, and to appear always in
the world in a manner worthy of his name, that George made no doubt
his mother's money would be forthcoming when his own ran short, and
generously obeyed her injunctions as to his style of life. I find in the
Esmond papers of this period, bills for genteel entertainments, tailors'
bills for court suits supplied, and liveries for his honour's negro
servants and chairmen, horse-dealers' receipts, and so forth; and am
thus led to believe that the elder of our Virginians was also after a
while living at a considerable expense.

He was not wild or extravagant like his brother. There was no talk of
gambling or racehorses against Mr. George; his table was liberal, his
equipages handsome, his purse always full, the estate to which he was
heir was known to be immense. I mention these circumstances because they
may probably have influenced the conduct both of George and his friends
in that very matter concerning which, as I have said, he and his mother
had been just corresponding. The young heir of Virginia was travelling
for his pleasure and improvement in foreign kingdoms. The queen, his
mother, was in daily correspondence with his Highness, and constantly
enjoined him to act as became his lofty station. There could be no
doubt from her letters that she desired he should live liberally and
magnificently. He was perpetually making purchases at his parent's
order. She had not settled as yet; on the contrary, she had wrote out by
the last mail for twelve new sets of waggon harness, and an organ
that should play fourteen specified psalm-tunes: which articles George
dutifully ordered. She had not paid as yet, and might not to-day or
to-morrow, but eventually, of course, she would: and Mr. Warrington
never thought of troubling his friends about these calculations, or
discussing with them his mother's domestic affairs. They, on their side,
took for granted that he was in a state of competence and ease, and,
without being mercenary folks, Mr. and Mrs. Lambert were no doubt
pleased to see an attachment growing up between their daughter and
a young gentleman of such good principles, talents, family, and
expectations. There was honesty in all Mr. Esmond Warrington's words
and actions, and in his behaviour to the world a certain grandeur and
simplicity, which showed him to be a true gentleman. Somewhat cold and
haughty in his demeanour to strangers, especially towards the great, he
was not in the least supercilious: he was perfectly courteous towards
women, and with those people whom he loved, especially kind, amiable,
lively, and tender.

No wonder that one young woman we know of got to think him the best man
in all the world--alas! not even excepting papa. A great love felt by
a man towards a woman makes him better, as regards her, than all other
men. We have said that George used to wonder himself when he found how
witty, how eloquent, how wise he was, when he talked with the fair young
creature whose heart had become all his.... I say we will not again
listen to their love whispers. Those soft words do not bear being
written down. If you please--good sir, or madam, who are sentimentally
inclined--lay down the book and think over certain things for yourself.
You may be ever so old now; but you remember. It may be all dead and
buried; but in a moment, up it springs out of its grave, and looks, and
smiles, and whispers as of yore when it clung to your arm, and dropped
fresh tears on your heart. It is here, and alive, did I say? O far, far
away! O lonely hearth and cold ashes! Here is the vase, but the roses
are gone; here is the shore, and yonder the ship was moored; but the
anchors are up, and it has sailed away for ever.

Et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. This, however, is mere sentimentality;
and as regards George and Theo, is neither here nor there. What I mean
to say is, that the young lady's family were perfectly satisfied with
the state of affairs between her and Mr. Warrington; and though he had
not as yet asked the decisive question, everybody else knew what the
answer would be when it came.

Mamma perhaps thought the question was a long time coming.

“Psha! my dear!” says the General. “There is time enough in all
conscience. Theo is not much more than seventeen; George, if I mistake
not, is under forty; and, besides, he must have time to write to
Virginia, and ask mamma.”

“But suppose she refuses?”

“That will be a bad day for old and young,” says the General, “Let us
rather say, suppose she consents, my love?--I can't fancy anybody in the
world refusing Theo anything she has set her heart on,” adds the father:
“and I am sure 'tis bent upon this match.”

So they all waited with the utmost anxiety until an answer from Madam
Esmond should arrive; and trembled lest the French privateers should
take the packet-ship by which the precious letter was conveyed.
