OLD COPY-BOOKS. By the time the Fieldhead party returned to Briarfield Caroline was nearly well. Miss Keeldar, who had received news by post of her friend's convalescence, hardly suffered an hour to elapse between her arrival at home and her first call at the rectory. A shower of rain was falling gently, yet fast, on the late flowers and russet autumn shrubs, when the garden wicket was heard to swing open, and Shirley's well-known form passed the window. On her entrance her feelings were evinced in her own peculiar fashion. When deeply moved by serious fears or joys she was not garrulous. The strong emotion was rarely suffered to influence her tongue, and even her eye refused it more than a furtive and fitful conquest. She took Caroline in her arms, gave her one look, one kiss, then said, "You are better." And a minute after, "I see you are safe now; but take care.

her glance reverted to Mrs. Pryor. It pierced her through. "When will my governess return to me?" she asked. "May I tell her all?" demanded Caroline of her mother. Leave being signified by a gesture, Shirley was presently enlightened on what had happened in her absence. "Very good," was the cool comment--"very good! But it is no news to me." "What! did you know?" "I guessed long since the whole business. I have heard somewhat of Mrs. Pryor's history--not from herself, but from others. With every detail of Mr. James Helstone's career and character I was acquainted. An afternoon's sitting and conversation with Miss Mann had rendered me familiar therewith; also he is one of Mrs. Yorke's warning examples--one of the blood-red lights she hangs out to scare young ladies from matrimony. I believe I should have been sceptical about the truth of the portrait traced by such fingers--both these ladies take a dark pleasure in offering to view the dark side of life--but I questioned Mr.

away, Cary; it will do you good. It is wrong to check natural tears. Besides, I choose to please myself by sharing an idea that at this moment beams in your mother's eye while she looks at you. Every drop blots out a sin. Weep! your tears have the virtue which the rivers of Damascus lacked. Like Jordan, they can cleanse a leprous memory." "Madam," she continued, addressing Mrs. Pryor, "did you think I could be daily in the habit of seeing you and your daughter together--marking your marvellous similarity in many points, observing (pardon me) your irrepressible emotions in the presence and still more in the absence of your child--and not form my own conjectures? I formed them, and they are literally correct. I shall begin to think myself shrewd." "And you said nothing?" observed Caroline, who soon regained the quiet control of her feelings.

had she regained sufficient strength to bear a change of scene--the excitement of a little society--than Miss Keeldar sued daily for her presence at Fieldhead. Whether Shirley had become wearied of her honoured relatives is not known. She did not say she was; but she claimed and retained Caroline with an eagerness which proved that an addition to that worshipful company was not unwelcome. The Sympsons were church people. Of course the rector's niece was received by them with courtesy. Mr. Sympson proved to be a man of spotless respectability, worrying temper, pious principles, and worldly views; his lady was a very good woman--patient, kind, well-bred. She had been brought up on a narrow system of views, starved on a few prejudices--a mere handful of bitter herbs; a few preferences, soaked till their natural flavour was extracted, and with no seasoning added in the cooking; some excellent principles, made up in a stiff raised crust of bigotry difficult to digest.

evil; and wherever they saw its trace--whether in look, word, or deed; whether they read it in the fresh, vigorous style of a book, or listened to it in interesting, unhackneyed, pure, expressive language--they shuddered, they recoiled. Danger was above their heads, peril about their steps. What was this strange thing? Being unintelligible it must be bad. Let it be denounced and chained up. Henry Sympson, the only son and youngest child of the family, was a boy of fifteen. He generally kept with his tutor. When he left him, he sought his cousin Shirley. This boy differed from his sisters. He was little, lame, and pale; his large eyes shone somewhat languidly in a wan orbit. They were, indeed, usually rather dim, but they were capable of illumination. At times they could not only shine, but blaze. Inward emotion could likewise give colour to his cheek and decision to his crippled movements.

their manner, that their brother's tutor did not live for them. They were learned; so was he--but not for them. They were accomplished; he had talents too, imperceptible to their senses. The most spirited sketch from his fingers was a blank to their eyes; the most original observation from his lips fell unheard on their ears. Nothing could exceed the propriety of their behaviour. I should have said nothing could have equalled it; but I remember a fact which strangely astonished Caroline Helstone. It was--to discover that her cousin had absolutely no sympathizing friend at Fieldhead; that to Miss Keeldar he was as much a mere teacher, as little a gentleman, as little a man, as to the estimable Misses Sympson. What had befallen the kind-hearted Shirley that she should be so indifferent to the dreary position of a fellow-creature thus isolated under her roof?

She was not, perhaps, haughty to him, but she never noticed him--she let him alone. He came and went, spoke or was silent, and she rarely recognized his existence. As to Louis Moore himself, he had the air of a man used to this life, and who had made up his mind to bear it for a time. His faculties seemed walled up in him, and were unmurmuring in their captivity. He never laughed; he seldom smiled; he was uncomplaining. He fulfilled the round of his duties scrupulously. His pupil loved him; he asked nothing more than civility from the rest of the world. It even appeared that he would accept nothing more--in that abode at least; for when his cousin Caroline made gentle overtures of friendship, he did not encourage them--he rather avoided than sought her.

Tartar had resumed his allegiance to Shirley, and was once more couched near her footstool, the audacious tutor by one word and gesture fascinated him again. He pricked up his ears at the word; he started erect at the gesture, and came, with head lovingly depressed, to receive the expected caress. As it was given, the significant smile again rippled across Moore's quiet face. * * * * * "Shirley," said Caroline one day, as they two were sitting alone in the summer-house, "did you know that my cousin Louis was tutor in your uncle's family before the Sympsons came down here?" Shirley's reply was not so prompt as her responses usually were, but at last she answered, "Yes--of course; I knew it well." "I thought you must have been aware of the circumstance." "Well! what then?" "It puzzles me to guess how it chanced that you never mentioned it to me." "Why should it puzzle you?" "It seems odd.

in this matter. You don't like poor Louis. Why? Are you impatient at what you perhaps consider his servile position? Do you wish that Robert's brother were more highly placed?" "Robert's brother, indeed!" was the exclamation, uttered in a tone like the accents of scorn; and with a movement of proud impatience Shirley snatched a rose from a branch peeping through the open lattice. "Yes," repeated Caroline, with mild firmness, "Robert's brother. He is thus closely related to Gérard Moore of the Hollow, though nature has not given him features so handsome or an air so noble as his kinsman; but his blood is as good, and he is as much a gentleman were he free." "Wise, humble, pious Caroline!" exclaimed Shirley ironically. "Men and angels, hear her! We should not despise plain features, nor a laborious yet honest occupation, should we?

an idiot--eh? Something commendable in his disposition!-- id est , not an absolute ruffian. Good! Your representations have weight with me; and to prove that they have, should he come this way I will speak to him." He approached the summer-house. Unconscious that it was tenanted, he sat down on the step. Tartar, now his customary companion, had followed him, and he couched across his feet. "Old boy!" said Louis, pulling his tawny ear, or rather the mutilated remains of that organ, torn and chewed in a hundred battles, "the autumn sun shines as pleasantly on us as on the fairest and richest. This garden is none of ours, but we enjoy its greenness and perfume, don't we?" He sat silent, still caressing Tartar, who slobbered with exceeding affection. A faint twittering commenced among the trees round. Something fluttered down as light as leaves.

"There," said she--"there is a providence for the improvident." "This September afternoon is pleasant," observed Louis Moore, as, not at all discomposed, he calmly cast the crumbs on to the grass. "Even for you?" "As pleasant for me as for any monarch." "You take a sort of harsh, solitary triumph in drawing pleasure out of the elements and the inanimate and lower animate creation." "Solitary, but not harsh. With animals I feel I am Adam's son, the heir of him to whom dominion was given over 'every living thing that moveth upon the earth.' Your dog likes and follows me. When I go into that yard, the pigeons from your dovecot flutter at my feet. Your mare in the stable knows me as well as it knows you, and obeys me better." "And my roses smell sweet to you, and my trees give you shade." "And," continued Louis, "no caprice can withdraw these pleasures from me; they are mine ." He walked off.

suppose he has more than once behaved in this way," thought Caroline to herself, "and that renders Shirley so distant to him. Yet I wonder she cannot make allowance for character and circumstances. I wonder the general modesty, manliness, sincerity of his nature do not plead with her in his behalf. She is not often so inconsiderate, so irritable." * * * * * The verbal testimony of two friends of Caroline's to her cousin's character augmented her favourable opinion of him. William Farren, whose cottage he had visited in company with Mr. Hall, pronounced him a "real gentleman;" there was not such another in Briarfield. He--William--"could do aught for that man. And then to see how t' bairns liked him, and how t' wife took to him first minute she saw him. He never went into a house but t' childer wor about him directly.

he is rather out of place there--in a false position. The Sympsons are most estimable people, but not the folks to comprehend him. They think a great deal about form and ceremony, which are quite out of Louis's way." "I don't think Miss Keeldar likes him." "She doesn't know him--she doesn't know him; otherwise she has sense enough to do justice to his merits." "Well, I suppose she doesn't know him," mused Caroline to herself, and by this hypothesis she endeavoured to account for what seemed else unaccountable. But such simple solution of the difficulty was not left her long. She was obliged to refuse Miss Keeldar even this negative excuse for her prejudice. One day she chanced to be in the schoolroom with Henry Sympson, whose amiable and affectionate disposition had quickly recommended him to her regard. The boy was busied about some mechanical contrivance; his lameness made him fond of sedentary occupation.

On scrutiny they proved to be French compositions, written in a hand peculiar but compact, and exquisitely clean and clear. The writing was recognizable. She scarcely needed the further evidence of the name signed at the close of each theme to tell her whose they were. Yet that name astonished her--"Shirley Keeldar, Sympson Grove, ----shire" (a southern county), and a date four years back. She tied up the packet, and held it in her hand, meditating over it. She half felt as if, in opening it, she had violated a confidence. "They are Shirley's, you see," said Henry carelessly. "Did you give them to Mr. Moore? She wrote them with Mrs. Pryor, I suppose?" "She wrote them in my schoolroom at Sympson Grove, when she lived with us there. Mr. Moore taught her French; it is his native language." "I know.

little chap. I'm afraid I am a poor unfortunate, Miss Caroline Helstone. I am a cripple, you know." "Never mind, Henry, you are a very nice little fellow; and if God has not given you health and strength, He has given you a good disposition and an excellent heart and brain." "I shall be despised. I sometimes think both Shirley and you despise me." "Listen, Henry. Generally, I don't like schoolboys. I have a great horror of them. They seem to me little ruffians, who take an unnatural delight in killing and tormenting birds, and insects, and kittens, and whatever is weaker than themselves. But you are so different I am quite fond of you. You have almost as much sense as a man (far more, God wot," she muttered to herself, "than many men); you are fond of reading, and you can talk sensibly about what you read." "I am fond of reading.

hair at Sympson Grove.--What made you keep them, Henry?" "It is not my doing. I should not have thought of it. It never entered my head to suppose copy-books of value. Mr. Moore put them by in the inner drawer of his desk. Perhaps he forgot them." "C'est cela. He forgot them, no doubt," echoed Shirley. "They are extremely well written," she observed complacently. "What a giddy girl you were, Shirley, in those days! I remember you so well. A slim, light creature whom, though you were so tall, I could lift off the floor. I see you with your long, countless curls on your shoulders, and your streaming sash. You used to make Mr. Moore lively--that is, at first. I believe you grieved him after a while." Shirley turned the closely-written pages and said nothing. Presently she observed, "That was written one winter afternoon.

ear. "What queer discoveries I make day by day now!--I who thought I had your confidence. Inexplicable creature! even this boy reproves you." "I have forgotten 'auld lang syne,' you see, Harry," said Miss Keeldar, answering young Sympson, and not heeding Caroline. "Which you never should have done. You don't deserve to be a man's morning star if you have so short a memory." "A man's morning star, indeed! and by 'a man' is meant your worshipful self, I suppose? Come, drink your new milk while it is warm." The young cripple rose and limped towards the fire; he had left his crutch near the mantelpiece. "My poor lame darling!" murmured Shirley, in her softest voice, aiding him. "Whether do you like me or Mr. Sam Wynne best, Shirley?" inquired the boy, as she settled him in an arm-chair. "O Harry, Sam Wynne is my aversion; you are my pet." "Me or Mr.

is a captive; it lies in physical bondage. But it will work its own redemption yet. Study carefully not only books but the world. You love nature; love her without fear. Be patient--wait the course of time. You will not be a soldier or a sailor, Henry; but if you live you will be--listen to my prophecy--you will be an author, perhaps a poet." "An author! It is a flash--a flash of light to me! I will--I will ! I'll write a book that I may dedicate it to you." "You will write it that you may give your soul its natural release. Bless me! what am I saying? more than I understand, I believe, or can make good. Here, Hal--here is your toasted oatcake; eat and live!" "Willingly!" here cried a voice outside the open window. "I know that fragrance of meal bread.

of laudable inquiry'?" He perceived the inner drawer open. "This is empty," said he. "Who has taken----" "Here, here!" Caroline hastened to say, and she restored the little packet to its place. He shut it up; he locked it in with a small key attached to his watch-guard; he restored the other papers to order, closed the repository, and sat down without further remark. "I thought you would have scolded much more, sir," said Henry. "The girls deserve reprimand." "I leave them to their own consciences." "It accuses them of crimes intended as well as perpetrated, sir. If I had not been here, they would have treated your portfolio as they have done your desk; but I told them it was padlocked." "And will you have lunch with us?" here interposed Shirley, addressing Moore, and desirous, as it seemed, to turn the conversation.

turn the conversation. "Certainly, if I may." "You will be restricted to new milk and Yorkshire oatcake." "Va--pour le lait frais!" said Louis. "But for your oatcake!" and he made a grimace. "He cannot eat it," said Henry. "He thinks it is like bran, raised with sour yeast." "Come, then; by special dispensation we will allow him a few cracknels, but nothing less homely." The hostess rang the bell and gave her frugal orders, which were presently executed. She herself measured out the milk, and distributed the bread round the cosy circle now enclosing the bright little schoolroom fire. She then took the post of toaster-general; and kneeling on the rug, fork in hand, fulfilled her office with dexterity. Mr. Hall, who relished any homely innovation on ordinary usages, and to whom the husky oatcake was from custom suave as manna, seemed in his best spirits.

its lowliness. It did not revolt her pride that the group to whom she voluntarily officiated as handmaid should include her cousin's tutor. It did not scare her that while she handed the bread and milk to the rest, she had to offer it to him also; and Moore took his portion from her hand as calmly as if he had been her equal. "You are overheated now," he said, when she had retained the fork for some time; "let me relieve you." And he took it from her with a sort of quiet authority, to which she submitted passively, neither resisting him nor thanking him. "I should like to see your pictures, Louis," said Caroline, when the sumptuous luncheon was discussed.--"Would not you, Mr. Hall?" "To please you, I should; but, for my own part, I have cut him as an artist.

monopolizing the contents, had the first view of every sketch herself. She enjoyed the treat--if treat it were--in silence, without a single comment. Moore stood behind her chair and looked over her shoulder, and when she had done and the others were still gazing, he left his post and paced through the room. A carriage was heard in the lane--the gate-bell rang. Shirley started. "There are callers," she said, "and I shall be summoned to the room. A pretty figure--as they say--I am to receive company. I and Henry have been in the garden gathering fruit half the morning. Oh for rest under my own vine and my own fig-tree! Happy is the slave-wife of the Indian chief, in that she has no drawing-room duty to perform, but can sit at ease weaving mats, and stringing beads, and peacefully flattening her pickaninny's head in an unmolested corner of her wigwam.

would have delivered an extempore philippic on the extraordinary habits of his niece: respect for the cloth arrested him. "I merely wished to announce," he proceeded coldly, "that the family from De Walden Hall, Mr., Mrs., the Misses, and Mr. Sam Wynne, are in the drawing-room." And he bowed and withdrew. "The family from De Walden Hall! Couldn't be a worse set," murmured Shirley. She sat still, looking a little contumacious, and very much indisposed to stir. She was flushed with the fire. Her dark hair had been more than once dishevelled by the morning wind that day. Her attire was a light, neatly fitting, but amply flowing dress of muslin; the shawl she had worn in the garden was still draped in a careless fold round her. Indolent, wilful, picturesque, and singularly pretty was her aspect--prettier than usual, as if some soft inward emotion, stirred who knows how, had given new bloom and expression to her features.

Shirley was put out of the room, protesting still, by a pouting lip, against her dismissal. "There is a curious charm about her," observed Mr. Hall, when she was gone. "And now," he added, "I must away; for Sweeting is off to see his mother, and there are two funerals." "Henry, get your books; it is lesson-time," said Moore, sitting down to his desk. "A curious charm!" repeated the pupil, when he and his master were left alone. "True. Is she not a kind of white witch?" he asked. "Of whom are you speaking, sir?" "Of my cousin Shirley." "No irrelevant questions; study in silence." Mr. Moore looked and spoke sternly--sourly. Henry knew this mood. It was a rare one with his tutor; but when it came he had an awe of it. He obeyed.
