THE FIRST BLUESTOCKING. Miss Keeldar and her uncle had characters that would not harmonize, that never had harmonized. He was irritable, and she was spirited. He was despotic, and she liked freedom. He was worldly, and she, perhaps, romantic. Not without purpose had he come down to Yorkshire. His mission was clear, and he intended to discharge it conscientiously. He anxiously desired to have his niece married, to make for her a suitable match, give her in charge to a proper husband, and wash his hands of her for ever. The misfortune was, from infancy upwards, Shirley and he had disagreed on the meaning of the words "suitable" and "proper." She never yet had accepted his definition; and it was doubtful whether, in the most important step of her life, she would consent to accept it. The trial soon came.

I ask in what sense that young man is worthy of me ?" "He has twice your money, twice your common sense, equal connections, equal respectability." "Had he my money counted fivescore times I would take no vow to love him." "Please to state your objections." "He has run a course of despicable, commonplace profligacy. Accept that as the first reason why I spurn him." "Miss Keeldar, you shock me!" "That conduct alone sinks him in a gulf of immeasurable inferiority. His intellect reaches no standard I can esteem: there is a second stumbling-block. His views are narrow, his feelings are blunt, his tastes are coarse, his manners vulgar." "The man is a respectable, wealthy man! To refuse him is presumption on your part." "I refuse point-blank! Cease to annoy me with the subject; I forbid it!" "Is it your intention ever to marry; or do you prefer celibacy?" "I deny your right to claim an answer to that question." "May I ask if you expect some man of title--some peer of the realm--to demand your hand?" "I doubt if the peer breathes on whom I would confer it." "Were there insanity in the family, I should believe you mad.

Why should I fear you?" "Take care, madam!" "Scrupulous care I will take, Mr. Sympson. Before I marry I am resolved to esteem--to admire--to love ." "Preposterous stuff! indecorous, unwomanly!" "To love with my whole heart. I know I speak in an unknown tongue; but I feel indifferent whether I am comprehended or not." "And if this love of yours should fall on a beggar?" "On a beggar it will never fall. Mendicancy is not estimable." "On a low clerk, a play-actor, a play-writer, or--or----" "Take courage, Mr. Sympson! Or what?" "Any literary scrub, or shabby, whining artist." "For the scrubby, shabby, whining I have no taste; for literature and the arts I have. And there I wonder how your Fawthrop Wynne would suit me. He cannot write a note without orthographical errors; he reads only a sporting paper; he was the booby of Stilbro' grammar school!" "Unladylike language!

less than three offers followed Mr. Wynne's, all more or less eligible. All were in succession pressed on her by her uncle, and all in succession she refused. Yet amongst them was more than one gentleman of unexceptionable character as well as ample wealth. Many besides her uncle asked what she meant, and whom she expected to entrap, that she was so insolently fastidious. At last the gossips thought they had found the key to her conduct, and her uncle was sure of it; and what is more, the discovery showed his niece to him in quite a new light, and he changed his whole deportment to her accordingly. Fieldhead had of late been fast growing too hot to hold them both. The suave aunt could not reconcile them; the daughters froze at the view of their quarrels. Gertrude and Isabella whispered by the hour together in their dressing-room, and became chilled with decorous dread if they chanced to be left alone with their audacious cousin.

her friends had met with and been introduced to Sir Philip Nunnely. They encountered him again and again on the sands, the cliffs, in the various walks, sometimes at the public balls of the place. He seemed solitary. His manner was very unpretending--too simple to be termed affable; rather timid than proud. He did not condescend to their society; he seemed glad of it. With any unaffected individual Shirley could easily and quickly cement an acquaintance. She walked and talked with Sir Philip; she, her aunt, and cousins sometimes took a sail in his yacht. She liked him because she found him kind and modest, and was charmed to feel she had the power to amuse him. One slight drawback there was--where is the friendship without it?--Sir Philip had a literary turn. He wrote poetry--sonnets, stanzas, ballads. Perhaps Miss Keeldar thought him a little too fond of reading and reciting these compositions; perhaps she wished the rhyme had possessed more accuracy, the measure more music, the tropes more freshness, the inspiration more fire.

rose behind them, he would pull out his last batch of sonnets, and read them in a voice tremulous with emotion. He did not seem to know that though they might be rhyme they were not poetry. It appeared, by Shirley's downcast eye and disturbed face, that she knew it, and felt heartily mortified by the single foible of this good and amiable gentleman. Often she tried, as gently as might be, to wean him from this fanatic worship of the Muses. It was his monomania; on all ordinary subjects he was sensible enough, and fain was she to engage him in ordinary topics. He questioned her sometimes about his place at Nunnely; she was but too happy to answer his interrogatories at length. She never wearied of describing the antique priory, the wild silvan park, the hoary church and hamlet; nor did she fail to counsel him to come down and gather his tenantry about him in his ancestral halls.

and where he could rarely find a quiet moment to show her the latest production of his fertile muse; he must have her out amongst the pleasant pastures, and lead her by the still waters. Tête-à-tête ramblings she shunned, so he made parties for her to his own grounds, his glorious forest; to remoter scenes--woods severed by the Wharfe, vales watered by the Aire. Such assiduity covered Miss Keeldar with distinction. Her uncle's prophetic soul anticipated a splendid future. He already scented the time afar off when, with nonchalant air, and left foot nursed on his right knee, he should be able to make dashingly-familiar allusion to his "nephew the baronet." Now his niece dawned upon him no longer "a mad girl," but a "most sensible woman." He termed her, in confidential dialogues with Mrs. Sympson, "a truly superior person; peculiar, but very clever." He treated her with exceeding deference; rose reverently to open and shut doors for her; reddened his face and gave himself headaches with stooping to pick up gloves, handkerchiefs, and other loose property, whereof Shirley usually held but insecure tenure.

half comprehend to what aim they tended. When plainly charged with being the preferred of the baronet, she said she believed he did like her, and for her part she liked him. She had never thought a man of rank--the only son of a proud, fond mother, the only brother of doting sisters--could have so much goodness, and, on the whole, so much sense. Time proved, indeed, that Sir Philip liked her. Perhaps he had found in her that "curious charm" noticed by Mr. Hall. He sought her presence more and more, and at last with a frequency that attested it had become to him an indispensable stimulus. About this time strange feelings hovered round Fieldhead; restless hopes and haggard anxieties haunted some of its rooms. There was an unquiet wandering of some of the inmates among the still fields round the mansion; there was a sense of expectancy that kept the nerves strained.

better than three Roman noses, than the locks of Absalom or the proportions of Saul." A spare and rare shaft she still reserved for his unfortunate poetic propensity; but even here she would tolerate no irony save her own. In short, matters had reached a point which seemed fully to warrant an observation made about this time by Mr. Yorke to the tutor, Louis. "Yond' brother Robert of yours seems to me to be either a fool or a madman. Two months ago I could have sworn he had the game all in his own hands; and there he runs the country, and quarters himself up in London for weeks together, and by the time he comes back he'll find himself checkmated. Louis, 'there is a tide in the affairs of men, which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune, but, once let slip, never returns again.' I'd write to Robert, if I were you, and remind him of that." "Robert had views on Miss Keeldar?" inquired Louis, as if the idea was new to him.

to a lad-rival--a puling slip of aristocracy--I am quite agreeable. At his age, in his place, with his inducements, I would have acted differently. Neither baronet, nor duke, nor prince should have snatched my sweetheart from me without a struggle. But you tutors are such solemn chaps; it is almost like speaking to a parson to consult with you." * * * * * Flattered and fawned upon as Shirley was just now, it appeared she was not absolutely spoiled--that her better nature did not quite leave her. Universal report had indeed ceased to couple her name with that of Moore, and this silence seemed sanctioned by her own apparent oblivion of the absentee; but that she had not quite forgotten him--that she still regarded him, if not with love, yet with interest--seemed proved by the increased attention which at this juncture of affairs a sudden attack of illness induced her to show that tutor-brother of Robert's, to whom she habitually bore herself with strange alternations of cool reserve and docile respect--now sweeping past him in all the dignity of the moneyed heiress and prospective Lady Nunnely, and anon accosting him as abashed school-girls are wont to accost their stern professors; bridling her neck of ivory and curling her lip of carmine, if he encountered her glance, one minute, and the next submitting to the grave rebuke of his eye with as much contrition as if he had the power to inflict penalties in case of contumacy.

bed one evening, Henry, who would not quit him, watching faithfully beside him, when a tap--too light to be that of Mrs. Gill or the housemaid--summoned young Sympson to the door. "How is Mr. Moore to-night?" asked a low voice from the dark gallery. "Come in and see him yourself." "Is he asleep?" "I wish he could sleep. Come and speak to him, Shirley." "He would not like it." But the speaker stepped in, and Henry, seeing her hesitate on the threshold, took her hand and drew her to the couch. The shaded light showed Miss Keeldar's form but imperfectly; yet it revealed her in elegant attire. There was a party assembled below, including Sir Philip Nunnely; the ladies were now in the drawing-room, and their hostess had stolen from them to visit Henry's tutor. Her pure white dress, her fair arms and neck, the trembling chainlet of gold circling her throat and quivering on her breast, glistened strangely amid the obscurity of the sickroom.

Silence fell for some minutes. "Do you suffer?--have you pain?" "Very little." "What made you ill?" Silence. "I wonder what caused this fever? To what do you attribute it?" "Miasma, perhaps--malaria. This is autumn, a season fertile in fevers." "I hear you often visit the sick in Briarfield, and Nunnely too, with Mr. Hall. You should be on your guard; temerity is not wise." "That reminds me, Miss Keeldar, that perhaps you had better not enter this chamber or come near this couch. I do not believe my illness is infectious. I scarcely fear"--with a sort of smile--" you will take it; but why should you run even the shadow of a risk? Leave me." "Patience, I will go soon; but I should like to do something for you before I depart--any little service----" "They will miss you below." "No; the gentlemen are still at table." "They will not linger long.

him." But he half rose to take the glass from young Sympson, and declined her attendance. "And can I do nothing?" "Nothing; for you cannot guarantee me a night's peaceful rest, and it is all I at present want." "You do not sleep well?" "Sleep has left me." "Yet you said you were not very ill?" "I am often sleepless when in high health." "If I had power, I would lap you in the most placid slumber--quite deep and hushed, without a dream." "Blank annihilation! I do not ask that." "With dreams of all you most desire." "Monstrous delusions! The sleep would be delirium, the waking death." "Your wishes are not so chimerical; you are no visionary." "Miss Keeldar, I suppose you think so; but my character is not, perhaps, quite as legible to you as a page of the last new novel might be." "That is possible.

Shirley.) "Henry, my boy, go to bed now; it is time you had some repose." "Sir, it would please me to watch at your bedside all night." "Nothing less called for. I am getting better. There, go." "Give me your blessing, sir." "God bless you, my best pupil!" "You never call me your dearest pupil!" "No, nor ever shall." * * * * * Possibly Miss Keeldar resented her former teacher's rejection of her courtesy. It is certain she did not repeat the offer of it. Often as her light step traversed the gallery in the course of a day, it did not again pause at his door; nor did her "cooing, vibrating voice" disturb a second time the hush of the sickroom. A sickroom, indeed, it soon ceased to be; Mr. Moore's good constitution quickly triumphed over his indisposition.

no wind followed its course or haunted its woody borders. Fieldhead gardens bore the seal of gentle decay. On the walks, swept that morning, yellow leaves had fluttered down again. Its time of flowers, and even of fruits, was over; but a scantling of apples enriched the trees. Only a blossom here and there expanded pale and delicate amidst a knot of faded leaves. These single flowers--the last of their race--Shirley culled as she wandered thoughtfully amongst the beds. She was fastening into her girdle a hueless and scentless nosegay, when Henry Sympson called to her as he came limping from the house. "Shirley, Mr. Moore would be glad to see you in the schoolroom and to hear you read a little French, if you have no more urgent occupation." The messenger delivered his commission very simply, as if it were a mere matter of course.

book shall I take?" "Here are the posthumous works of St. Pierre. Read a few pages of the 'Fragments de l'Amazone.'" She accepted the chair which he had placed in readiness near his own; the volume lay on his desk--there was but one between them; her sweeping curls dropped so low as to hide the page from him. "Put back your hair," he said. For one moment Shirley looked not quite certain whether she would obey the request or disregard it. A flicker of her eye beamed furtive on the professor's face. Perhaps if he had been looking at her harshly or timidly, or if one undecided line had marked his countenance, she would have rebelled, and the lesson had ended there and then; but he was only awaiting her compliance--as calm as marble, and as cool. She threw the veil of tresses behind her ear.

"Do you still remember that rubbish?" "Every line." "I doubt you." "I will engage to repeat it word for word." "You would stop short at the first line." "Challenge me to the experiment." "I challenge you." He proceeded to recite the following. He gave it in French, but we must translate, on pain of being unintelligible to some readers. * * * * * "And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born unto them, that the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose." This was in the dawn of time, before the morning stars were set, and while they yet sang together. The epoch is so remote, the mists and dewy gray of matin twilight veil it with so vague an obscurity, that all distinct feature of custom, all clear line of locality, evade perception and baffle research.

this tribe--unknown; in what region that spot--untold. We usually think of the East when we refer to transactions of that date; but who shall declare that there was no life in the West, the South, the North? What is to disprove that this tribe, instead of camping under palm groves in Asia, wandered beneath island oak woods rooted in our own seas of Europe? It is no sandy plain, nor any circumscribed and scant oasis I seem to realize. A forest valley, with rocky sides and brown profundity of shade, formed by tree crowding on tree, descends deep before me. Here, indeed, dwell human beings, but so few, and in alleys so thick branched and overarched, they are neither heard nor seen. Are they savage? Doubtless. They live by the crook and the bow; half shepherds, half hunters, their flocks wander wild as their prey.

seasons exaggerate no passion, no sense; its temperature tends to harmony; its breezes, you would say, bring down from heaven the germ of pure thought and purer feeling. Not grotesquely fantastic are the forms of cliff and foliage, not violently vivid the colouring of flower and bird. In all the grandeur of these forests there is repose; in all their freshness there is tenderness. The gentle charm vouchsafed to flower and tree, bestowed on deer and dove, has not been denied to the human nursling. All solitary, she has sprung up straight and graceful. Nature cast her features in a fine mould; they have matured in their pure, accurate first lines, unaltered by the shocks of disease. No fierce dry blast has dealt rudely with the surface of her frame; no burning sun has crisped or withered her tresses. Her form gleams ivory-white through the trees; her hair flows plenteous, long, and glossy; her eyes, not dazzled by vertical fires, beam in the shade large and open, and full and dewy.

and mossed, gave a seat; the oak boughs, thick-leaved, wove a canopy. Slow and grand the Day withdrew, passing in purple fire, and parting to the farewell of a wild, low chorus from the woodlands. Then Night entered, quiet as death. The wind fell, the birds ceased singing. Now every nest held happy mates, and hart and hind slumbered blissfully safe in their lair. The girl sat, her body still, her soul astir; occupied, however, rather in feeling than in thinking, in wishing than hoping, in imagining than projecting. She felt the world, the sky, the night, boundlessly mighty. Of all things herself seemed to herself the centre--a small, forgotten atom of life, a spark of soul, emitted inadvertent from the great creative source, and now burning unmarked to waste in the heart of a black hollow. She asked, was she thus to burn out and perish, her living light doing no good, never seen, never needed--a star in an else starless firmament, which nor shepherd, nor wanderer, nor sage, nor priest tracked as a guide or read as a prophecy?

slacked; she thought Something above relented; she felt as if Something far round drew nigher; she heard as if Silence spoke. There was no language, no word, only a tone. Again--a fine, full, lofty tone, a deep, soft sound, like a storm whispering, made twilight undulate. Once more, profounder, nearer, clearer, it rolled harmonious. Yet again--a distinct voice passed between Heaven and Earth. "Eva!" If Eva were not this woman's name, she had none. She rose. "Here am I." "Eva!" "O Night (it can be but Night that speaks), I am here!" The voice, descending, reached Earth. "Eva!" "Lord," she cried, "behold thine handmaid!" She had her religion--all tribes held some creed. "I come--a Comforter!" "Lord, come quickly!" The Evening flushed full of hope; the Air panted; the Moon--rising before--ascended large, but her light showed no shape. "Lean towards me, Eva.

reclaim his own, and so to foster and aid that it shall not perish hopeless." "A son of God! Am I indeed chosen?" "Thou only in this land. I saw thee that thou wert fair; I knew thee that thou wert mine. To me it is given to rescue, to sustain, to cherish mine own. Acknowledge in me that Seraph on earth named Genius." "My glorious Bridegroom! true Dayspring from on high! All I would have at last I possess. I receive a revelation. The dark hint, the obscure whisper, which have haunted me from childhood, are interpreted. Thou art He I sought. Godborn, take me, thy bride!" "Unhumbled, I can take what is mine. Did I not give from the altar the very flame which lit Eva's being? Come again into the heaven whence thou wert sent." That Presence, invisible but mighty, gathered her in like a lamb to the fold; that voice, soft but all-pervading, vibrated through her heart like music.

received no image; and yet a sense visited her vision and her brain as of the serenity of stainless air, the power of sovereign seas, the majesty of marching stars, the energy of colliding elements, the rooted endurance of hills wide based, and, above all, as of the lustre of heroic beauty rushing victorious on the Night, vanquishing its shadows like a diviner sun. Such was the bridal hour of Genius and Humanity. Who shall rehearse the tale of their after-union? Who shall depict its bliss and bale? Who shall tell how He between whom and the Woman God put enmity forged deadly plots to break the bond or defile its purity? Who shall record the long strife between Serpent and Seraph:--How still the Father of Lies insinuated evil into good, pride into wisdom, grossness into glory, pain into bliss, poison into passion?

the tutor's desk, and was drawing little leaves, fragments of pillars, broken crosses, on the margin of the book. "French may be half forgotten, but the habits of the French lesson are retained, I see," said Louis. "My books would now, as erst, be unsafe with you. My newly-bound St. Pierre would soon be like my Racine--Miss Keeldar, her mark, traced on every page." Shirley dropped her crayon as if it burned her fingers. "Tell me what were the faults of that devoir ?" she asked. "Were they grammatical errors, or did you object to the substance?" "I never said that the lines I drew were indications of faults at all. You would have it that such was the case, and I refrained from contradiction." "What else did they denote?" "No matter now." "Mr. Moore," cried Henry, "make Shirley repeat some of the pieces she used to say so well by heart." "If I ask for any, it will be 'Le Cheval Dompté,'" said Moore, trimming with his penknife the pencil Miss Keeldar had worn to a stump.

her face, and hid it half with her arms, half in her curls, which, as she stooped, fell loose again. "Certainly I was a rebel," she answered. "A rebel!" repeated Henry. "Yes; you and papa had quarrelled terribly, and you set both him and mamma, and Mrs. Pryor, and everybody, at defiance. You said he had insulted you----" "He had insulted me," interposed Shirley. "And you wanted to leave Sympson Grove directly. You packed your things up, and papa threw them out of your trunk; mamma cried, Mrs. Pryor cried; they both stood wringing their hands begging you to be patient; and you knelt on the floor with your things and your up-turned box before you, looking, Shirley, looking--why, in one of your passions. Your features, in such passions, are not distorted; they are fixed, but quite beautiful. You scarcely look angry, only resolute, and in a certain haste; yet one feels that at such times an obstacle cast across your path would be split as with lightning.

Papa lost heart, and called Mr. Moore." "Enough, Henry." "No, it is not enough. I hardly know how Mr. Moore managed, except that I recollect he suggested to papa that agitation would bring on his gout; and then he spoke quietly to the ladies, and got them away; and afterwards he said to you, Miss Shirley, that it was of no use talking or lecturing now, but that the tea-things were just brought into the schoolroom, and he was very thirsty, and he would be glad if you would leave your packing for the present and come and make a cup of tea for him and me.

time, gave me the treat of hearing my native tongue spoken without accent by an English girl." "She was as sweet as summer cherries for a month afterwards," struck in Henry: "a good hearty quarrel always left Shirley's temper better than it found it." "You talk of me as if I were not present," observed Miss Keeldar, who had not yet lifted her face. "Are you sure you are present?" asked Moore. "There have been moments since my arrival here when I have been tempted to inquire of the lady of Fieldhead if she knew what had become of my former pupil." "She is here now." "I see her, and humble enough; but I would neither advise Harry nor others to believe too implicitly in the humility which one moment can hide its blushing face like a modest little child, and the next lift it pale and lofty as a marble Juno." "One man in times of old, it is said, imparted vitality to the statue he had chiselled; others may have the contrary gift of turning life to stone." Moore paused on this observation before he replied to it.

And with that she raised her head, lofty in look and statue-like in hue, as Louis had described it. "Behold the metamorphosis!" he said; "scarce imagined ere it is realized: a lowly nymph develops to an inaccessible goddess. But Henry must not be disappointed of his recitation, and Olympia will deign to oblige him. Let us begin." "I have forgotten the very first line." "Which I have not. My memory, if a slow, is a retentive one. I acquire deliberately both knowledge and liking. The acquisition grows into my brain, and the sentiment into my breast; and it is not as the rapid-springing produce which, having no root in itself, flourishes verdurous enough for a time, but too soon falls withered away. Attention, Henry! Miss Keeldar consents to favour you. 'Voyez ce cheval ardent et impétueux,' so it commences." Miss Keeldar did consent to make the effort; but she soon stopped.

his manner, his pronunciation, his expression. It was now her turn to petition. "Recall 'Le Songe d'Athalie,'" she entreated, "and say it." He said it for her. She took it from him; she found lively excitement in the pleasure of making his language her own. She asked for further indulgence; all the old school pieces were revived, and with them Shirley's old school days. He had gone through some of the best passages of Racine and Corneille, and then had heard the echo of his own deep tones in the girl's voice, that modulated itself faithfully on his. "Le chêne et le Roseau," that most beautiful of La Fontaine's fables, had been recited, well recited, by the tutor, and the pupil had animatedly availed herself of the lesson. Perhaps a simultaneous feeling seized them now, that their enthusiasm had kindled to a glow, which the slight fuel of French poetry no longer sufficed to feed; perhaps they longed for a trunk of English oak to be thrown as a Yule log to the devouring flame.

Tartar, who long since had craved and obtained admission, sat sagely in the centre of the rug, staring at the blaze which burst fitful from morsels of coal among the red cinders. The group were happy enough, but-- "Pleasures are like poppies spread; You seize the flower--its bloom is shed." The dull, rumbling sound of wheels was heard on the pavement in the yard. "It is the carriage returned," said Shirley; "and dinner must be just ready, and I am not dressed." A servant came in with Mr. Moore's candle and tea; for the tutor and his pupil usually dined at luncheon time. "Mr. Sympson and the ladies are returned," she said, "and Sir Philip Nunnely is with them." "How you did start, and how your hand trembled, Shirley!" said Henry, when the maid had closed the shutter and was gone.
