PHBE. Shirley probably got on pleasantly with Sir Philip that evening, for the next morning she came down in one of her best moods. "Who will take a walk with me?" she asked, after breakfast. "Isabella and Gertrude, will you?" So rare was such an invitation from Miss Keeldar to her female cousins that they hesitated before they accepted it. Their mamma, however, signifying acquiescence in the project, they fetched their bonnets, and the trio set out. It did not suit these three young persons to be thrown much together. Miss Keeldar liked the society of few ladies; indeed, she had a cordial pleasure in that of none except Mrs. Pryor and Caroline Helstone. She was civil, kind, attentive even to her cousins; but still she usually had little to say to them. In the sunny mood of this particular morning, she contrived to entertain even the Misses Sympson.

her behind her cousins as they neared Fieldhead on their return. Perhaps an interval of twenty minutes elapsed between her separation from them and her re-entrance into the house. In the meantime she had spoken to John, and then she had lingered in the lane at the gate. A summons to luncheon called her in. She excused herself from the meal, and went upstairs. "Is not Shirley coming to luncheon?" asked Isabella. "She said she was hungry." An hour after, as she did not quit her chamber, one of her cousins went to seek her there. She was found sitting at the foot of the bed, her head resting on her hand; she looked quite pale, very thoughtful, almost sad. "You are not ill?" was the question put. "A little sick," replied Miss Keeldar. Certainly she was not a little changed from what she had been two hours before.

First she shrank from remark; and, if persisted in, she, with her own peculiar hauteur , repelled it. "Was she ill?" The reply came with decision. "I am not ." "Did anything weigh on her mind? Had anything happened to affect her spirits?" She scornfully ridiculed the idea. "What did they mean by spirits? She had no spirits, black or white, blue or gray, to affect." "Something must be the matter--she was so altered." "She supposed she had a right to alter at her ease. She knew she was plainer. If it suited her to grow ugly, why need others fret themselves on the subject?" "There must be a cause for the change. What was it?" She peremptorily requested to be let alone. Then she would make every effort to appear quite gay, and she seemed indignant at herself that she could not perfectly succeed.

now that her face showed thin, and her large eye looked hollow, there was something in the darkening of that face and kindling of that eye which touched as well as alarmed. To all comparative strangers who, unconscious of the alterations in her spirits, commented on the alteration in her looks, she had one reply,-- "I am perfectly well; I have not an ailment." And health, indeed, she must have had, to be able to bear the exposure to the weather she now encountered. Wet or fair, calm or storm, she took her daily ride over Stilbro' Moor, Tartar keeping up at her side, with his wolf-like gallop, long and untiring. Twice, three times, the eyes of gossips--those eyes which are everywhere, in the closet and on the hill-top--noticed that instead of turning on Rushedge, the top ridge of Stilbro' Moor, she rode forwards all the way to the town.

... *Bb. you is is is is  is I is is an the here   your is  the it this this your I  recently I I  we the ya of the  aaaaAaaadaaa

sake, avow everything. Speak, my boy." " She say she is ill! I believe, sir, if she were dying, she would smile, and aver, 'Nothing ails me.'" "What have you learned then? What new circumstance?" "I have learned that she has just made her will." "Made her will?" The tutor and pupil were silent. "She told you that?" asked Moore, when some minutes had elapsed. "She told me quite cheerfully, not as an ominous circumstance, which I felt it to be. She said I was the only person besides her solicitor, Pearson Hall, and Mr. Helstone and Mr. Yorke, who knew anything about it; and to me, she intimated, she wished specially to explain its provisions." "Go on, Harry." "'Because,' she said, looking down on me with her beautiful eyes--oh! they are beautiful, Mr. Moore! I love them! I love her!

and she shall live with men. Seraphs shall not have her! Mr. Moore, if one of the 'sons of God,' with wings wide and bright as the sky, blue and sounding as the sea, having seen that she was fair, descended to claim her, his claim should be withstood--withstood by me--boy and cripple as I am." "Henry Sympson, go on, when I tell you." "'Because,' she said, 'if I made no will, and died before you, Harry, all my property would go to you; and I do not intend that it should be so, though your father would like it. But you,' she said, 'will have his whole estate, which is large--larger than Fieldhead. Your sisters will have nothing; so I have left them some money, though I do not love them, both together, half so much as I love one lock of your fair hair.' She said these words, and she called me her 'darling,' and let me kiss her.

was with him. He visited the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and kept himself unspotted from the world. Then she asked, 'Do you approve what I have done, Harry?' I could not answer. My tears choked me, as they do now." Mr. Moore allowed his pupil a moment to contend with and master his emotion. He then demanded, "What else did she say?" "When I had signified my full consent to the conditions of her will, she told me I was a generous boy, and she was proud of me. 'And now,' she added, 'in case anything should happen, you will know what to say to Malice when she comes whispering hard things in your ear, insinuating that Shirley has wronged you, that she did not love you. You will know that I did love you, Harry; that no sister could have loved you better--my own treasure.' Mr.

What more did she say? Anything more?" "We settled one or two family points between ourselves." "I should rather like to know what----" "But, Mr. Moore, you smile. I could not smile to see Shirley in such a mood." "My boy, I am neither nervous, nor poetic, nor inexperienced. I see things as they are; you don't as yet. Tell me these family points." "Only, sir, she asked me whether I considered myself most of a Keeldar or a Sympson; and I answered I was Keeldar to the core of the heart and to the marrow of the bones. She said she was glad of it; for, besides her, I was the only Keeldar left in England. And then we agreed on some matters." "Well?" "Well, sir, that if I lived to inherit my father's estate, and her house, I was to take the name of Keeldar, and to make Fieldhead my residence.

Amazon, and yet lifting her head above both help and sympathy." "Do you know where she is now, Henry? Is she in the house, or riding out?" "Surely not out, sir. It rains fast." "True; which, however, is no guarantee that she is not at this moment cantering over Rushedge. Of late she has never permitted weather to be a hindrance to her rides." "You remember, Mr. Moore, how wet and stormy it was last Wednesday--so wild, indeed, that she would not permit Zo to be saddled? Yet the blast she thought too tempestuous for her mare she herself faced on foot; that afternoon she walked nearly as far as Nunnely. I asked her, when she came in, if she was not afraid of taking cold. 'Not I,' she said. 'It would be too much good luck for me. I don't know, Harry, but the best thing that could happen to me would be to take a good cold and fever, and so pass off like other Christians.' She is reckless, you see, sir." "Reckless indeed!

go. "Harry!" He returned. "Do not deliver the message formally. Word it as, in former days, you would have worded an ordinary summons to the schoolroom." "I see, sir. She will be more likely to obey." "And, Harry----" "Sir?" "I will call you when I want you. Till then, you are dispensed from lessons." He departed. Mr. Moore, left alone, rose from his desk. "I can be very cool and very supercilious with Henry," he said. "I can seem to make light of his apprehensions, and look down du haut de ma grandeur on his youthful ardour. To him I can speak as if, in my eyes, they were both children. Let me see if I can keep up the same rôle with her. I have known the moment when I seemed about to forget it, when Confusion and Submission seemed about to crush me with their soft tyranny, when my tongue faltered, and I have almost let the mantle drop, and stood in her presence, not master--no--but something else.

did she mean by that allusion to the cold people who petrify flesh to marble? It pleased me--I hardly know why; I would not permit myself to inquire. I never do indulge in scrutiny either of her language or countenance; for if I did, I should sometimes forget common sense and believe in romance. A strange, secret ecstasy steals through my veins at moments. I'll not encourage--I'll not remember it. I am resolved, as long as may be, to retain the right to say with Paul, 'I am not mad, but speak forth the words of truth and soberness.'" He paused, listening. "Will she come, or will she not come?" he inquired. "How will she take the message? Navely or disdainfully? Like a child or like a queen? Both characters are in her nature. "If she comes, what shall I say to her?

only come, I can teach her to the contrary. I would rather she were a little perverse; it will steel me. I prefer her cuirassed in pride, armed with a taunt. Her scorn startles me from my dreams; I stand up myself. A sarcasm from her eyes or lips puts strength into every nerve and sinew I have. Some step approaches, and not Henry's." The door unclosed; Miss Keeldar came in. The message, it appeared, had found her at her needle; she brought her work in her hand. That day she had not been riding out; she had evidently passed it quietly. She wore her neat indoor dress and silk apron. This was no Thalestris from the fields, but a quiet domestic character from the fireside. Mr. Moore had her at advantage. He should have addressed her at once in solemn accents, and with rigid mien.

none but myself. We all change." "Will you sit down? Formerly, Miss Keeldar, I had some influence with you: have I any now? May I feel that what I am saying is not accounted positive presumption?" "Let me read some French, Mr. Moore, or I will even take a spell at the Latin grammar, and let us proclaim a truce to all sanitary discussions." "No, no. It is time there were discussions." "Discuss away, then, but do not choose me for your text. I am a healthy subject." "Do you not think it wrong to affirm and reaffirm what is substantially untrue?" "I say I am well. I have neither cough, pain, nor fever." "Is there no equivocation in that assertion? Is it the direct truth?" "The direct truth." Louis Moore looked at her earnestly. "I can myself," he said, "trace no indications of actual disease.

only have you lost sleep, appetite, and flesh," proceeded Moore, "but your spirits are always at ebb. Besides, there is a nervous alarm in your eye, a nervous disquiet in your manner. These peculiarities were not formerly yours." "Mr. Moore, we will pause here. You have exactly hit it. I am nervous. Now, talk of something else. What wet weather we have--steady, pouring rain!" " You nervous? Yes; and if Miss Keeldar is nervous, it is not without a cause. Let me reach it. Let me look nearer. The ailment is not physical. I have suspected that. It came in one moment. I know the day. I noticed the change. Your pain is mental." "Not at all. It is nothing so dignified--merely nervous. Oh! dismiss the topic." "When it is exhausted; not till then. Nervous alarms should always be communicated, that they may be dissipated.

strong, trustworthy. "I had better tell you than my aunt," she said, "or than my cousins, or my uncle. They would all make such a bustle, and it is that very bustle I dread--the alarm, the flurry, the éclat . In short, I never liked to be the centre of a small domestic whirlpool. You can bear a little shock--eh?" "A great one, if necessary." Not a muscle of the man's frame moved, and yet his large heart beat fast in his deep chest. What was she going to tell him? Was irremediable mischief done? "Had I thought it right to go to you, I would never have made a secret of the matter one moment," she continued. "I would have told you at once, and asked advice." "Why was it not right to come to me?" "It might be right --I do not mean that; but I could not do it.

it is, it has taken my sleep away, and made me nervous, thin, and foolish; because, on account of that little mark, I am obliged to look forward to a possibility that has its terrors." The sleeve was readjusted, the bracelet replaced. "Do you know that you try me?" he said, smiling. "I am a patient sort of man, but my pulse is quickening." "Whatever happens, you will befriend me, Mr. Moore? You will give me the benefit of your self-possession, and not leave me at the mercy of agitated cowards?" "I make no promise now. Tell me the tale, and then exact what pledge you will." "It is a very short tale. I took a walk with Isabella and Gertrude one day, about three weeks ago. They reached home before me; I stayed behind to speak to John. After leaving him, I pleased myself with lingering in the lane, where all was very still and shady.

often flogs his pointers cruelly. She was too flurried to know me; and when I attempted to pat her head, she turned and snatched at my arm. She bit it so as to draw blood, then ran panting on. Directly after, Mr. Wynne's keeper came up, carrying a gun. He asked if I had seen a dog. I told him I had seen Phbe. "'You had better chain up Tartar, ma'am,' he said, 'and tell your people to keep within the house. I am after Phbe to shoot her, and the groom is gone another way. She is raging mad.'" Mr. Moore leaned back in his chair and folded his arms across his chest. Miss Keeldar resumed her square of silk canvas, and continued the creation of a wreath of Parmese violets. "And you told no one, sought no help, no cure?

at luncheon, to hear if you moved in the room above. All was quiet." "I was sitting at the foot of the bed, wishing Phbe had not bitten me." "And alone. You like solitude." "Pardon me." "You disdain sympathy." "Do I, Mr. Moore?" "With your powerful mind you must feel independent of help, of advice, of society." "So be it, since it pleases you." She smiled. She pursued her embroidery carefully and quickly, but her eyelash twinkled, and then it glittered, and then a drop fell. Mr. Moore leaned forward on his desk, moved his chair, altered his attitude. "If it is not so," he asked, with a peculiar, mellow change in his voice, "how is it, then?" "I don't know." "You do know, but you won't speak. All must be locked up in yourself." "Because it is not worth sharing." "Because nobody can give the high price you require for your confidence.

there is no danger of your dying at all." "Amen! I am very willing to live, if it please God. I have felt life sweet." "How can it be otherwise than sweet with your endowments and nature? Do you truly expect that you will be seized with hydrophobia, and die raving mad?" "I expect it, and have feared it. Just now I fear nothing." "Nor do I, on your account. I doubt whether the smallest particle of virus mingled with your blood; and if it did, let me assure you that, young, healthy, faultlessly sound as you are, no harm will ensue. For the rest, I shall inquire whether the dog was really mad. I hold she was not mad." "Tell nobody that she bit me." "Why should I, when I believe the bite innocuous as a cut of this penknife?

shall not. Lock the chamber door against the surgeons; turn them out if they get in. Let neither the young nor the old MacTurk lay a finger on me; nor Mr. Greaves, their colleague; and lastly, if I give trouble, with your own hand administer to me a strong narcotic--such a sure dose of laudanum as shall leave no mistake. Promise to do this. " Moore left his desk, and permitted himself the recreation of one or two turns through the room. Stopping behind Shirley's chair, he bent over her, and said, in a low, emphatic voice, "I promise all you ask--without comment, without reservation." "If female help is needed, call in my housekeeper, Mrs. Gill. Let her lay me out if I die. She is attached to me. She wronged me again and again, and again and again I forgave her.

cannot condescend to complain. After all, you should not taunt me with being childish, for if you were as unhappy as I have been for the last three weeks, you too would want some friend." "We all want a friend, do we not?" "All of us that have anything good in our natures." "Well, you have Caroline Helstone." "Yes. And you have Mr. Hall." "Yes. Mrs. Pryor is a wise, good woman. She can counsel you when you need counsel." "For your part, you have your brother Robert." "For any right-hand defections, there is the Rev. Matthewson Helstone, M.A., to lean upon; for any left-hand fallings-off there is Hiram Yorke, Esq. Both elders pay you homage." "I never saw Mrs. Yorke so motherly to any young man as she is to you. I don't know how you have won her heart, but she is more tender to you than she is to her own sons.

the word ' dare ,' to whom do you allude?" "To you." "How is it applicable to me?" "On account of your austerity and shyness." "Why am I austere and shy?" "Because you are proud." "Why am I proud?" "I should like to know. Will you be good enough to tell me?" "Perhaps, because I am poor, for one reason. Poverty and pride often go together." "That is such a nice reason. I should be charmed to discover another that would pair with it. Mate that turtle, Mr. Moore." "Immediately. What do you think of marrying to sober Poverty many-tinted Caprice?" "Are you capricious?" " You are." "A libel. I am steady as a rock, fixed as the polar star." "I look out at some early hour of the day, and see a fine, perfect rainbow, bright with promise, gloriously spanning the beclouded welkin of life.

sort of dinners you like best--perfectly well. I know precisely the dishes you prefer----" "She robbed these dishes of flavour, and made a fool of me besides. I like to sleep well. In my quiet days, when I was my own man, I never quarrelled with the night for being long, nor cursed my bed for its thorns. She changed all this." "Mr. Moore----" "And having taken from me peace of mind and ease of life, she took from me herself--quite coolly, just as if, when she was gone, the world would be all the same to me. I knew I should see her again at some time. At the end of two years, it fell out that we encountered again under her own roof, where she was mistress. How do you think she bore herself towards me, Miss Keeldar?" "Like one who had profited well by lessons learned from yourself." "She received me haughtily.

in her only a lofty stranger, she would suddenly show me such a glimpse of loving simplicity--she would warm me with such a beam of reviving sympathy, she would gladden an hour with converse so gentle, gay, and kindly--that I could no more shut my heart on her image than I could close that door against her presence. Explain why she distressed me so." "She could not bear to be quite outcast; and then she would sometimes get a notion into her head, on a cold, wet day, that the schoolroom was no cheerful place, and feel it incumbent on her to go and see if you and Henry kept up a good fire; and once there, she liked to stay." "But she should not be changeful. If she came at all, she should come oftener." "There is such a thing as intrusion." "To-morrow you will not be as you are to-day." "I don't know.

as she gathered up her silks, "have you heard from your brother lately? Do you know what he means by staying in town so long? Does he talk of returning?" "He talks of returning; but what has caused his long absence I cannot tell. To speak the truth, I thought none in Yorkshire knew better than yourself why he was reluctant to come home." A crimson shadow passed across Miss Keeldar's cheek. "Write to him and urge him to come," she said. "I know there has been no impolicy in protracting his absence thus far. It is good to let the mill stand, while trade is so bad; but he must not abandon the county." "I am aware," said Louis, "that he had an interview with you the evening before he left, and I saw him quit Fieldhead afterwards. I read his countenance, or tried to read it.
