MARTIN'S TACTICS. It was necessary to the arrangement of Martin's plan that he should stay at home that day. Accordingly, he found no appetite for breakfast, and just about school-time took a severe pain about his heart, which rendered it advisable that, instead of setting out to the grammar school with Mark, he should succeed to his father's arm-chair by the fireside, and also to his morning paper. This point being satisfactorily settled, and Mark being gone to Mr. Summer's class, and Matthew and Mr. Yorke withdrawn to the counting-house, three other exploits--nay, four--remained to be achieved. The first of these was to realize the breakfast he had not yet tasted, and with which his appetite of fifteen could ill afford to dispense; the second, third, fourth, to get his mother, Miss Moore, and Mrs. Horsfall successfully out of the way before four o'clock that afternoon.

The first was, for the present, the most pressing, since the work before him demanded an amount of energy which the present empty condition of his youthful stomach did not seem likely to supply. Martin knew the way to the larder, and knowing this way he took it. The servants were in the kitchen, breakfasting solemnly with closed doors; his mother and Miss Moore were airing themselves on the lawn, and discussing the closed doors aforesaid. Martin, safe in the larder, made fastidious selection from its stores. His breakfast had been delayed; he was determined it should be recherché . It appeared to him that a variety on his usual somewhat insipid fare of bread and milk was both desirable and advisable; the savoury and the salutary he thought might be combined.

pain about the heart. He had muttered some words, amongst which the phrase "shamming Abraham" had been very distinctly audible, and the succession to the armchair and newspaper had appeared to affect him with mental spasms. The spectacle now before him--the apples, the tarts, the tea-cakes, the fowl, ham, and pudding--offered evidence but too well calculated to inflate his opinion of his own sagacity. Martin paused interdit one minute, one instant; the next he knew his ground, and pronounced all well. With the true perspicacity des âmes élites , he at once saw how this at first sight untoward event might be turned to excellent account. He saw how it might be so handled as to secure the accomplishment of his second task--namely, the disposal of his mother. He knew that a collision between him and Matthew always suggested to Mrs.

content that the most difficult part of the labour he had set himself was over. Once he seemed to flag in the course of the morning. "It is not worth while to bother myself for that Caroline," he remarked. But a quarter of an hour afterwards he was again in the dining-room, looking at the head with dishevelled tresses, and eyes turbid with despair. "Yes," he said, "I made her sob, shudder, almost faint. I'll see her smile before I've done with her; besides, I want to outwit all these womenites." Directly after dinner Mrs. Yorke fulfilled her son's calculation by withdrawing to her chamber. Now for Hortense. That lady was just comfortably settled to stocking-mending in the back parlour, when Martin--laying down a book which, stretched on the sofa (he was still indisposed, according to his own account), he had been perusing in all the voluptuous ease of a yet callow pacha--lazily introduced some discourse about Sarah, the maid at the Hollow.

the nurse opened. "If you please, ma'am, you are invited to step into the back parlour and take some refreshment. You will not be disturbed; the family are out." He watched her down; he watched her in; himself shut the door. He knew she was safe. The hard work was done; now for the pleasure. He snatched his cap, and away for the wood. It was yet but half-past three. It had been a fine morning, but the sky looked dark now. It was beginning to snow; the wind blew cold; the wood looked dismal, the old tree grim. Yet Martin approved the shadow on his path. He found a charm in the spectral aspect of the doddered oak. He had to wait. To and fro he walked, while the flakes fell faster; and the wind, which at first had but moaned, pitifully howled.

is but a 'chitty-faced creature,' as my mother would say. I could find in my heart to wish I had a cloak to wrap her in." Thus meditating to himself, he neglected to answer Miss Helstone. "You have seen him?" "No." "Oh! you promised you would." "I mean to do better by you than that. Didn't I say I don't care to see him?" "But now it will be so long before I get to know any thing certain about him, and I am sick of waiting. Martin, do see him, and give him Caroline Helstone's regards, and say she wished to know how he was, and if anything could be done for his comfort." "I won't." "You are changed. You were so friendly last night." "Come, we must not stand in this wood; it is too cold." "But before I go promise me to come again to-morrow with news." "No such thing.

looked into his face. "I think I will. Anything rather than return as anxious as I came." "I can't answer for that. This, however, I promise you: be ruled by me, and you shall see Moore yourself." "See him myself?" "Yourself." "But, dear Martin, does he know?" "Ah! I'm dear now. No, he doesn't know." "And your mother and the others?" "All is right." Caroline fell into a long, silent fit of musing, but still she walked on with her guide. They came in sight of Briarmains. "Have you made up your mind?" he asked. She was silent. "Decide; we are just on the spot. I won't see him--that I tell you--except to announce your arrival." "Martin, you are a strange boy, and this is a strange step; but all I feel is and has been, for a long time, strange.

you ready?" "Yes." "Follow me." He left his shoes on the mat, mounted the stair unshod. Caroline stole after, with noiseless step. There was a gallery, and there was a passage; at the end of that passage Martin paused before a door and tapped. He had to tap twice--thrice. A voice, known to one listener, at last said, "Come in." The boy entered briskly. "Mr. Moore, a lady called to inquire after you. None of the women were about. It is washing-day, and the maids are over the crown of the head in soap-suds in the back kitchen, so I asked her to step up." "Up here, sir?" "Up here, sir; but if you object, she shall go down again." "Is this a place or am I a person to bring a lady to, you absurd lad?" "No; so I'll take her off." "Martin, you will stay here.

nothing shall approach; I'll see you safe away. Should you persist in staying longer, I leave you to your fate." He shut the door. In the gallery he was as elate as a king. He had never been engaged in an adventure he liked so well, for no adventure had ever invested him with so much importance or inspired him with so much interest. "You are come at last," said the meagre man, gazing on his visitress with hollow eyes. "Did you expect me before?" "For a month, near two months, we have been very near; and I have been in sad pain, and danger, and misery, Cary." "I could not come." "Couldn't you? But the rectory and Briarmains are very near--not two miles apart." There was pain and there was pleasure in the girl's face as she listened to these implied reproaches.

we will sit down and talk about it." They sat down. Caroline drew her chair up to his. The air was now dark with snow; an Iceland blast was driving it wildly. This pair neither heard the long "wuthering" rush, nor saw the white burden it drifted. Each seemed conscious but of one thing--the presence of the other. "So mamma and you came again?" "And Mrs. Yorke did treat us strangely. We asked to see you. 'No,' said she, 'not in my house. I am at present responsible for his life; it shall not be forfeited for half an hour's idle gossip.' But I must not tell you all she said; it was very disagreeable. However, we came yet again--mamma, Miss Keeldar, and I. This time we thought we should conquer, as we were three against one, and Shirley was on our side.

despaired of ever seeing you again. Weakness has wrought terrible depression in me--terrible depression." "And you sit alone?" "Worse than alone." "But you must be getting better, since you can leave your bed?" "I doubt whether I shall live. I see nothing for it, after such exhaustion, but decline." "You--you shall go home to the Hollow." "Dreariness would accompany, nothing cheerful come near me." "I will alter this. This shall be altered, were there ten Mrs. Yorkes to do battle with." "Cary, you make me smile." "Do smile; smile again. Shall I tell you what I should like?" "Tell me anything--only keep talking. I am Saul; but for music I should perish." "I should like you to be brought to the rectory, and given to me and mamma." "A precious gift! I have not laughed since they shot me till now." "Do you suffer pain, Robert?" "Not so much pain now; but I am hopelessly weak, and the state of my mind is inexpressible--dark, barren, impotent.

at your side, where I thought never more to be. Here I speak to you. I see you listen to me willingly--look at me kindly. Did I count on that? I despaired." Moore sighed--a sigh so deep it was nearly a groan. He covered his eyes with his hand. "May I be spared to make some atonement." Such was his prayer. "And for what?" "We will not touch on it now, Cary; unmanned as I am, I have not the power to cope with such a topic. Was Mrs. Pryor with you during your illness?" "Yes"--Caroline smiled brightly--"you know she is mamma?" "I have heard--Hortense told me; but that tale too I will receive from yourself. Does she add to your happiness?" "What! mamma? She is dear to me; how dear I cannot say. I was altogether weary, and she held me up." "I deserve to hear that in a moment when I can scarce lift my hand to my head.

stay longer, Robert." "Can you promise to return?" "No, she can't," responded Martin. "The thing mustn't become customary. I can't be troubled. It's very well for once; I'll not have it repeated." " You 'll not have it repeated." "Hush! don't vex him; we could not have met to-day but for him. But I will come again, if it is your wish that I should come." "It is my wish--my one wish--almost the only wish I can feel." "Come this minute. My mother has coughed, got up, set her feet on the floor. Let her only catch you on the stairs, Miss Caroline. You're not to bid him good-bye"--stepping between her and Moore--"you are to march." "My shawl, Martin." "I have it. I'll put it on for you when you are in the hall." He made them part. He would suffer no farewell but what could be expressed in looks.
