CASE OF DOMESTIC PERSECUTION--REMARKABLE INSTANCE OF PIOUS PERSEVERANCE IN THE DISCHARGE OF RELIGIOUS DUTIES. Martin, having known the taste of excitement, wanted a second draught; having felt the dignity of power, he loathed to relinquish it. Miss Helstone--that girl he had always called ugly, and whose face was now perpetually before his eyes, by day and by night, in dark and in sunshine--had once come within his sphere. It fretted him to think the visit might never be repeated. Though a schoolboy he was no ordinary schoolboy; he was destined to grow up an original. At a few years' later date he took great pains to pare and polish himself down to the pattern of the rest of the world, but he never succeeded; an unique stamp marked him always. He now sat idle at his desk in the grammar school, casting about in his mind for the means of adding another chapter to his commenced romance.

once on the sacred day, to fill their large pew in Briarfield Church with the whole of their blooming family. Theoretically, Mr. Yorke placed all sects and churches on a level. Mrs. Yorke awarded the palm to Moravians and Quakers, on account of that crown of humility by these worthies worn. Neither of them were ever known, however, to set foot in a conventicle. Martin, I say, disliked Sunday, because the morning service was long, and the sermon usually little to his taste. This Saturday afternoon, however, his woodland musings disclosed to him a new-found charm in the coming day. It proved a day of deep snow--so deep that Mrs. Yorke during breakfast announced her conviction that the children, both boys and girls, would be better at home; and her decision that, instead of going to church, they should sit silent for two hours in the back parlour, while Rose and Martin alternately read a succession of sermons--John Wesley's "Sermons." John Wesley, being a reformer and an agitator, had a place both in her own and her husband's favour.

he hates still more to obey," said Mrs. Yorke. "I suppose I am influenced by pure perverseness?" "Yes, you are." "Mother, I am not ." "By what, then, are you influenced?" "By a complication of motives, the intricacies of which I should as soon think of explaining to you as I should of turning myself inside out to exhibit the internal machinery of my frame." "Hear Martin! hear him!" cried Mr. Yorke. "I must see and have this lad of mine brought up to the bar. Nature meant him to live by his tongue. Hesther, your third son must certainly be a lawyer; he has the stock-in-trade--brass, self-conceit, and words--words--words." "Some bread, Rose, if you please," requested Martin, with intense gravity, serenity, phlegm. The boy had naturally a low, plaintive voice, which in his "dour moods" rose scarcely above a lady's whisper.

frozen sleet, besides the depth under foot. Go out into it, since thou prefers it to a warm fireside." Martin quietly assumed his cloak, comforter, and cap, and deliberately went out. "My father has more sense than my mother," he pronounced. "How women miss it! They drive the nail into the flesh, thinking they are hammering away at insensate stone." He reached church early. "Now, if the weather frightens her (and it is a real December tempest), or if that Mrs. Pryor objects to her going out, and I should miss her after all, it will vex me; but, tempest or tornado, hail or ice, she ought to come, and if she has a mind worthy of her eyes and features she will come. She will be here for the chance of seeing me, as I am here for the chance of seeing her.

she doesn't come," muttered Martin, shortly and savagely, to himself. The rector's shovel-hat had passed the porch. Mr. Helstone and his clerk were in the vestry. The bells ceased--the reading-desk was filled--the doors were closed--the service commenced. Void stood the rectory pew--she was not there. Martin scorned her. "Worthless thing! vapid thing! commonplace humbug! Like all other girls--weakly, selfish, shallow!" Such was Martin's liturgy. "She is not like our picture. Her eyes are not large and expressive; her nose is not straight, delicate, Hellenic; her mouth has not that charm I thought it had, which I imagined could beguile me of sullenness in my worst moods. What is she? A thread-paper, a doll, a toy, a girl , in short." So absorbed was the young cynic he forgot to rise from his knees at the proper place, and was still in an exemplary attitude of devotion when, the litany over, the first hymn was given out.

passed into the rectory pew. The French-gray cloak and small beaver bonnet were known to Martin; it was the very costume his eyes had ached to catch. Miss Helstone had not suffered the storm to prove an impediment. After all, she was come to church. Martin probably whispered his satisfaction to his hymn book; at any rate, he therewith hid his face two minutes. Satisfied or not, he had time to get very angry with her again before the sermon was over. She had never once looked his way; at least he had not been so lucky as to encounter a glance. "If," he said--"if she takes no notice of me, if she shows I am not in her thoughts, I shall have a worse, a meaner opinion of her than ever. Most despicable would it be to come for the sake of those sheep-faced Sunday scholars, and not for my sake or that long skeleton Moore's." The sermon found an end; the benediction was pronounced; the congregation dispersed.

Pryor." "I was not sure whether you would come this way, Martin, but I thought I would run the chance. There is no such thing as getting a quiet word spoken in the church or churchyard." "Will you agree?--make over Mrs. Pryor to my mother, and put me in her skirts?" "As if I could understand you! What puts Mrs. Pryor into your head?" "You call her 'mamma,' don't you?" "She is my mamma." "Not possible--or so inefficient, so careless a mamma; I should make a five times better one. You may laugh. I have no objection to see you laugh. Your teeth--I hate ugly teeth; but yours are as pretty as a pearl necklace, and a necklace of which the pearls are very fair, even, and well matched too." "Martin, what now? I thought the Yorkes never paid compliments?" "They have not done till this generation; but I feel as if it were my vocation to turn out a new variety of the Yorke species.

Having said that he is like me, I need not add that he is handsome." "You are not handsome, Martin." "No; but wait awhile--just let me take my time. I mean to begin from this day to cultivate, to polish, and we shall see." "You are a very strange, a very unaccountable boy, Martin. But don't imagine you ever will be handsome; you cannot." "I mean to try. But we were talking about Mrs. Pryor. She must be the most unnatural mamma in existence, coolly to let her daughter come out in this weather. Mine was in such a rage because I would go to church; she was fit to fling the kitchen brush after me." "Mamma was very much concerned about me; but I am afraid I was obstinate. I would go." "To see me?" "Exactly; I thought of nothing else.

think I hear my father sending out the overlooker and five of the dyers, to look in six directions for the body of his prodigal son in the snow; and my mother repenting her of her many misdeeds towards me, now I am gone." "Martin, how is Mr. Moore?" " That is what you came for, just to say that word." "Come, tell me quickly." "Hang him! he is no worse; but as ill-used as ever--mewed up, kept in solitary confinement. They mean to make either an idiot or a maniac of him, and take out a commission of lunacy. Horsfall starves him; you saw how thin he was." "You were very good the other day, Martin." "What day? I am always good--a model." "When will you be so good again?" "I see what you are after; but you'll not wheedle me--I am no cat's-paw." "But it must be done.

up." "You know that would advance nothing. Well, I shall stick to my point. See him I will. If you won't help me, I'll manage without help." "Do; there is nothing like self-reliance, self-dependence." "I have no time to reason with you now; but I consider you provoking. Good-morning." Away she went, the umbrella shut, for she could not carry it against the wind. "She is not vapid; she is not shallow," said Martin. "I shall like to watch, and mark how she will work her way without help. If the storm were not of snow, but of fire--such as came refreshingly down on the cities of the plain--she would go through it to procure five minutes' speech of that Moore. Now, I consider I have had a pleasant morning. The disappointments got time on; the fears and fits of anger only made that short discourse pleasanter, when it came at last.
