WHEREIN MATTERS MAKE SOME PROGRESS, BUT NOT MUCH. Martin had planned well. He had laid out a dexterously concerted scheme for his private amusement. But older and wiser schemers than he are often doomed to see their finest-spun projects swept to annihilation by the sudden broom of Fate, that fell housewife whose red arm none can control. In the present instance this broom was manufactured out of the tough fibres of Moore's own stubborn purpose, bound tight with his will. He was now resuming his strength, and making strange head against Mrs. Horsfall. Each morning he amazed that matron with a fresh astonishment. First he discharged her from her valet duties; he would dress himself. Then he refused the coffee she brought him; he would breakfast with the family. Lastly, he forbade her his chamber. On the same day, amidst the outcries of all the women in the place, he put his head out of doors.

step would be his death. It came. Moore, little disposed to speak, made his purse do duty for his tongue. He expressed his gratitude to the servants and to Mrs. Horsfall by the chink of his coin. The latter personage approved and understood this language perfectly; it made amends for all previous contumacy. She and her patient parted the best friends in the world. The kitchen visited and soothed, Moore betook himself to the parlour. He had Mrs. Yorke to appease; not quite so easy a task as the pacification of her housemaids. There she sat plunged in sullen dudgeon, the gloomiest speculations on the depths of man's ingratitude absorbing her thoughts. He drew near and bent over her; she was obliged to look up, if it were only to bid him "avaunt." There was beauty still in his pale, wasted features; there was earnestness and a sort of sweetness--for he was smiling--in his hollow eyes.

had nursing enough to last me my life." Here the little girls came in--Jessie crying, Rose quiet but grave. Moore took them out into the hall to soothe, pet, and kiss them. He knew it was not in their mother's nature to bear to see any living thing caressed but herself. She would have felt annoyed had he fondled a kitten in her presence. The boys were standing about the chaise as Moore entered it; but for them he had no farewell. To Mr. Yorke he only said, "You have a good riddance of me. That was an unlucky shot for you, Yorke; it turned Briarmains into an hospital. Come and see me at the cottage soon." He drew up the glass; the chaise rolled away. In half an hour he alighted at his own garden wicket. Having paid the driver and dismissed the vehicle, he leaned on that wicket an instant, at once to rest and to muse.

"Six months ago I passed out at this gate," said he, "a proud, angry, disappointed man. I come back sadder and wiser; weakly enough, but not worried. A cold, gray, yet quiet world lies round--a world where, if I hope little, I fear nothing. All slavish terrors of embarrassment have left me. Let the worst come, I can work, as Joe Scott does, for an honourable living; in such doom I yet see some hardship but no degradation.

entered the house. It was afternoon, twilight yet out of doors--starless and moonless twilight; for though keenly freezing with a dry, black frost, heaven wore a mask of clouds congealed and fast locked. The mill-dam too was frozen. The Hollow was very still. Indoors it was already dark. Sarah had lit a good fire in the parlour; she was preparing tea in the kitchen. "Hortense," said Moore, as his sister bustled up to help him off with his cloak, "I am pleased to come home." Hortense did not feel the peculiar novelty of this expression coming from her brother, who had never before called the cottage his home, and to whom its narrow limits had always heretofore seemed rather restrictive than protective. Still, whatever contributed to his happiness pleased her, and she expressed herself to that effect. He sat down, but soon rose again.

Helstone should come and spend the evening with you." "Would it not be better to-morrow, dear brother?" "I should like her to see the place as it is just now; its brilliant cleanliness and perfect neatness are so much to your credit." "It might benefit her in the way of example." "It might and must; she ought to come." He went into the kitchen. "Sarah, delay tea half an hour." He then commissioned her to dispatch Harry Scott to the rectory, giving her a twisted note hastily scribbled in pencil by himself, and addressed "Miss Helstone." Scarcely had Sarah time to get impatient under the fear of damage to her toast already prepared when the messenger returned, and with him the invited guest. She entered through the kitchen, quietly tripped up Sarah's stairs to take off her bonnet and furs, and came down as quietly, with her beautiful curls nicely smoothed, her graceful merino dress and delicate collar all trim and spotless, her gay little work-bag in her hand.

improvement in her health. Her colour and her plump cheeks were returning, she remarked. It was true. There was an obvious change in Miss Helstone. All about her seemed elastic; depression, fear, forlornness, were withdrawn. No longer crushed, and saddened, and slow, and drooping, she looked like one who had tasted the cordial of heart's ease, and been lifted on the wing of hope. After tea Hortense went upstairs. She had not rummaged her drawers for a month past, and the impulse to perform that operation was now become resistless. During her absence the talk passed into Caroline's hands. She took it up with ease; she fell into her best tone of conversation. A pleasing facility and elegance of language gave fresh charm to familiar topics; a new music in the always soft voice gently surprised and pleasingly captivated the listener; unwonted shades and lights of expression elevated the young countenance with character, and kindled it with animation.

"I am glad of that. And I really cheer you?" "You look brightly, move buoyantly, speak musically." "It is pleasant to be here again." "Truly it is pleasant; I feel it so. And to see health on your cheek and hope in your eye is pleasant, Cary; but what is this hope, and what is the source of this sunshine I perceive about you?" "For one thing, I am happy in mamma. I love her so much, and she loves me. Long and tenderly she nursed me. Now, when her care has made me well, I can occupy myself for and with her all the day. I say it is my turn to attend to her; and I do attend to her. I am her waiting-woman as well as her child. I like--you would laugh if you knew what pleasure I have in making dresses and sewing for her.

consequently will not please you." "Ah, don't! I cannot bear to think ill of you." "And I cannot bear that you should think better of me than I deserve." "Well, but I half know your 'thing;' indeed, I believe I know all about it." "You do not." "I believe I do." "Whom does it concern besides me?" She coloured; she hesitated; she was silent. "Speak, Cary! Whom does it concern?" She tried to utter a name, and could not. "Tell me; there is none present but ourselves. Be frank." "But if I guess wrong?" "I will forgive. Whisper, Cary." He bent his ear to her lips. Still she would not, or could not, speak clearly to the point. Seeing that Moore waited and was resolved to hear something, she at last said, "Miss Keeldar spent a day at the rectory about a week since.

of her money, and that she refused me indignantly and scornfully (you need neither start nor blush; nor yet need you prick your trembling fingers with your needle. That is the plain truth, whether you like it or not)--if such was not the subject of her august confidences, on what point did they turn? You say you talked the whole night through; what about?" "About things we never thoroughly discussed before, intimate friends as we have been; but you hardly expect I should tell you?" "Yes, yes, Cary; you will tell me. You said we were friends, and friends should always confide in each other." "But you are sure you won't repeat it?" "Quite sure." "Not to Louis?" "Not even to Louis. What does Louis care for young ladies' secrets?" "Robert, Shirley is a curious, magnanimous being." "I dare say.

gentlemen, closing with Sir Philip Nunnely. "She has loved none of these." "Yet some of them were worthy of a woman's affection." "Of some women's, but not of Shirley's." "Is she better than others of her sex?" "She is peculiar, and more dangerous to take as a wife--rashly." "I can imagine that." "She spoke of you----" "Oh, she did! I thought you denied it." "She did not speak in the way you fancy; but I asked her, and I would make her tell me what she thought of you, or rather how she felt towards you. I wanted to know; I had long wanted to know." "So had I; but let us hear. She thinks meanly, she feels contemptuously, doubtless?" "She thinks of you almost as highly as a woman can think of a man. You know she can be eloquent.

love----" "Shirley incapable of love!" "That she will never marry. I imagine her jealous of compromising her pride, of relinquishing her power, of sharing her property." "Shirley has hurt your amour propre ." "She did hurt it; though I had not an emotion of tenderness, nor a spark of passion for her." "Then, Robert, it was very wicked in you to want to marry her." "And very mean, my little pastor, my pretty priestess. I never wanted to kiss Miss Keeldar in my life, though she has fine lips, scarlet and round as ripe cherries; or, if I did wish it, it was the mere desire of the eye." "I doubt, now, whether you are speaking the truth. The grapes or the cherries are sour--'hung too high.'" "She has a pretty figure, a pretty face, beautiful hair. I acknowledge all her charms and feel none of them, or only feel them in a way she would disdain.

resume our gossip. Do not tremble; look me in the face. See what a poor, pale, grim phantom I am--more pitiable than formidable." She looked shyly. "There is something formidable still, pale as you are," she said, as her eye fell under his. "To return to Shirley," pursued Moore: "is it your opinion that she is ever likely to marry?" "She loves." "Platonically--theoretically--all humbug!" "She loves what I call sincerely." "Did she say so?" "I cannot affirm that she said so. No such confession as 'I love this man or that' passed her lips." "I thought not." "But the feeling made its way in spite of her, and I saw it. She spoke of one man in a strain not to be misunderstood. Her voice alone was sufficient testimony. Having wrung from her an opinion on your character, I demanded a second opinion of--another person about whom I had my conjectures, though they were the most tangled and puzzled conjectures in the world.

has found her captor. Mistress she may be of all round her, but her own mistress she is not." "So you exulted at recognizing a fellow-slave in one so fair and imperial?" "I did; Robert, you say right, in one so fair and imperial." "You confess it--a fellow -slave?" "I confess nothing; but I say that haughty Shirley is no more free than was Hagar." "And who, pray, is the Abraham, the hero of a patriarch who has achieved such a conquest?" "You still speak scornfully, and cynically, and sorely; but I will make you change your note before I have done with you." "We will see that. Can she marry this Cupidon?" "Cupidon! he is just about as much a Cupidon as you are a Cyclops." "Can she marry him?" "You will see." "I want to know his name, Cary." "Guess it." "Is it any one in this neighbourhood?" "Yes, in Briarfield parish." "Then it is some person unworthy of her.

the floor at your feet." "You had better not. I shall decline to help you up." "And worshipping you downright. My mother was a Roman Catholic. You look like the loveliest of her pictures of the Virgin. I think I will embrace her faith and kneel and adore." "Robert, Robert, sit still; don't be absurd. I will go to Hortense if you commit extravagances." "You have stolen my senses. Just now nothing will come into my mind but les litanies de la sainte Vièrge. Rose céleste, reine des anges !" " Tour d'ivoire, maison d'or --is not that the jargon? Well, sit down quietly, and guess your riddle." "But 'mamma' charmed--there's the puzzle." "I'll tell you what mamma said when I told her. 'Depend upon it, my dear, such a choice will make the happiness of Miss Keeldar's life.'" "I'll guess once, and no more.

a few more whispered sentences. He was waiting at the foot of the staircase as Caroline descended after putting on her shawl. "Must I call Shirley a noble creature now?" he asked. "If you wish to speak the truth, certainly." "Must I forgive her?" "Forgive her? Naughty Robert! Was she in the wrong, or were you?" "Must I at length love her downright, Cary?" Caroline looked keenly up, and made a movement towards him, something between the loving and the petulant. "Only give the word, and I'll try to obey you." "Indeed, you must not love her; the bare idea is perverse." "But then she is handsome, peculiarly handsome. Hers is a beauty that grows on you. You think her but graceful when you first see her; you discover her to be beautiful when you have known her for a year." "It is not you who are to say these things.
