THE WINDING-UP. Yes, reader, we must settle accounts now. I have only briefly to narrate the final fates of some of the personages whose acquaintance we have made in this narrative, and then you and I must shake hands, and for the present separate. Let us turn to the curates--to the much-loved, though long-neglected. Come forward, modest merit! Malone, I see, promptly answers the invocation. He knows his own description when he hears it. No, Peter Augustus; we can have nothing to say to you. It won't do. Impossible to trust ourselves with the touching tale of your deeds and destinies. Are you not aware, Peter, that a discriminating public has its crotchets; that the unvarnished truth does not answer; that plain facts will not digest? Do you not know that the squeak of the real pig is no more relished now than it was in days of yore?

parish; whereas the product of your own imagination, the mere figment, the sheer fiction, is adopted, petted, termed pretty, proper, sweetly natural--the little, spurious wretch gets all the comfits, the honest, lawful bantling all the cuffs. Such is the way of the world, Peter; and as you are the legitimate urchin, rude, unwashed, and naughty, you must stand down. Make way for Mr. Sweeting. Here he comes, with his lady on his arm--the most splendid and the weightiest woman in Yorkshire--Mrs. Sweeting, formerly Miss Dora Sykes. They were married under the happiest auspices, Mr. Sweeting having been just inducted to a comfortable living, and Mr. Sykes being in circumstances to give Dora a handsome portion. They lived long and happily together, beloved by their parishioners and by a numerous circle of friends. There! I think the varnish has been put on very nicely.

Advance, Mr. Donne. This gentleman turned out admirably--far better than either you or I could possibly have expected, reader. He, too, married a most sensible, quiet, lady-like little woman. The match was the making of him. He became an exemplary domestic character, and a truly active parish priest (as a pastor he, to his dying day, conscientiously refused to act). The outside of the cup and platter he burnished up with the best polishing-powder; the furniture of the altar and temple he looked after with the zeal of an upholsterer, the care of a cabinet-maker.

the ministry then in office; and, what is more remarkable, he screwed something out of every one of these personages. It is on record that he got five pounds from the close-fisted old lady Queen Charlotte, and two guineas from the royal profligate her eldest son. When Mr. Donne set out on begging expeditions, he armed himself in a complete suit of brazen mail. That you had given a hundred pounds yesterday was with him no reason why you should not give two hundred to-day. He would tell you so to your face, and, ten to one, get the money out of you. People gave to get rid of him. After all, he did some good with the cash. He was useful in his day and generation. Perhaps I ought to remark that on the premature and sudden vanishing of Mr.

many would call virtues. The circumstance of finding himself invited to tea with a Dissenter would unhinge him for a week. The spectacle of a Quaker wearing his hat in the church, the thought of an unbaptized fellow-creature being interred with Christian rites--these things could make strange havoc in Mr. Macarthey's physical and mental economy. Otherwise he was sane and rational, diligent and charitable. I doubt not a justice-loving public will have remarked, ere this, that I have thus far shown a criminal remissness in pursuing, catching, and bringing to condign punishment the would-be assassin of Mr. Robert Moore. Here was a fine opening to lead my willing readers a dance, at once decorous and exciting--a dance of law and gospel, of the dungeon, the dock, and the "dead-thraw." You might have liked it, reader, but I should not. I and my subject would presently have quarrelled, and then I should have broken down.

mad leveller in politics. The poor soul died of delirium tremens a year after the attempt on Moore, and Robert gave his wretched widow a guinea to bury him. * * * * * The winter is over and gone; spring has followed with beamy and shadowy, with flowery and showery flight. We are now in the heart of summer--in mid-June--the June of 1812. It is burning weather. The air is deep azure and red gold. It fits the time; it fits the age; it fits the present spirit of the nations. The nineteenth century wantons in its giant adolescence; the Titan boy uproots mountains in his game, and hurls rocks in his wild sport. This summer Bonaparte is in the saddle; he and his host scour Russian deserts. He has with him Frenchmen and Poles, Italians and children of the Rhine, six hundred thousand strong.

fire; the sea becomes "as the blood of a dead man;" the islands flee away; the mountains are not found. In this year, Lord Wellington assumed the reins in Spain. They made him generalissimo, for their own salvation's sake. In this year he took Badajos, he fought the field of Vittoria, he captured Pampeluna, he stormed San Sebastian; in this year he won Salamanca. Men of Manchester, I beg your pardon for this slight résumé of warlike facts, but it is of no consequence. Lord Wellington is, for you, only a decayed old gentleman now. I rather think some of you have called him a "dotard;" you have taunted him with his age and the loss of his physical vigour. What fine heroes you are yourselves! Men like you have a right to trample on what is mortal in a demigod.

Scoff at your ease; your scorn can never break his grand old heart. But come, friends, whether Quakers or cotton-printers, let us hold a peace-congress, and let out our venom quietly. We have been talking with unseemly zeal about bloody battles and butchering generals; we arrive now at a triumph in your line. On the 18th of June 1812 the Orders in Council were repealed, and the blockaded ports thrown open. You know very well--such of you as are old enough to remember--you made Yorkshire and Lancashire shake with your shout on that occasion.

my to is is iss  is ,  ,ttsdt,y   si sp aab s . it, ,,s up, s is si a mhe, e  asen ,-   it just     sen justs it   me  am  er  it so  it m iss it back   is super it  and  .  mm si  i   as   am   you   poker   just  am si  is can   I s

she was at last, fettered to a fixed day. There she lay, conquered by love, and bound with a vow. Thus vanquished and restricted, she pined, like any other chained denizen of deserts. Her captor alone could cheer her; his society only could make amends for the lost privilege of liberty. In his absence she sat or wandered alone, spoke little, and ate less. She furthered no preparations for her nuptials; Louis was himself obliged to direct all arrangements. He was virtually master of Fieldhead weeks before he became so nominally--the least presumptuous, the kindest master that ever was, but with his lady absolute. She abdicated without a word or a struggle. "Go to Mr. Moore, ask Mr. Moore," was her answer when applied to for orders. Never was wooer of wealthy bride so thoroughly absolved from the subaltern part, so inevitably compelled to assume a paramount character.

remark she made a year afterwards proved that she partly also acted on system. "Louis," she said, "would never have learned to rule if she had not ceased to govern. The incapacity of the sovereign had developed the powers of the premier." It had been intended that Miss Helstone should act as bridesmaid at the approaching nuptials, but Fortune had destined her another part. She came home in time to water her plants. She had performed this little task. The last flower attended to was a rose-tree, which bloomed in a quiet green nook at the back of the house. This plant had received the refreshing shower; she was now resting a minute. Near the wall stood a fragment of sculptured stone--a monkish relic--once, perhaps, the base of a cross. She mounted it, that she might better command the view.

the deep red of the bonfires!" The answer was a closer caress; and Caroline turned, and looked, not into Mrs. Pryor's matron face, but up at a dark manly visage. She dropped her watering-pot and stepped down from the pedestal. "I have been sitting with 'mamma' an hour," said the intruder. "I have had a long conversation with her. Where, meantime, have you been?" "To Fieldhead. Shirley is as naughty as ever, Robert. She will neither say Yes nor No to any question put. She sits alone. I cannot tell whether she is melancholy or nonchalant. If you rouse her or scold her, she gives you a look, half wistful, half reckless, which sends you away as queer and crazed as herself. What Louis will make of her, I cannot tell. For my part, if I were a gentleman, I think I would not dare undertake her." "Never mind them.

an illuminated countenance, whose characters were all beaming, though the page itself was dusk. This face, potent in the majesty of its traits, shed down on her hope, fondness, delight. "Will the repeal do you good-- much good, immediate good?" she inquired. Caroline devoured his words; she held his hand in hers; she drew a long breath. "You are saved? Your heavy difficulties are lifted?" "They are lifted. I breathe. I can act." "At last! Oh, Providence is kind! Thank Him, Robert." "I do thank Providence." "And I also, for your sake!" She looked up devoutly. "Now I can take more workmen, give better wages, lay wiser and more liberal plans, do some good, be less selfish. Now , Caroline, I can have a house--a home which I can truly call mine--and now ----" He paused, for his deep voice was checked.

answered him. "Is Caroline mine?" "Caroline is yours." "I will prize her. The sense of her value is here, in my heart; the necessity for her society is blended with my life. Not more jealous shall I be of the blood whose flow moves my pulses than of her happiness and well-being." "I love you, too, Robert, and will take faithful care of you." "Will you take faithful care of me? Faithful care! As if that rose should promise to shelter from tempest this hard gray stone! But she will care for me, in her way. These hands will be the gentle ministrants of every comfort I can taste. I know the being I seek to entwine with my own will bring me a solace, a charity, a purity, to which, of myself, I am a stranger." Suddenly Caroline was troubled; her lip quivered.

"She told me that, with a gentle pride that reminded me of somebody else." "She is not at all interfering, and incapable of gossip." "I know her, Cary. But if, instead of being the personification of reserve and discretion, she were something quite opposite, I should not fear her." "Yet she will be your mother-in-law?" The speaker gave an arch little nod. Moore smiled. "Louis and I are not of the order of men who fear their mothers-in-law, Cary. Our foes never have been, nor will be, those of our own household. I doubt not my mother-in-law will make much of me." "That she will--in her quiet way, you know. She is not demonstrative; and when you see her silent, or even cool, you must not fancy her displeased; it is only a manner she has. Be sure to let me interpret for her whenever she puzzles you; always believe my account of the matter, Robert." "Oh, implicitly!

combine politeness with an air of sincerity.'" "'Mamma' is rather a misanthropist, is she not? Not the best opinion of the sterner sex?" "She forbears to judge them as a whole, but she has her exceptions whom she admires--Louis and Mr. Hall, and, of late, yourself. She did not like you once; I knew that, because she would never speak of you. But, Robert----" "Well, what now? What is the new thought?" "You have not seen my uncle yet?" "I have. 'Mamma' called him into the room. He consents conditionally. If I prove that I can keep a wife, I may have her; and I can keep her better than he thinks--better than I choose to boast." "If you get rich you will do good with your money, Robert?".

what now? What is the new thought?" "You have not seen my uncle yet?" "I have. 'Mamma' called him into the room. He consents conditionally. If I prove that I can keep a wife, I may have her; and I can keep her better than he thinks--better than I choose to boast." "If you get rich you will do good with your money, Robert?" "I will do good; you shall tell me how. Indeed, I have some schemes of my own, which you and I will talk about on our own hearth one day. I have seen the necessity of doing good; I have learned the downright folly of being selfish. Caroline, I foresee what I will now foretell. This war must ere long draw to a close. Trade is likely to prosper for some years to come. There may be a brief misunderstanding between England and America, but that will not last.

him. He is of the pâte generally approved, bon comme le pain --daily bread for the most fastidious, good for the infant and the aged, nourishing for the poor, wholesome for the rich. Shirley, in spite of her whims and oddities, her dodges and delays, has an infatuated fondness for him. She will one day see him as universally beloved as even she could wish. He will also be universally esteemed, considered, consulted, depended on--too much so. His advice will be always judicious, his help always good-natured. Ere long both will be in inconvenient request. He will have to impose restrictions. As for me, if I succeed as I intend to do, my success will add to his and Shirley's income. I can double the value of their mill property. I can line yonder barren Hollow with lines of cottages and rows of cottage-gardens----" "Robert!

thank Heaven! What can you grow in Bilberry Moss? What will flourish on Rushedge?" "Caroline, the houseless, the starving, the unemployed shall come to Hollow's Mill from far and near; and Joe Scott shall give them work, and Louis Moore, Esq., shall let them a tenement, and Mrs. Gill shall mete them a portion till the first pay-day." She smiled up in his face. "Such a Sunday school as you will have, Cary! such collections as you will get! such a day school as you and Shirley and Miss Ainley will have to manage between you! The mill shall find salaries for a master and mistress, and the squire or the clothier shall give a treat once a quarter." She mutely offered a kiss--an offer taken unfair advantage of, to the extortion of about a hundred kisses. "Extravagant day-dreams," said Moore, with a sigh and smile, "yet perhaps we may realize some of them.

Esq., of Hollow's Mill, to Caroline, niece of the Rev. Matthewson Helstone, M.A., rector of Briarfield. The ceremony, in the first instance, was performed by Mr. Helstone, Hiram Yorke, Esq., of Briarmains, giving the bride away. In the second instance, Mr. Hall, vicar of Nunnely, officiated. Amongst the bridal train the two most noticeable personages were the youthful bridesmen, Henry Sympson and Martin Yorke. I suppose Robert Moore's prophecies were, partially at least, fulfilled. The other day I passed up the Hollow, which tradition says was once green, and lone, and wild; and there I saw the manufacturer's day-dreams embodied in substantial stone and brick and ashes--the cinder-black highway, the cottages, and the cottage gardens; there I saw a mighty mill, and a chimney ambitious as the tower of Babel. I told my old housekeeper when I came home where I had been.

NELSON AND SONS PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS THE NELSON CLASSICS. Uniform with this Volume and Same Price. =Jack Sheppard.= HARRISON AINSWORTH. =Masterman Ready.= CAPTAIN MARRYAT. =Michael Strogoff.= JULES VERNE. =The Wide Wide World.= ELIZ. WETHERELL. This famous American novel has for many years been a classic in every home. It is a masterpiece of the best type of domestic fiction. =Hereward the Wake.= CHARLES KINGSLEY. This brilliant romance tells of the last stand of the great English leader, Hereward, against the advance of the Normans. The scene is largely laid in the Fen country, and every page is a record of fierce strife. The fall of Hereward is one of the greatest death scenes in literature. =David Copperfield--I.= CHARLES DICKENS. =David Copperfield--II.= CHARLES DICKENS. "David Copperfield" is, by general consent, Dickens's masterpiece, showing, as it does, all his peculiar merits in their highest form.

become a wiser people, but we shall never again be so humorous. =Windsor Castle.= HARRISON AINSWORTH. The romances of Harrison Ainsworth need no advertisement. In this, as in his "Tower of London" and "Old St. Paul's," he has taken one of England's great historical sites, and woven around it an appropriate romance. =Peg Woffington.= CHARLES READE. =Reminiscences of Scottish Life and Character.= Dean RAMSAY. The only book of jests that has ever attained an honourable place in literature. Its wealth of genuine humour is a perpetual refutation of the old slander that Scots joke "wi' deeficulty." =Parables from Nature.= Mrs. GATTY. This is one of the great children's books of the world. It was a classic in our grandmothers' time, and possesses that imperishable charm which makes it as attractive to-day as when it was first written. =Lavengro.= GEORGE BORROW.

and her keen insight into human nature have been abundantly recognized, so that to-day she is probably the most read novelist of her period. In Sir Walter Scott's phrase she possesses "the exquisite touch which renders ordinary commonplace things and characters interesting." =Toilers of the Sea.= VICTOR HUGO. =The Laughing Man.= VICTOR HUGO. =Les Misérables--I.= VICTOR HUGO. =Les Misérables--II.= VICTOR HUGO. ='Ninety-Three.= VICTOR HUGO. Victor Hugo took the romantic novel as invented by Sir Walter Scott and gave it a new and philosophic interest. All his great romances have a purpose. "Les Misérables" exposes the tyranny of human laws; "The Toilers of the Sea" shows the conflict of man with nature; "The Laughing Man" expounds the tyranny of the aristocratic ideal as exemplified in England. But being a great artist as well as a great thinker, he never turned his romances into pamphlets.

and people. =The Cloister and the Hearth.= CHARLES READE. There are many who think this the greatest of all historical novels, and it is certain that there are few better. It is not a story so much as a vast and varied transcript of life. It is also a delightful romance, and Gerard and Margaret are among the immortals of fiction. =Romola.= GEORGE ELIOT. This is the only novel of George Eliot's in which the scene is laid outside her own country. It is a story of Florence during the time of the Renaissance, a marvellous picture of the intellectual and moral ferment which the New Learning created. With amazing learning and insight the author portrays the souls of men and women, and her study of a weak man and a strong woman has rarely been surpassed in English literature for dramatic power and moral truth. =Silas Marner.= GEORGE ELIOT.

Cornelius van Baerle, the guardian of the tulip, and Rosa, the jailer's daughter. =Tom Cringle's Log.= MICHAEL SCOTT. A brilliant story of West Indian life by an author who combined abundant personal experience with keen observation, sprightly temper, and delightful humour. "Tom Cringle's Log" has been many times reprinted, and has lost nothing of its popularity and power to please. =Lamb's Tales from Shakespeare.= =The Scarlet Letter.= NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE. This is one of the most powerful and affecting stories ever conceived. On its first appearance, in 1850, it immediately leaped high into public favour, and attained the distinction of an unmistakable classic. The tragedy of Hester Prynne and Arthur Dimmesdale is wrought out in the midst of an austere Puritan community, which exacts the bitterest expiation for sin. THE NELSON CLASSICS. Uniform with this Volume and Same Price . CONDENSED LIST.
