HIGH AND LOW. At the foot of the stairs, Mr. Gryce excused himself, and calling in two or three men whom he had left outside, had the valet removed before taking Miss Butterworth back into the study. When all was quiet again, and they found an opportunity to speak, Mr. Gryce remarked: "One very important thing has been settled by the experiment we have just made. Bartow is acquitted of participation in this crime." "Then we can give our full attention to the young people. You have heard nothing from them, I suppose?" "No." "Nor from the old man who laughed?" "No." Miss Butterworth looked disappointed. "I thought--it seemed very probable--that the scrap of writing you found would inform you who these were. If it was important enough for the dying man to try to swallow it, it certainly should give some clew to his assailant." "Unfortunately, it does not do so.

me again. Remember Evelyn!' And signed, 'Amos's son.'" "Amos's son! That is Mr. Adams himself." "So we have every reason to believe." "Strange! Unaccountable! And the paper inscribed with these words was found clinched between his teeth! Was the handwriting recognized?" "Yes, as his own, if we can judge from the specimens we have seen of his signature on the fly-leaves of his books." "Well, mysteries deepen. And the retaining of this paper was so important to him that even in his death throe he thrust it in this strangest of all hiding-places, as being the only one that could be considered safe from search. And the girl! Her first words on coming to herself were: 'You have left that line of writing behind.' Mr. Gryce, those words, few and inexplicable as they are, contain the key to the whole situation.

might have been an old scrap, referring to past sorrows or secrets." "These words were written that afternoon. The paper on which they were scrawled was torn from a sheet of letter paper lying on the desk, and the pen with which they were inscribed--you must have noticed where it lay, quite out of its natural place on the extreme edge of the table." "Certainly, sir; but I had little idea of the significance we might come to attach to it. These words are connected, then, with the girl I saw. And she is not Evelyn or he would not have repeated in this note the bird's catch-word, 'Remember Evelyn!' I wonder if she is Evelyn?" proceeded Miss Butterworth, pointing to the one large picture which adorned the wall. "We may call her so for the nonce. So melancholy a face may well suggest some painful family secret.

it up without an effort. Those words, now. There were some other words you have not repeated to me." "They came before that injunction, 'Remember Evelyn!' They bespoke a resolve. 'Neither she nor you will ever see me again.'" "Ah! but these few words are very significant, Mr. Gryce. Could he have dealt that blow himself? May he have been a suicide after all?" "Madam, you have the right to inquire; but from Bartow's pantomime, you must have perceived it is not a self-inflicted blow he mimics, but a maddened thrust from an outraged hand. Let us keep to our first conclusions; only--to be fair to every possibility--the condition of Mr. Adams's affairs and the absence of all family papers and such documents as may usually be found in a wealthy man's desk prove that he had made some preparation for possible death.

"Ha! You detectives have your experiences! I should not have enjoyed spending that especial evening with you. But what an old-world tragedy we are unearthing here! I declare"--and the good lady actually rubbed her eyes--"I feel as if transported back to medival days. Who says we are living in New York within sound of the cable car and the singing of the telegraph wire?" "Some men are perfectly capable of bringing the medival into Wall Street. I think Mr. Adams was one of those men. Romanticism tinged all his acts, even the death he died. Nor did it cease with his death. It followed him to the tomb. Witness the cross we found lying on his bosom." "That was the act of another's hand, the result of another's superstition. That shows the presence of a priest or a woman at the moment he died." "Yet," proceeded Mr.

They, however, stopped long enough to cast one final look around them. As they did so Miss Butterworth's finger slowly rose. "See!" said she, "you can hardly perceive from this side of the wall the opening made by the removal of that picture on the stair landing. Wouldn't you say that it was in the midst of those folds of dark-colored tapestry up there?" "Yes, I had already located that spot as the one. With the picture hung up on the other side, it would be quite invisible." "One needs to keep one's eyes moving in a case like this. That picture must have been drawn aside several times while we were in this room. Yet we failed to notice it." "That was from not looking high enough. High and low, Mr. Gryce! What goes on at the level of the eye is apparent to every one." The smile with which he acknowledged this parting shot and prepared to escort her to the door had less of irony than sadness in it.
