DESPAIR. Was it? Tragedies as unpremeditated as this had doubtless occurred, and inconsistencies in character shown themselves in similar impetuosities, from the beginning of time up till now. Yet there was not a man present, with or without the memory of Bartow's pantomime, which, as you will recall, did not tally at all with this account of Mr. Adams's violent end, who did not show in a greater or less degree his distrust and evident disbelief in this tale, poured out with such volubility before them. The young man, gifted as he was with the keenest susceptibilities, perceived this, and his head drooped. "I shall add nothing to and take nothing from what I have said," was his dogged remark. "Make of it what you will." The inspector who was conducting the inquiry glanced dubiously at Mr. Gryce as these words left Thomas Adams's lips; whereupon the detective said: "We are sorry you have taken such a resolution.

the prisoner's pallid lips. Then he lifted his head and replied with a certain air of desperation: "Incrimination is not what I fear now. From the way you all look at me I perceive that I am lost, for I have no means of proving my story." This acknowledgment, which might pass for the despairing cry of an innocent man, made his interrogator stare. "You forget," suggested that gentleman, "that you had your wife with you. She can corroborate your words, and will prove herself, no doubt, an invaluable witness in your favor." "My wife!" he repeated, choking so that his words could be barely understood. "Must she be dragged into this--so sick, so weak a woman? It would kill her, sir. She loves me--she----" "Was she with you in Mr. Adams's study? Did she see him lift the dagger against his own breast?" "No." And with this denial the young man seemed to take new courage.

creature to speak----" Here the inspector cut short these appeals which were rending every heart present. "Have you read the newspapers for the last few days?" he asked. "I? Yes, yes, sir. How could I help it? Blood is blood; the man was my brother; I had left him dying--I was naturally anxious, naturally saw my own danger, and I read them, of course." "Then you know he was found with a large cross on his breast, a cross which was once on the wall. How came it to be torn down? Who put it on his bosom?" "I, sir. I am not a Catholic but Felix was, and seeing him dying without absolution, without extreme unction, I thought of the holy cross, and tore down the only one I saw, and placed it in his arms." "A pious act.

with him?" "We confront you with no one. We only asked you a question. You did not observe the valet, then?" "No, sir." "Or understand the mystery of the colored lights?" "No, sir." "Or of the plate of steel and the other contrivances with which your brother enlivened his solitude?" "I do not follow you, sir." But there was a change in his tone. "I see," said the inspector, "that the complications which have disturbed us and made necessary this long delay in the collection of testimony have not entered into the crime as described by you. Now this is possible; but there is still a circumstance requiring explanation; a little circumstance, which is, nevertheless, one of importance, since your wife mentioned it to you as soon as she became conscious. I allude to the half dozen or more words which were written by your brother immediately preceding his death.

hand, but failed to grasp the scrap of paper which the inspector held out. Then he burst into a loud cry: "Enough! I cannot hold out, with no other support than a wicked lie. I killed my brother for reasons good as any man ever had for killing another. But I shall not impart them. I would rather be tried for murder and hanged." It was a complete breakdown, pitiful from its contrast with the man's herculean physique and fine, if contracted, features. If the end, it was a sad end, and Mr. Gryce, whose forehead had taken on a deep line between the eyebrows, slowly rose and took his stand by the young man, who looked ready to fall. The inspector, on the contrary, did not move. He had begun a tattoo with his fingers on the table, and seemed bound to beat it out, when another sudden cry broke from the young man's lips: "What is that?" he demanded, with his eyes fixed on the door, and his whole frame shaking violently.

well what he is saying. He is saying that he killed his brother, that he held the dagger which rid the world of a monster of whose wickedness none knew. But you must not heed him. Indeed you must not heed him. He is innocent; I, his wife, have come twenty miles, from a bed of weakness and suffering, to tell you so. He----" But here a hand was laid gently, but firmly on her mouth. She looked up, met her husband's eyes filled with almost frantic appeal, and giving him a look in return that sank into the heart of every man who beheld it, laid her own hand on his and drew it softly away. "It is too late, Tom, I must speak. My father, my own weakness, or your own peremptory commands could not keep me at Belleville when I knew you had been brought here.

would be a cowardice unworthy of our love and the true lives we hope to lead together. Sirs!" and each man there held his breath to catch the words which came in faint and fainter intonation from her lips, "I know my husband to be innocent, because the hand that held the dagger was mine. I killed Felix Cadwalader!" * * * * * The horror of such a moment is never fully realized till afterward. Not a man there moved, not even her husband, yet on every cheek a slow pallor was forming, which testified to the effect of such words from lips made for smiles and showing in every curve the habit of gentle thought and the loftiest instincts. Not till some one cried out from the doorway, "Catch her! she is falling!" did any one stir or release the pent-up breath which awe and astonishment had hitherto held back on every lip.

the strongest interest, understood at once the meaning of the change which had come over his prisoner at that point in his memorable arrest when he first realized that it was for himself they had come, and not for the really guilty person, the idolized object of his affections. Meanwhile, he was facing them all, with one hand laid tenderly on that unconscious head. "Do not think," he cried, "that because this young girl has steeped her hand in blood, she is a wicked woman. There is no purer heart on earth than hers, and none more worthy of the worship of a true man. See! she killed my brother, son of my father, beloved by my mother, yet I can kiss her hand, kiss her forehead, her eyes, her feet, not because I hate him, but because I worship her, the purest--the best----" He left her, and came and stood before those astonished men.
