Sally sat with her back propped against a mound of golden sand, her eyes half-lidded as she surveyed the morning rituals of Roville-sur-Mer. Like most French seaside resorts, the beach was the assembly point for the visiting populace at dawn. Fathers, sporting whiskers that painted cheerful patches of color across the foreground, stood amidst clusters of their female relations sheltered beneath gay parasols. Dogs ambled to and fro, while children excavated the sand with spades, pausing periodically to strike one another with these handy tools.

One canine, a poodle of distinctly military bearing, trotted over to Sally. Discovering she possessed a box of sweets, he decided to settle in and await further developments. While the anticipation of treats is usually delightful, Sally's vacation had proven an exception to this rule. It had been a month of luxurious, lazy drifting from one French town to another, halted finally by the glittering charms of Roville—its blue skies, its Casino, its snow-white hotels lining the Promenade. Yet, the voice of America was calling. Gerald had written a scrappy, hurried note stating that *The Primrose Way* was to open in Detroit soon, necessitating her immediate return. Though the letter lacked polish, Sally could not ignore it; she would depart tomorrow.

For today, however, was today. She sat and watched the bathers, savoring the familiar peace of idleness, listening to the faint murmur of the waves. But there was a drawback to mornings on the Roville plage: the tendency to fall asleep. Doing so so soon after breakfast was undignified, even on holiday. Usually, Sally fought the drowsiness, but today the sun was warm and the whispers of the waves insidious. She had almost dozed off when voices nearby jerked her back to consciousness. These were not the usual local chatter; they were spoken in English, a novelty in Roville.

A few feet away, two men had seated themselves on the sand.

Sally's amusement during her travels had often been examining strangers and assigning them characters via intuition—a game she consistently failed at. She glanced at the pair from the corner of her eye. The first was a tall, dark man with a tight, precise mouth and high cheekbones, giving him a vaguely sinister air. He had the look of a clean-shaven man engaged in a perpetual struggle with facial hair; he shaved twice daily and possessed the self-control not to swear when he cut himself, though Sally imagined him smiling nastily when he did.

"Hard," Sally diagnosed. "I shouldn't like him. A lawyer, I think."

She turned to the other and found herself meeting his gaze. He had been staring at her with intense fixation since arriving. His mouth hung slightly open, suggesting a man who, after many disappointments, had finally found something worth looking at.

"Rather a dear," Sally decided.

He was a sturdy, thick-set youth with an amiable, freckled face and the reddest hair she had ever seen. He had a square chin with a slight cut at one angle. Sally was convinced that, however he had acquired that wound, he had not done so with superior self-control.

"A temper," she meditated. "Very quick, but soon over. Not very clever, I suppose, but nice."

She looked away, embarrassed by his fascinated stare. Meanwhile, the dark man, having successfully lit a cigarette despite a strong breeze in a fashion that suggested competence bordering on the annoying, tossed aside the match and resumed conversation.

"And how is Scrymgeour?" he inquired.

"Oh, all right," the red-haired young man replied absently. Sally looked straight ahead, though she felt his eyes were still busy.

"I was surprised at his being here. He told me he meant to stay in Paris."

A slight pause ensued. Sally gave the attentive poodle a piece of nougat.

"Say," observed the red-haired youth in clear, penetrating tones that vibrated with intense feeling, "that's the prettiest girl I've seen in my life!"

At this frank revelation, Sally, though startled, was not displeased. To a broad-minded girl, the outburst seemed a legitimate comment on matters of public interest. His companion, however, was unmixedly shocked.

"My dear fellow!" he ejaculated.

"Oh, it's all right," said the red-haired youth, unmoved. "She can't understand. There isn't a bally soul in this dashed place that speaks a word of English. If I didn't happen to remember a few odd bits of French, I should have starved by now. That girl," he continued, returning to the subject most imperatively occupying his mind, "is an absolute topper! I give you my solemn word I've never seen anybody to touch her. Look at those hands and feet. You don't get them outside France. Of course, her mouth is a bit wide," he said reluctantly.

Sally's immobility, coupled with the other man's assurance regarding the linguistic deficiencies of Roville's inhabitants, reassured the dark man. He breathed again. He had never behaved with anything but scrupulous correctness himself, and he quailed at the idea of being associated remotely with incorrectness. It had been a black moment for him when his companion uttered those few kind words.

"Still, you ought to be careful," he said austerely.

He looked at Sally, who was now dividing her attention between the poodle and a raffish-looking mongrel that had joined the party, and returned to the topic of the mysterious Scrymgeour.

"How is Scrymgeour's dyspepsia?"

The red-haired youth seemed faintly interested in Scrymgeour's internal affairs.

"Do you notice the way her hair sort of curls over her ears?" he asked. "Eh? Oh, pretty much the same, I think."

"What hotel are you staying at?"

"The Normandie."

Sally dipped into her box for another chocolate cream and gave an imperceptible start. She, too, was staying at the Normandie. She presumed her admirer was a recent arrival, as she had seen nothing of him at the hotel.

"The Normandie?" The dark man looked puzzled. "I know Roville pretty well by report, but I've never heard of any Hotel Normandie. Where is it?"

"It's a little shanty down near the station. Not much of a place. Still, it's cheap, and the cooking's all right."

His companion's bewilderment increased.

"What on earth is a man like Scrymgeour doing there?" he said. Sally felt an urgent desire to know more about the absent Scrymgeour; constant repetition of his name had made him seem almost like an old friend. "If there's one thing he's fussy about..."

"There are at least eleven thousand things he's fussy about," interrupted the red-haired youth disapprovingly. "Jumpy old blighter!"

"If there's one thing he's particular about, it's the sort of hotel he goes to. Ever since I've known him, he has always wanted the best. I should have thought he would have gone to the Splendide." He mused on this problem in a dissatisfied sort of way, then seemingly reconciled himself to the fact that a rich man's eccentricities must be humoured. "I'd like to see him again. Ask him if he will dine with me at the Splendide tonight. Say eight sharp."

Sally, occupied with her growing entourage of dogs—which now included a white terrier with a black patch over its left eye—could not see the young man's face. But his voice, when he replied, told her that something was wrong. There was a false airiness in it.

"Oh, Scrymgeour isn't in Roville."

"No? Where is he?"

"Paris, I believe."

"What!" The dark man's voice sharpened. He sounded as though cross-examining a reluctant witness. "Then why aren't you there? What are you doing here? Did he give you a holiday?"

"Yes, he did."

"When do you rejoin him?"

"I don't."

"What!"

The red-haired youth's manner was not unmistakably dogged.

"Well, if you want to know," he said, "the old blighter fired me the day before yesterday."

There was a shuffling of sand as the dark man sprang up. Sally, intent on the drama unfolding beside her, absent-mindedly gave the poodle a piece of nougat which should by rights have gone to the terrier. She shot a swift glance sideways and saw the dark man standing in an attitude reminiscent of the stern father of melodrama about to drive his erring daughter out into the snow. The red-haired youth, outwardly stolid, gazed before him down the beach at a fat bather in an orange suit who, after six false starts, was now actually in the water, floating with the dignity of a wrecked balloon.

"Do you mean to tell me," demanded the dark man, "that, after all the trouble the family took to get you what was practically a sinecure with endless possibilities if you only behaved yourself, you have deliberately thrown away..." A despairing gesture completed the sentence. "Good God, you're hopeless!"

The red-haired youth made no reply. He continued to gaze down the beach. Of all outdoor sports, few are more stimulating than watching middle-aged Frenchmen bathe. Drama, action, suspense—all are present. From the first stealthy testing of the water with an apprehensive toe to the final seal-like plunge,
