Sally had originally planned to arrive in New York, check into the St. Regis, and indulge in the gilded luxuries her fortune entitled her to before securing a permanent, modest apartment. However, when the moment arrived and she gave directions to the taxi driver at the dock, the plan felt absurdly cinematic—like something plucked from a cheap drama. It seemed premature to sever ties with the boarding house that had been her home for three years until she actually found her new flat. The honorable thing, if she wished to avoid branding herself a "female Fillmore" in the eyes of her own conscience, was to return temporarily to Mrs. Meecher's admirable establishment and reunite with her old friends. After all, home is where the heart is, even if the culinary offerings lean heavily toward prunes.

Perhaps it was the self-satisfaction of doing the right thing, or perhaps it was the electric anticipation of seeing Gerald Foster again after weeks apart, that made the familiar streets sparkle with an impossible brightness. It was a perfect, crisp New York morning; the sky was a piercing blue, the sun a rich amber, and even the ash cans seemed to gleam with a stimulating vitality. Streetcars swarmed with cheerful commuters bounding to work; policemen directed traffic with jaunty ease; and white-clad street cleaners performed their poetic duties with a quiet, undeniable relish. Unbeknownst to them, Sally was back, yet somehow, the whole city seemed to be behaving as if today were a special occasion.

The first discordant note in this overture of happiness was struck by Mrs. Meecher. After expressing her delight that Sally needed her old room, she dropped the bombshell: Gerald Foster had left town that morning.

"Gone to Detroit, he has," Mrs. Meecher announced. "And Miss Doland, too." She paused to deliver a caustic remark to the handyman, who was currently using Sally's trunk as a weapon to complain about the wallpaper in the hall. "There's that play of his being tried out there, you know, starting Monday," Mrs. Meecher continued once the handyman had bumped his way upstairs. "They've been rehearsing ever since you left."

Sally felt a pang of disappointment, but the morning was so beautiful, and New York so dazzling after the dreary voyage, that she refused to let herself be depressed without cause. Besides, she could always go to Detroit tomorrow. It was comforting to have something to look forward to.

"Oh, is Elsa in the company?" Sally asked.

"Sure," Mrs. Meecher confirmed, keeping pace with theatrical gossip. She was a former member of the profession herself, having starred in the first production of *Florodora*, though, unlike everyone else, she wasn't part of the original sextette. "Mr. Faucitt was down to see a rehearsal, and he said Miss Doland was fine. And he's not easy to please, as you know."

"How is Mr. Faucitt?"

Mrs. Meecher, not unwillingly, for she was a woman who enjoyed the tragedies of life, launched her second assault on Sally's elevated mood.

"Poor old gentleman, he ain't over and above well," she said. "Went to bed early last night with a headache, and this morning I been to see him, and he don't look well. There's a lot of this Spanish influenza about. Might be that. Lots of people have been dying of it, if you believe what you see in the papers," Mrs. Meecher added buoyantly.

"Good gracious! You don't think..."

"Well, he ain't turned black," Mrs. Meecher admitted with regret. "They say they turn black. If you believe what you see in the papers, that is. Of course, that may come later," she concluded with the air of someone convinced everything would eventually work itself out. "The doctor'll be in to see him pretty soon. He's quite happy. Toto's sitting with him."

Sally's concern deepened. Like anyone who had spent significant time in the house, she held strong opinions on Toto. This creature, who stained the reputation of the entire canine species by pretending to be a dog, was a small, woolly beast with a persistent, penetrating yap that was hard to endure in health and utterly intolerable for a sick man. Her heart bled for Mr. Faucitt. Mrs. Meecher, however, maintained a faith in her little pet's amiability and soothing powers that seven years of close association had failed to shake. To her, having Toto on the scene meant all necessary pampering measures had been taken.

"I must go up and see him!" cried Sally. "Poor old dear."

"Sure. You know his room. You can hear Toto talking to him now," said Mrs. Meecher complacently. "He wants a cracker, that's what he wants. Toto likes a cracker after breakfast."

As Sally entered the room, the invalid's weary eyes turned toward the door. At the sight of Sally, they lit up with an incredulous rapture. Almost any visitor would have pleased Mr. Faucitt at that moment, as his little playmate had long outlived any initial welcome, but the arrival of his beloved Sally seemed to the old man akin to a return of the age of miracles.

"Sally!"

"One moment. Here, Toto!"

Struck momentarily dumb by the prospect of food, Toto jumped off the bed and stood with his head cocked, peering questioningly at the cracker. Suspicious as dogs often are, he allowed himself to be lured into the hallway. Once there, Sally tossed the cracker down, slipped inside, and shut the door. Toto, after a couple of yaps—which may have been gratitude or baffled fury—trotted off downstairs, and Mr. Faucitt drew a deep, shuddering breath.

"Sally, you come, as ever, as an angel of mercy. Our worthy Mrs. Meecher means well, and I yield to no man in my respect for her innate kindness of heart: but she errs in supposing that that thrice-damned whelp of hers is a combination of sick-nurse, soothing medicine, and a week at the seaside. She insisted on bringing him here. He was yapping then, as he was yapping when, with womanly resource which I cannot sufficiently praise, you decoyed him hence. And each yap went through me like hammer-strokes on sheeted tin. Sally, you stand alone among womankind. You shine like a good deed in a naughty world. When did you get back?"

"I've only just arrived in my hired barouche from the pier."

"And you came to see your old friend without delay? I am grateful and flattered, Sally, my dear."

"Of course I came to see you. Do you suppose that, when Mrs. Meecher told me you were sick, I just said 'Is that so?' and went on talking about the weather? Well, what do you mean by it? Frightening everybody. Poor old darling, do you feel very bad?"

"One thousand individual mice are nibbling the base of my spine, and I am conscious of a constant need of cooling refreshment. But what of that? Your presence is a tonic. Tell me, how did our Sally enjoy foreign travel?"

"Our Sally had the time of her life."

"Did you visit England?"

"Only passing through."

"How did it look?" asked Mr. Faucitt eagerly.

"Moist. Very moist."

"It would," said Mr. Faucitt indulgently. "I confess that, happy as I have been in this country, there are times when I miss those wonderful London days, when a sort of cosy brown mist hangs over the streets and the pavements ooze with a perspiration of mud and water, and you see through the haze the yellow glow of the Bodega lamps shining in the distance like harbour-lights. Not," said Mr. Faucitt, "that I specify the Bodega to the exclusion of other and equally worthy hostelries. I have passed just as pleasant hours in Rule's and Short's. You missed something by not lingering in England, Sally."

"I know I did--pneumonia."

Mr. Faucitt shook his head reproachfully.

"You are prejudiced, my dear. You would have enjoyed London if you had had the courage to brave its superficial gloom. Where did you spend your holiday? Paris?"

"Part of the time. And the rest of the while I was down by the sea. It was glorious. I don't think I would ever have come back if I hadn't had to. But, of course, I wanted to see you all again. And I wanted to be at the opening of Mr. Foster's play. Mrs. Meecher tells me you went to one of the rehearsals."

"I attended a dog-fight which I was informed was a rehearsal," said Mr. Faucitt severely. "There is no rehearsing nowadays."

"Oh dear! Was it as bad as all that?"

"The play is good. The play—I will go further—is excellent. It has fat. But the acting..."

"Mrs. Meecher said you told her that Elsa was good."

"Our worthy hostess did not misreport me. Miss Doland has great possibilities. She reminds me somewhat of Matilda Devine, under whose banner I played a season at the Old Royalty in London many years ago. She has the seeds of greatness in her, but she is wasted in the present case on an insignificant part. There is only one part in the play. I allude to the
