For several weeks following her reunion with Ginger Kemp, Sally experienced what felt like a golden age. Her little kingdom hummed with peace and prosperity; she awoke each morning to a world so meticulously smoothed that even the most cynical pessimist could find no fault with it. True, Gerald remained a thousand miles away in Chicago, supervising the opening of "The Primrose Way." Fillmore had agreed to Ike's suggestion to premiere the play there, calling in Gerald—a former dramatist—to revise a struggling comedy at a local theater. Consequently, Gerald would be stuck on the spot for some time. While disappointing, Sally refused to let it depress her. Life, in every other respect, was perfection. Fillmore's enterprise was booming, Ginger's conscience was clear, she had secured a charming apartment, her new hat suited her perfectly, and "The Primrose Way" was a colossal hit. Chicago, according to Fillmore, had forgotten all national and local woes, riveting its entire population to the single problem of securing seats. The production had been, he claimed, the most terrifyingly stirring event since the Great Fire.

Above all, the mystery of Ginger's future had been solved. Ginger had joined the Fillmore Nicholas Theatrical Enterprises Ltd., a title Fillmore deemed unnecessarily long for a brass plate. Daily, Ginger could be found in the outer office, ostensibly reading the evening papers. His exact role remained vague; sometimes he felt like the man at the wheel, other times like a glorified—and barely so—office boy. Mostly, however, his duty was to herd the mob away from Fillmore, who sat in semi-regal splendor in the inner office, pondering grand schemes. Though Ginger occasionally wondered what fifty dollars a week bought him, his gratitude to Sally for securing the position was absolute. They met frequently, often as Ginger helped furnish Sally's new apartment. With boundless energy, he carried heavy chairs, claiming it kept him in condition.

"And what I mean to say is," Ginger paused, hauling a massive easy chair toward the third spot Sally had selected, "if I didn't sweat a bit helping you..."

"Ginger, desist!" Sally commanded.

"Yes, but honestly..."

"If you don't stop, I'll make you move that chair into the next room."

"Shall I?" Ginger rubbed his blistered hands. "Anything you say."

"Silly! Of course not. The other rooms are my bedroom, the bathroom, and the kitchen. What on earth would I want a lumbering chair there? Besides, I believe the first choice was the best."

"Back she goes, then?"

Sally frowned, deep in thought. Setting up house required considerable mental labor.

"No," she decided. "By the window is better." She looked at him remorsefully. "I'm giving you a lot of trouble."

"Trouble!" Ginger, accompanied by the chair, staggered across the room. "The way I look at it, you got me that job, and..."

"Stop!"

"Right ho... Still, you did, you know."

Sitting in the armchair, stretching her weary limbs, Sally watched Ginger work with a sense of vicarious fatigue. The room was already cozy; pictures hung, the carpet lay down, furniture stood neatly arranged. For the first time in three years of boarding-house drudgery, she felt the restful sensation of being truly at home. She had longed for a settled abode, a place to lock the door on herself. The apartment was small, but it was undoubtedly a haven. She scanned the room for flaws... until she froze.

"Hullo!" she exclaimed. "Where's that photograph of me? I'm sure I put it on the mantelpiece yesterday."

Exertion had flushed Ginger's face a brilliant crimson. He inspected the mantelpiece narrowly.

"No. No photograph here."

"I know there isn't. But it was there yesterday. Or was it? I know I meant to put it there. It's the most beautiful thing you ever saw. Not a bit like me; but what of that? They touch 'em up in the dark-room, you know. I value it because it looks the way I should like to look if I could."

"I've never had a beautiful photograph taken of myself," Ginger said solemnly, with gentle regret.

"Cheer up!"

"Oh, I don't mind. I only mentioned..."

"Ginger," Sally interrupted, "pardon me, but this chair is *not* right! It ought to be where it was at the beginning. Could you give your imitation of a pack-mule just once more? And after that, I'll make you some tea. If there's any tea—or milk—or cups."

"There are cups all right. I know, because I smashed two the day before yesterday. I'll nip round the corner for some milk, shall I?"

"Yes, please nip. All this hard work has taken it out of me terribly."

Over the tea table, Sally became inquisitive.

"What I can't understand about this job of yours, Ginger—which I was noble enough to secure—is the amount of leisure that seems to go with it. How is it that you spend your valuable time juggling with my furniture every day?"

"Oh, I can usually get off."

"But oughtn't you to be at your post? What do you do?"

Ginger stirred his tea thoughtfully. "Well, I sort of mess about, you know. I interview divers blighters, tell 'em your brother is out, take their names and addresses, and... oh, all that sort of thing."

"Does Fillmore consult you much?"

"He lets me read some of the plays sent in. Awful tosh most of them. Sometimes he sends me off to a vaudeville house to report on special acts, in case he wants to use them."

"For his revue?"

"Didn't you know? Oh, rather. A whacking big affair. Going to cut out the Follies."

"But—" Sally gasped. "My goodness!"

It was just like Fillmore to branch out into expensive schemes when he ought to be consolidating his small success. An inexhaustible fount of optimism bubbled eternally within him. "That's rather ambitious," she said.

"Yes. Ambitious sort of cove, your brother. Quite the Napoleon."

"I shall have to talk to him," Sally decided. She was annoyed. Everything had been peaceful and prosperous until he spoiled it. Now she would have to start worrying again.

"Of course," argued Ginger, "there's money in revues. Fellows make pots out of them over in London."

Sally shook her head. "It won't do. And I'll tell you another thing that won't do. This armchair. Of course it ought to be over by the window. You can see that yourself, can't you."

"Absolutely!" said Ginger, patiently preparing for action once more.

***

Sally's anxiety regarding her ebullient brother was not lessened by a telegram from Miss Winch in Chicago.

While Sally couldn't claim to fully understand the telegraphic syntax, there was a sinister suggestion in the message that decided her to investigate immediately. Tearing away from her furnishing joys, she rushed to the headquarters of Fillmore Nicholas Theatrical Enterprises Ltd. Upon arrival, she found Ginger absent from his customary post, replaced by a pimply youth of tender years who melted away at her name. Sally walked right in and found Fillmore with his feet on an untidy desk, studying what appeared to be costume designs.

"Ah, Sally!" he said in a distrait, tired voice. Prosperity was putting in its silent, deadly work on the Hope of the American Theatre. What had been a smooth fullness around the angle of the jaw was now frankly a double chin. He wore a new waistcoat, unbuttoned. "I am rather busy. Always glad to see you, but I am rather busy. I have a hundred things to attend to."

"Well, attend to me. That'll only make a hundred and one. Fill, what's all this I hear about a revue?"

Fillmore looked like a small boy caught in the act of stealing jam. He had been wondering what Sally would say and hoped she wouldn't hear until preparations were complete. Extremely fond of Sally, he knew her cautionary nature and dreaded her criticism.

"Oh yes, the revue!"

"It's no good saying 'Oh yes'! You know perfectly well it's a crazy idea."

"Really... these business matters... this interference..."

"I don't want to run your affairs for you, Fill, but that money of mine does make me a sort of partner, I suppose, and I think I have a right to raise a loud yell of agony when I see you risking it on a..."

"Pardon me," said Fillmore loftily, looking happier. "Let me explain. Women never understand business matters. Your money is tied up exclusively in 'The Primrose Way,' which, as you know, is a tremendous success. You have nothing whatever to worry about."

"I'm not worrying about the money. I'm worrying about you."

A tolerant smile played about Fillmore's face. "Don't be alarmed. I'm all right."

"You aren't all right. You've no business, when you've only just started, to rush into an enormous production. You can't afford it."

"My dear child, as I said before, women cannot understand these things. A man in my position can always command money for a new venture."

"Do you mean to say
