The prevailing wisdom suggests that the highest form of joy lies in the creation of joy within others. Consequently, when Bugs Butler awoke from his coma in Jersey City—some thirty hours after the disastrous bout detailed in the previous chapter—he should have felt a profound, quiet contentment. His inability to parry a short left hook followed immediately by a devastating right to the jaw had, it must be admitted, improved the fortunes of several individuals.

Mr. Lew Lucas, the victor, was visibly elated. So were his seconds, one of whom went so far as to plant a kiss upon his cheek. The majority of the crowd, having wagered heavily on the champion, were naturally delighted. Yet, Bugs Butler offered no rejoicing. To describe his peevish demeanor as a discordant note in the general carnival of victory would be an understatement. A heavy frown marred his features as he slouched from the ring, utterly devoid of triumph.

However, the happiness generated by the knockout continued to ripple outward. Two "Wise Guys," who had been unable to witness the fight in person, received the results via ticker tape and declared themselves five hundred dollars richer with exuberant pride. A pimpled office boy at the Fillmore Nicholas Theatrical Enterprises Ltd. caused quite a stir in the subway, whooping gleefully as he read the morning paper, for he, too, had benefited financially from the fragility of Mr. Butler's chin. Meanwhile, Sally, breakfasting in her modest apartment, consumed the details of the contender's demise with fierce satisfaction. While she was not a girl who harbored ill will toward many, she had cultivated a distinct and lively distaste for Bugs Butler.

Lew Lucas appeared to be a man perfectly suited to her tastes. Given the brief time at his disposal, he could not have avenged Ginger with greater thoroughness. Round one saw him divert attention to Mr. Butler's left eye; round two focused on the gentleman's body; and round three delivered the knockout. Could anyone have done more? Sally reasoned not, raising her coffee cup to toast Lew Lucas and hoping his old mother was immensely proud of him.

Just then, the telephone bell rang. Sally snatched up the receiver.
"Hullo?"
"Oh, hullo!" a voice replied.
"Ginger!" Sally cried, delight flooding her voice.
"I say, I'm awfully glad you're back," the voice stammered. "I only got your letter this morning. Found it at the boarding-house..."
"Ginger," Sally interrupted, "your voice is music, but I want to see you. Where are you?"
"I'm at a chemist's shop across the street. I was wondering if—"
"Come here at once!"
"I say, may I? I was just going to ask."
"You miserable creature, why haven't you been round to see me before?"
"Well, as a matter of fact, I haven't been going about much for the last day. You see..."
"I know. Of course." Sympathy quickened Sally's tone. She glanced sideways with approval and gratitude at the large portrait of Lew Lucas beaming down from the morning paper. "You poor thing! How are you?"
"Oh, all right, thanks."
"Well, hurry."
A slight pause occurred at the other end.
"I say."
"Well?"
"I'm not much to look at, you know."
"You never were. Stop talking and hurry over."
"I mean to say..."
Sally hung up the receiver firmly. She waited eagerly for a few minutes until footsteps echoed down the passage. They halted at her door, the bell chimed, and Sally flung it open only to recoil in consternation.
"Oh, Ginger!"
His statement regarding his appearance had been accurate. He gazed at her devotedly through an unblemished right eye, while the other was completely obscured by a puffy, dull-purple swelling. A massive bruise disfigured his left cheekbone, and he spoke with difficulty through swollen lips.
"It's all right, you know," he assured her.
"It isn't. It's awful! Oh, you poor darling!" Sally clenched her teeth viciously. "I wish he had killed him!"
"Eh?"
"I wish Lew Lucas—or whoever his name is—had murdered him. Brute!"
"Oh, I don't know, you know." Ginger's innate sense of fairness compelled him to defend his late employer. "He isn't a bad sort of chap, really. Bugs Butler, I mean."
"Do you seriously mean to stand there and tell me you don't loathe the creature?"
"Oh, he's all right. See his point of view, and all that. Can't blame him, if you come to think of it, for getting the wind up a bit in the circumstances. Bit thick, I mean to say—a sparring partner going at him like that. Naturally, he didn't think it much of a wheeze. It was my fault right along. Oughtn't to have done it, of course, but somehow, when he started making an ass of me and I knew you were looking on... well, it seemed a good idea to have a dash at doing something on my own. No right to, of course. A sparring partner isn't supposed..."
"Sit down," said Sally.
Ginger sat.
"Ginger," Sally said, "you're too good to live."
"Oh, I say!"
"I believe if someone sandbagged you and stole your watch and chain, you'd say there were faults on both sides or something. I'm just a cat, and I say I wish your beast of a Bugs Butler had perished miserably. I'd have gone and danced on his grave... But whatever made you go in for that sort of thing?"
"Well, it seemed the only job that was going at the moment. I've always done a goodish bit of boxing and I was very fit, and it looked to me rather an opening. Gave me something to get along with. You get paid quite fairly decently, you know, and it's rather a jolly life..."
"Jolly? Being hammered about like that?"
"Oh, you don't notice it much. I've always enjoyed scrapping rather. And, you see, when your brother gave me the push..."
Sally uttered an exclamation.
"What an extraordinary thing it is—I went all the way out to White Plains that afternoon to find Fillmore and tackle him about that and I didn't say a word about it. And I haven't seen or been able to get hold of him since."
"No? Busy sort of cove, your brother."
"Why did Fillmore let you go?"
"Let me go? Oh, you mean... well, there was a sort of mix-up. A kind of misunderstanding."
"What happened?"
"Oh, it was nothing. Just a..."
"What happened?"
Ginger's disfigured countenance betrayed embarrassment. He looked awkwardly about the room.
"It's not worth talking about."
"It is worth talking about. I've a right to know. It was I who sent you to Fillmore..."
"Now that," said Ginger, "was jolly decent of you."
"Don't interrupt! I sent you to Fillmore, and he had no business to let you go without saying a word to me. What happened?"
Ginger twiddled his fingers unhappily.
"Well, it was rather unfortunate. You see, his wife—I don't know if you know her?...
"Of course I know her."
"Why, yes, you would, wouldn't you? Your brother's wife, I mean," said Ginger acutely. "Though, as a matter of fact, you often find sisters-in-law who won't have anything to do with one another. I know a fellow..."
"Ginger," said Sally, "it's no good your thinking you can get out of telling me by rambling off on other subjects. I'm grim and resolute and relentless, and I mean to get this story out of you if I have to use a corkscrew. Fillmore's wife, you were saying..."
Ginger came back reluctantly to the main theme.
"Well, she came into the office one morning, and we started fooling about..."
"Fooling about?"
"Well, kind of chivvying each other."
"Chivvying?"
"At least I was."
"You were what?"
"Sort of chasing her a bit, you know."
Sally regarded this apostle of frivolity with amazement.
"What do you mean?"
Ginger's embarrassment increased.
"The thing was, you see, she happened to trickle in rather quietly when I happened to be looking at something, and I didn't know she was there till she suddenly grabbed it..."
"Grabbed what?"
"The thing. The thing I happened to be looking at. She bagged it... collared it... took it away from me, you know, and wouldn't give it back and generally started to rot about a bit, so I rather began to chivvy her to some extent, and I'd just caught her when your brother happened to roll in. I suppose," said Ginger, putting two and two together, "he had really come with her to the office and had happened to hang back for a minute or two, to talk to somebody or something... well, of course, he was considerably fed to see me apparently doing jiu-jitsu with his wife. Enough to rattle any man, if you come to think of it," said Ginger, ever fair-minded. "Well, he didn't say anything
