To comprehend the architecture of this new day, one must first understand the absolute exhaustion of the preceding night. The two girls emerged into a world that had momentarily ceased to breathe, finding no living soul on their return to the rectory. They moved through the corridors as ghosts, slipping inside without a sound, ascending the stairs unheard by the waking house. The grey, breaking morning provided the scant illumination they required, casting long, uncertain shadows across the unfamiliar floorboards. Shirley sought her couch immediately; though the room was strange—a place she had never known as a sanctuary—and though the recent scene was unparalleled in its capacity to terrify and excite, scarce had her head touched the pillow before a deep, restorative sleep claimed her. It silenced her senses, washing away the tremors of the storm.

Perfect health was Shirley's enviable portion. Warm-hearted and sympathetic though she was, she possessed a constitution that refused to be broken by passion. Powerful emotions could rouse and sway her spirit without draining it dry. The tempest had shaken her while it raged, but it had left her elasticity unbent, her freshness unblighted. For every day that brought stimulating emotion, every night yielded recreating rest. Caroline, observing her sleeping form, read the profound serenity of Shirley's mind in the beauty of her happy countenance.

For herself, however, being of a different temperament, Caroline could not sleep. The mere commonplace excitement of the tea-drinking and school-gathering would have sufficed to keep her restless all night; the effect of the terrible drama enacted before her eyes was unlikely to leave her for days. It was vain even to try to maintain a recumbent posture. She sat up by Shirley's side, counting the slow, agonizing minutes, watching the June sun mount the heavens with a feverish intensity.

Life wastes fast in such vigils as Caroline had lately kept too often—vigils during which the mind, having no pleasant food to nourish it, no manna of hope, no hived-honey of joyful memories, tries to subsist on the meagre diet of wishes. Failing to derive either delight or support from these empty cravings, and feeling itself ready to perish with a gnawing want, the mind turns to philosophy, to resolution, to resignation. It calls upon all these gods for aid, calls vainly—is unheard, unhelped, and languishes.

Caroline was a Christian; therefore, in trouble, she framed prayers according to the Christian creed, offering them with deep earnestness, begging for patience, strength, relief. This world, however, is the scene of trial and probation; and, seeing no favorable result from her petitions, it seemed to her that they were unheard and unaccepted. She believed, sometimes, that God had turned His face from her. At moments she was a Calvinist, and sinking into the gulf of religious despair, she saw darkening over her the doom of reprobation.

Most people have periods in their lives when they feel thus forsaken—when, having long hoped against hope, they see the day of fruition deferred until their hearts truly sicken within them. This is a terrible hour, yet it is often the darkest point which precedes the rise of day—that turn of the year when the icy January wind carries over the waste at once the dirge of departing winter and the prophecy of coming spring. The perishing birds, however, cannot thus understand the blast before which they shiver; and as little can the suffering soul recognize, in the climax of its affliction, the dawn of its deliverance. Yet, let whoever grieves still cling fast to love and faith in God. God will never deceive, never finally desert Him. "Whom He loveth, He chasteneth." These words are true, and should not be forgotten.

The household was finally astir; the servants were up; the shutters were thrown open below. Caroline, as she quitted the couch—which had been but a thorny one to her—felt that revival of spirits which the return of day and action gives to all but the wholly despairing or actually dying. She dressed herself, as usual, with meticulous care, arranging her hair and attire so that nothing of the forlornness she felt at heart should be visible externally. When both were dressed, Shirley looked as fresh as ever, only that Miss Keeldar's eyes were lively, and Miss Helstone's languid.

"To-day I shall have much to say to Moore," were Shirley's first words; and you could see in her face that life was full of interest, expectation, and occupation for her. "He will have to undergo cross-examination," she added. "I dare say he thinks he has outwitted me cleverly. And this is the way men deal with women—still concealing danger from them, thinking, I suppose, to spare them pain. They imagined we little knew where we were to-night. We *know* they little conjectured where we were. Men, I believe, fancy women's minds something like those of children. Now, that is a mistake."

This was said as she stood at the glass, training her naturally waved hair into curls, twining it round her fingers. She took up the theme again five minutes later, as Caroline fastened her dress and clasped her girdle.

"If men could see us as we really are, they would be a little amazed; but the cleverest, the acutest men are often under an illusion about women. They do not read them in a true light; they misapprehend them, both for good and evil. Their good woman is a queer thing, half doll, half angel; their bad woman almost always a fiend. Then to hear them fall into ecstasies with each other's creations—worshipping the heroine of such a poem, novel, drama—thinking it fine, divine! Fine and divine it may be, but often quite artificial—false as the rose in my best bonnet there. If I spoke all I think on this point, if I gave my real opinion of some first-rate female characters in first-rate works, where should I be? Dead under a cairn of avenging stones in half an hour."

"Shirley, you chatter so, I can't fasten you. Be still. And, after all, authors' heroines are almost as good as authoresses' heroes."

"Not at all. Women read men more truly than men read women. I'll prove that in a magazine paper some day when I've time; only it will never be inserted. It will be 'declined with thanks,' and left for me at the publisher's."

"To be sure. You could not write cleverly enough. You don't know enough. You are not learned, Shirley."

"God knows I can't contradict you, Cary; I'm as ignorant as a stone. There's one comfort, however: you are not much better."

They descended to breakfast.

"I wonder how Mrs. Pryor and Hortense Moore have passed the night," said Caroline, as she made the coffee. "Selfish being that I am, I never thought of either of them till just now. They will have heard all the tumult; Fieldhead and the cottage are so near; and Hortense is timid in such matters—so, no doubt, is Mrs. Pryor."

"Take my word for it, Lina, Moore will have contrived to get his sister out of the way. She went home with Miss Mann. He will have quartered her there for the night. As to Mrs. Pryor, I own I am uneasy about her; but in another half-hour we will be with her."

By this time, the news of what had happened at the Hollow was spread all over the neighborhood. Fanny, who had been to Fieldhead to fetch the milk, returned in panting haste with tidings that there had been a battle in the night at Mr. Moore's mill, and that some said twenty men were killed. Eliza, during Fanny's absence, had been apprised by the butcher's boy that the mill was burnt to the ground. Both women rushed into the parlour to announce these terrible facts to the ladies, terminating their clear and accurate narrative by the assertion that they were sure the master must have been in it all. He and Thomas, the clerk, they were confident, must have gone last night to join Mr. Moore and the soldiers. Mr. Malone, too, had not been heard of at his lodgings since yesterday afternoon; and Joe Scott's wife and family were in the greatest distress, wondering what had become of their head.

Scarcely was this information imparted when a knock at the kitchen door announced the Fieldhead errand-boy, arrived in hot haste, bearing a billet from Mrs. Pryor. It was hurriedly written, urging Miss Keeldar to return directly, as the neighborhood and the house seemed likely to be all in confusion, and orders would have to be given which the mistress of the hall alone could regulate. In a postscript, it was entreated that Miss Helstone might not be left alone at the rectory. She had better, it was suggested, accompany Miss Keeldar.

"There are not two opinions on that head," said Shirley, as she tied on her own bonnet, and then ran to fetch Caroline's.

"But what will Fanny and Eliza do? And if my uncle returns?"

"Your uncle will not return yet; he has other fish to fry. He will be galloping backwards and forwards from Briarfield to Stilbro' all day, rousing the magistrates in the court-house and the officers at the barracks; and Fanny and Eliza can have in Joe Scott's and the clerk's wives to bear them company. Besides, of course
