The rain lashed against the leaded glass of the library windows, a rhythmic drumming that felt, to Margaret Hale, like the frantic, indifferent heartbeat of the industrial age—thoroughly indifferent to the quiet suffocations of its women. She stood by the tea-table in a light-coloured muslin gown, the fabric stained faintly with the pink of her own flushed cheeks, her round ivory hands moving with a dainty, noiseless precision among the cups. A bracelet encircled one tapering arm, threatening to slide down over her wrist; she pushed it up impatiently until it tightened her soft flesh, then marked the loosening, the inevitable fall. It was a futile gesture, a pantomime of control in a world that demanded submission.

Mr. Thornton watched the replacement of this troublesome ornament with far more attention than he listened to her father. His gaze was fixed on the mechanics of her constraint, fascinated by the way she fought the weight of gold against the fluidity of her skin. He could almost have exclaimed, "There it goes again!" The sight of her struggling with her own adornment mirrored the struggle he perceived in the very air of the room: a tension between the raw, crushing power of industry and the fragile, enduring humanity trying to survive within it.

He observed the contrast between the two men with a clarity that cut through the dim light. Mr. Hale was slight, appearing taller than he was due to the economy of his frame, his face a map of soft, wavering lines that trembled with every fluctuating emotion. His eyelids were large and arched, lending his eyes a peculiar, almost feminine languor. In stark opposition stood Mr. Thornton, a man of massive, solid frame whose straight brows fell low over clear, deep-set eyes that seemed intent on penetrating the very core of truth. Where Hale's features were carved from marble yet softened by dreams, Thornton's were defined by firm, uncompromising lines, particularly about the lips which were slightly compressed. When a rare, bright smile broke through the severity of his expression, it transformed his face instantly from a mask of resolve into a beacon of honest, fearless joy—a light Margaret found herself drawn to, inexplicable and magnetic.

"And this imagination of power, this practical realisation of a gigantic thought, came out of one man's brain in our good town," Mr. Thornton declared, his voice resonant with the confidence of someone who believed in the inevitability of progress. "That very man has it within him to mount, step by step, on each wonder he achieves to higher marvels still. And I'll be bound to say, we have many among us who, if he were gone, could spring into the breach and carry on the war which compels, and shall compel, all material power to yield to science."

His words hung in the air, heavy with the arrogance of triumph. Margaret looked up, her eyes wide with inquiring wonder as he quoted the old ballad of Chevy Chase, bridging the gap between the cog-wheels of the factory floor and the romanticized chivalry of the past.

"It is no boast of mine," replied Mr. Thornton, dismissing the notion of pride with a wave of his hand. "It is plain matter-of-fact. I won't deny that I am proud of belonging to a town—or perhaps I should rather say a district—the necessities of which give birth to such grandeur of conception. I would rather be a man toiling, suffering—nay, failing and successless—here, than lead a dull prosperous life in the old worn grooves of what you call more aristocratic society down in the South, with their slow days of careless ease. One may be clogged with honey and unable to rise and fly."

"You are mistaken," said Margaret, the defense of her homeland rising in her throat with a vehemence that brought the color into her cheeks and angry tears to her eyes. "You do not know anything about the South. If there is less adventure or less progress—from the gambling spirit of trade, which seems requisite to force out these wonderful inventions—there is less suffering also. I see men here going about in the streets who look ground down by some pinching sorrow or care—who are not only sufferers but haters. Now, in the South we have our poor, but there is not that terrible expression in their countenances of a sullen sense of injustice which I see here. You do not know the South, Mr. Thornton," she concluded, collapsing into a determined silence, furious with herself for having spoken so freely, exposing the wounds she tried so hard to hide.

"And may I say you do not know the North?" asked he, his tone shifting to an inexpressible gentleness as he sensed the pain he had caused. She remained resolutely silent, yearning after the lovely haunts of Hampshire with a passion that made her feel her voice would be unsteady and trembling if she dared to speak.

"At any rate, Mr. Thornton," said Mrs. Hale, attempting to steer the conversation toward safer ground, "you will allow that Milton is a much more smoky, dirty town than you will ever meet with in the South."

"I'm afraid I must give up its cleanliness," said Mr. Thornton, flashing a quick, gleaming smile that belied the seriousness of his stance. "But we are bidden by parliament to burn our own smoke; so I suppose, like good little children, we shall do as we are bid—some time."

"But I think you told me you had altered your chimneys so as to consume the smoke, did you not?" asked Mr. Hale.

"Mine were altered by my own will, before parliament meddled with the affair. It was an immediate outlay, but it repays me in the saving of coal. I'm not sure whether I should have done it, if I had waited until the act was passed. At any rate, I should have waited to be informed against and fined, and given all the trouble in yielding that I legally could. But all laws which depend for their enforcement upon informers and fines, become inert from the odiousness of the machinery. I doubt if there has been a chimney in Milton informed against for five years past, although some are constantly sending out one-third of their coal in what is called here unparliamentary smoke."

"I only know it is impossible to keep the muslin blinds clean here above a week together; and at Helstone we have had them up for a month or more, and they have not looked dirty at the end of that time. And as for hands—Margaret, how many times did you say you had washed your hands this morning before twelve o'clock? Three times, was it not?"

"Yes, mamma."

"You seem to have a strong objection to acts of parliament and all legislation affecting your mode of management down here at Milton," said Mr. Hale.

"Yes, I have; and many others have as well. And with justice, I think. The whole machinery—I don't mean the wood and iron machinery now—of the cotton trade is so new that it is no wonder if it does not work well in every part all at once. Seventy years ago what was it? And now what it is not? Raw, crude materials came together; men of the same level, as regarded education and station, took suddenly the different position of masters and men, owing to the motherwit, as regarded opportunities and probabilities, which distinguished some, and made them far-seeing as to what great future lay concealed in that rude model of Sir Richard Arkwright's. The rapid development of what might be called a new trade, gave those early masters enormous power of wealth and command. I don't mean merely over the workmen; I mean over purchasers—over the whole world's market. Why, I may give you, as an instance, an advertisement, inserted not fifty years ago in a Milton paper, that so-and-so (one of the half-dozen calico-printers of the time) would close his warehouse at noon each day; therefore, that all purchasers must come before that hour. Fancy a man dictating in this manner the time when he would sell and when he would not sell. Now, I believe, if a good customer chose to come at midnight, I should get up, and stand hat in hand to receive his orders."

Margaret's lip curled, a flash of defiance in the dim light, but she was compelled to listen; she could no longer abstract herself in her own thoughts. The sheer audacity of the statement, the casual dismissal of human dignity in favor of commercial efficiency, gnawed at her.

"I only name such things to show what almost unlimited power the manufacturers had about the beginning of this century. The men were rendered dizzy by it. Because a man was successful in his ventures, there was no reason that in all other things his mind should be well-balanced. On the contrary, his sense of justice, and his simplicity, were often utterly smothered under the glut of wealth that came down upon him; and they tell strange tales of the wild extravagance of living indulged in on gala-days by those early cotton-lords. There can be no doubt, too, of the tyranny they exercised over their work-people. You know the proverb, Mr. Hale, 'Set a beggar on horseback, and he'll ride to the devil,'—well, some of these early manufacturers did ride to the devil in a magnificent style—crushing human bone and flesh under their horses' hoofs without remorse. But by-and-by came a reaction; there were more factories, more masters; more men were wanted. The power of masters and men became more evenly balanced; and now the battle is pretty fairly waged between us. We will hardly submit to the decision of an umpire, much less to the interference of a medd
