The rain lashed against the leaded glass of the library windows, a rhythmic drumming that felt, to Margaret Hale, like the frantic, indifferent heartbeat of a city that refused to acknowledge the quiet suffocation of its women. Yet within this confined sanctuary, where the walls and curtains seemed to expand until they swallowed the horizon, a peculiar alchemy was taking place. Mrs. Hale watched her daughter with a mixture of amusement and maternal fascination, observing Margaret's anticipation of the Thornton dinner party with the wide-eyed simplicity of a child awaiting a promised treat. In the monotonous stagnation of illness, both mother and daughter had lost their sense of proportion; the domestic sphere felt vast and impenetrable, while the world beyond remained a terrifying abstraction. For Mrs. Hale, whose youthful vanities had been smothered by the crushing weight of poverty and clerical modesty, the prospect of seeing Margaret dressed for society was a thrilling resurrection of a dead self. She hovered anxiously over the wardrobe, her questions sharp with insecurity.

"Then you think you shall wear your white silk?" she pressed, her voice tight. "Are you sure it will fit? It's nearly a year since Edith was married!"

"Oh, yes, mamma!" Margaret replied, her tone lightening the tension. "Mrs. Murray made it, and it's sure to be right; it may be a straw's breadth shorter or longer-waisted, according to my having grown fat or thin. But I don't think I've altered in the least."

"Perhaps you'd better let Dixon see it," Mrs. Hale suggested, her eyes darting to the moth-eaten corners of the room. "It may have gone yellow with lying by."

"If you like, mamma. But if the worst comes to the worst, I've a very nice pink gauze which Aunt Shaw gave me, only two or three months before Edith was married. That can't have gone yellow."

"No! but it may have faded."

"Well! then I've a green silk. I feel more as if it was the embarrassment of riches."

"I wish I knew what you ought to wear," Mrs. Hale confessed, her nerves fraying.

Margaret's demeanor shifted instantly, the gravity of the moment settling over her. "Shall I go and put them on one after another, mamma, and then you could see which you liked best?"

"But—yes! perhaps that will be best."

Off went Margaret. She was tempted to indulge in the theatricality of the occasion—to make her rich white silk balloon out into a grotesque cheese, or to retreat backward from her mother as if she were a sovereign queen—but when she sensed that such whims were viewed as interruptions to the serious business of survival, she suppressed them, becoming grave and sedate. What drove the world to fuss so relentlessly over her attire, she could not comprehend. Yet later that afternoon, when she named her engagement to Bessy Higgins, the servant girl's reaction was immediate and electric.

"Dear! and are you going to dine at Thornton's at Marlborough Mills?" Bessy exclaimed, her voice rising.

"Yes, Bessy. Why are you so surprised?"

"Oh, I dunno. But they visit wi' a' th' first folk in Milton."

"And you don't think we're quite the first folk in Milton, eh, Bessy?" Margaret teased gently.

Bessy's cheeks flushed, the color returning to her pale face as her thought was effortlessly read. "Well," she said, her voice dropping to a conspiratorial whisper, "yo' see, they thinken a deal o' money here; and I reckon yo've not getten much."

"No," said Margaret, her expression softening. "That's very true. But we are educated people, and have lived amongst educated people. Is there anything so wonderful, in our being asked out to dinner by a man who owns himself inferior to my father by coming to him to be instructed? I don't mean to blame Mr. Thornton. Few drapers' assistants, as he was once, could have made themselves what he is."

"But can yo' give dinners back, in yo're small house? Thornton's house is three times as big."

"Well, I think we could manage to give Mr. Thornton a dinner back, as you call it. Perhaps not in such a large room, nor with so many people. But I don't think we've thought about it at all in that way."

"I never thought yo'd be dining with Thorntons," Bessy repeated, awe coloring her features. "Why, the mayor hissel' dines there; and the members of Parliament and all."

"I think, I could support the honour of meeting the mayor of Milton."

"But them ladies dress so grand!" Bessy added, casting an anxious glance at Margaret's plain print gown, which her Milton-trained eyes appraised at a mere sevenpence a yard.

Margaret's face dimpled into a merry laugh. "Thank you, Bessy, for thinking so kindly about my looking nice among all the smart people. But I've plenty of grand gowns,—a week ago, I should have said they were far too grand for anything I should ever want here. But as I'm to dine at Mr. Thornton's, and perhaps to meet the mayor, I shall put on my very best gown, you may be sure."

"What win yo' wear?" Bessy asked, a note of relief entering her voice.

"White silk," said Margaret. "A gown I had for a cousin's wedding, a year ago."

"That'll do!" Bessy declared, sinking back into her chair. "I should be loth to have yo' looked down upon."

"Oh! I'll be fine enough, if that will save me from being looked down upon in Milton."

"I wish I could see you dressed up," Bessy whispered, her gaze drifting upward. "I reckon, yo're not what folk would ca' pretty; yo've not red and white enough for that. But dun yo' know, I ha' dreamt of yo', long afore ever I seed yo'."

"Nonsense, Bessy!"

"Ay, but I did. Yo'r very face,—looking wi' yo'r clear steadfast eyes out o' th' darkness, wi' yo'r hair blown off from yo'r brow, and going out like rays round yo'r forehead, which was just as smooth and straight as it is now,—and yo' always came to give me strength, which I seemed to gather out o' yo'r deep comforting eyes,—and yo' was drest in shining raiment—just as yo'r going to be drest. So, yo' see, it was yo'!"

"Nay, Bessy," said Margaret, gently, "it was but a dream."

"And why might na I dream a dream in my affliction as well as others? Did not many a one i' the Bible? Ay, and see visions too! Why, even my father thinks a deal o' dreams! I tell yo' again, I saw yo' as plainly, coming swiftly towards me, wi' yo'r hair blown back wi' the very swiftness o' the motion, just like the way it grows, a little standing off like; and the white shining dress on yo've getten to wear. Let me come and see yo' in it. I want to see yo' and touch yo' as in very deed yo' were in my dream."

"My dear Bessy, it is quite a fancy of yours."

"Fancy or no fancy,—yo've come, as I knew yo' would, when I saw yo'r movement in my dream,—and when yo're here about me, I reckon I feel easier in my mind, and comforted, just as a fire comforts one on a dree day. Yo' said it were on th' twenty-first; please God, I'll come and see yo'."

"Oh Bessy! you may come and welcome; but don't talk so—it really makes me sorry. It does indeed."

"Then I'll keep it to mysel', if I bite my tongue out. Not but what it's true for all that."

Margaret fell silent. Finally, she spoke. "Let us talk about it sometimes, if you think it true. But not now. Tell me, has your father turned out?"

"Ay!" Bessy answered heavily, her spirit collapsing under the weight of recent news. "He and many another,—all Hamper's men,—and many a one besides. Th' women are as bad as th' men, in their savageness, this time. Food is high,—and they mun have food for their childer, I reckon. Suppose Thorntons sent 'em their dinner out,—th' same money, spent on potatoes and meal, would keep many a crying baby quiet, and hush up its mother's heart for a bit!"

"Don't speak so!" Margaret cried, horror striking her. "You'll make me feel wicked and guilty in going to this dinner."

"No!" Bessy insisted, her voice gaining a fierce, defiant edge. "Some's pre-elected to sumptuous feasts, and purple and fine linen,—may be yo're one on 'em. Others toil and moil all their lives long—and the very dogs are not pitiful in our days, as they were in the days of Lazarus. But if yo' ask me to cool yo're tongue wi' th' tip of my finger, I'll come across the great gulf to yo' just for th' thought o' what yo've been to me here."

"Bessy; you
