The rain lashed against the leaded glass of the library windows, a rhythmic drumming that felt, to Margaret Hale, like the frantic, indifferent heartbeat of a city that had forgotten the quiet suffocation of its women. She sat at her mahogany desk, the heavy scent of beeswax and damp wool filling the room, her gaze fixed upon the thick sheaf of letters that had arrived by the morning post. They were from Mr. Lennox, his sprawling, confident script detailing his latest thoughts on literature and the boundaries of affection.

Margaret traced the edge of the parchment with a silver letter-opener, her movements slow and deliberate. Lennox was a man of undeniable erudition, yet his proposals were suffocated by the very patriarchal complacency she so deeply despised. He wrote to her of friendship sliding imperceptibly into love, positioning himself as the benevolent instructor to her "undefeated resolution to admire only the right things."

"The right things," she murmured aloud, the words tasting like ash. What he meant, of course, was the established canon—the texts elevated by centuries of wealthy, privileged men who saw their own reflections in the exploits of conquerors and the musings of comfortable philosophers.

She turned mentally to the other letter, the one that burned brighter than any ink on paper. Mr. Thornton. In Lennox's case, there had been an intervening stage of friendship, a bridge crossed and immediately regretted. But with Thornton, there was no bridge. Their intercourse had been one continued series of opposition. His opinions clashed with hers, and indeed, she had never perceived that he had cared for her opinions as belonging to her, the individual. As far as they defied his rock-like power of character, his passion-strength, he seemed to throw them off from him with contempt, until she felt the weariness of the exertion of making useless protests.

Now, he had come, in this strange, wild, passionate way, to make known his love. Even before he left the room—and certainly not five minutes after—the clear conviction had dawned upon her, shining bright and terrible, that he did love her; that he had loved her; that he would love her. She shrank and shuddered as under the fascination of some great power, repugnant to her whole previous life. She crept away, hiding from his idea. But it was of no use. To parody a line out of Fairfax's *Tasso*:

"His strong idea wandered through her thought."

She disliked him the more for having mastered her inner will. How dared he say that he would love her still, even though she shook him off with contempt? She wished she had spoken more—stronger. Sharp, decisive speeches came thronging into her mind, now that it was too late to utter them. The deep impression made by the interview was like that of a horror in a dream; that will not leave the room although we waken up, and rub our eyes, and force a stiff, rigid smile upon our lips. It is there—there, cowering and gibbering, with fixed ghastly eyes, in some corner of the chamber, listening to hear whether we dare to breathe of its presence to any one. And we dare not; poor cowards that we are!

And so she shuddered away from the threat of his enduring love. What did he mean? Had she not the power to daunt him? She would see. It was more daring than became a man to threaten her so. Did he ground it upon the miserable yesterday? If need were, she would do the same tomorrow—by a crippled beggar, willingly and gladly—but by him, she would do it, just as bravely, in spite of his deductions, and the cold slime of woman's impertinence. She did it because it was right, and simple, and true to save where she could save; even to try to save. *Fais ce que dois, advienne que pourra.*

Hitherto she had not stirred from where he had left her; no outward circumstances had roused her out of the trance of thought in which she had been plunged by his last words, and by the look of his deep, intent, passionate eyes, as their flames had made her own fall before them. She went to the window, and threw it open, to dispel the oppression which hung around her. Then she went and opened the door, with a sort of impetuous wish to shake off the recollection of the past hour, in the company of others, or in active exertion. But all was profoundly hushed in the noonday stillness of a house, where an invalid catches the unrefreshing sleep that is denied to the night-hours. Margaret would not be alone. What should she do? "Go and see Bessy Higgins, of course," thought she, as the recollection of the message sent the night before flashed into her mind. And away she went.

When she got there, she found Bessy lying on the settle, moved close to the fire, though the day was sultry and oppressive. She was laid down quite flat, as if resting languidly after some paroxysm of pain. Margaret felt sure she ought to have the greater freedom of breathing which a more sitting posture would procure; and, without a word, she raised her up, and so arranged the pillows, that Bessy was more at ease, though very languid.

"I thought I should na' ha' seen yo' again," said she, at last, looking wistfully in Margaret's face.

"I'm afraid you're much worse. But I could not have come yesterday, my mother was so ill—for many reasons," said Margaret, colouring.

"You'd m'appen think I went beyond my place in sending Mary for yo'. But the wraglin' and the loud voices had just torn me to pieces, and I thought when father left, oh! if I could just hear her voice, reading me some words o' peace and promise, I could die away into the silence and rest o' God, just as a baby is hushed up to sleep by its mother's lullaby."

"Shall I read you a chapter, now?"

"Ay, do! M'appen I shan't listen to th' sense, at first; it will seem far away—but when yo' come to words I like—to th' comforting texts—it'll seem close in my ear, and going through me as it were."

Margaret began. Bessy tossed to and fro. If, by an effort, she attended for one moment, it seemed as though she were convulsed into double restlessness the next. At last, she burst out: "Don't go on reading. It's no use. I'm blaspheming all the time in my mind, wi' thinking angrily on what canna be helped.—Yo'd hear of th' riot, m'appen, yesterday at Marlborough Mills? Thornton's factory, yo' know."

"Your father was not there, was he?" said Margaret colouring deeply.

"Not he. He'd ha' given his right hand if it had never come to pass. It's that that's fretting me. He's fairly knocked down in his mind by it. It's no use telling him, fools will always break out o' bounds. Yo' never saw a man so downhearted as he is."

"But why?" asked Margaret. "I don't understand."

"Why, yo' see, he's a committee-man on this special strike. Th' Union appointed him because, though I say it as shouldn't say it, he's reckoned a deep chap, and true to th' back-bone. And he and t'other committee-men laid their plans. They were to hou'd together through thick and thin; what the major part thought, t'others were to think, whether they would or no. And above all there was to be no going again the law of the land. Folk would go with them if they saw them striving and starving wi' dumb patience; but if there was once any noise o' fighting and struggling—even wi' knobsticks—all was up, as they know by the experience of many, and many a time before. They would try and get speech o' th' knobsticks, and coax 'em, and reason wi' 'em, and m'appen warn 'em off; but whatever came, the Committee charged all members o' th' Union to lie down and die, if need were, without striking a blow; and then they reckoned they were sure o' carrying th' public with them. And besides all that, Committee knew they were right in their demand, and they didn't want to have right all mixed up wi' wrong, till folk can't separate it, no more nor I can the physic-powder from the jelly yo' gave me to mix it in; jelly is much the biggest, but powder tastes it all through. Well, I've told yo' at length about this'n, but I am tired out. Yo' just think for yor'sel, what it mun be for father to have a' his work undone, and by such a fool as Boucher, who must needs go right again the orders of Committee, and ruin th' strike, just as bad as if he meant to be a Judas. Eh! but father giv'd it him last night! He went so far as to say, he'd go and tell police where they might find th' ringleader o' th' riot; he'd give him up to th' mill-owners to do what they would wi' him. He'd show the world that th' real leaders o' the strike were not such as Boucher,
