The rain lashed against the leaded glass of the library windows, a rhythmic drumming that felt, to Margaret Hale, like the frantic, indifferent heartbeat of a city that cared nothing for the quiet suffocation of its women. She sat at her small, slightly-built desk, the heavy scent of beeswax and damp wool filling the room, her gaze fixed upon the empty space where Mrs. Thornton had stood moments before. Every step she took in this house echoed, a physical manifestation of her agitation, but she forced herself to remain still until she heard the sound of the latch lifting and the door closing securely behind her mistress. Only then did she rise, compelling her memory to replay the conversation, speech by speech, dissecting the words until they lost their sting.

"At any rate, her words do not touch me," she murmured aloud, the words tasting like ash. "They fall off from me; for I am innocent of all the motives she attributes to me. But still, it is hard to think that any one—any woman—can believe all this of another so easily. It is hard and sad. Where I have done wrong, she does not accuse me—she does not know. He never told her: I might have known he would not!"

She lifted her head, a flicker of pride igniting within her at the delicacy of feeling Mr. Thornton had displayed, even in his rejection. Then, a new thought, sharp and invasive, cut through her resolve. She pressed her hands tightly together, her knuckles white.

"He, too, must take poor Frederick for some lover." The word passed through her mind, bringing a flush to her cheeks that burned hotter than the shame. "I see it now. It is not merely that he knows of my falsehood, but he believes that some one else cares for me; and that I... Oh dear!—oh dear! What shall I do? What do I mean? Why do I care what he thinks, beyond the mere loss of his good opinion as regards my telling the truth or not? I cannot tell. But I am very miserable! Oh, how unhappy this last year has been! I have passed out of childhood into old age. I have had no youth—no womanhood; the hopes of womanhood have closed for me—for I shall never marry; and I anticipate cares and sorrows just as if I were an old woman, and with the same tearful spirit. I am weary of this continual call upon me for strength. I could bear up for papa; because that is a natural, pious duty. And I think I could bear up against—at any rate, I could have the energy to resent, Mrs. Thornton's unjust, impertinent suspicions. But it is hard to feel how completely he must misunderstand me. What has happened to make me so morbid to-day? I do not know. I only know I cannot help it. I must give way sometimes. No, I will not though," she said, springing to her feet with a sudden surge of defiance. "I will not—I *will* not think of myself and my own position. I won't examine into my own feelings. It would be of no use now. Some time, if I live to be an old woman, I may sit over the fire, and looking into the embers, see the life that might have been."

All this time she was hastily putting on her things to go out, only stopping from time to time to wipe her eyes, with an impatient gesture at the tears that would come again, in spite of all her bravery.

"I dare say there's many a woman makes as sad a mistake as I have done, and only finds it out too late. And how proudly and impertinently I spoke to him that day! But I did not know then. It has come upon me little by little, and I don't know where it began. Now I won't give way. I shall find it difficult to behave in the same way to him, with this miserable consciousness upon me; but I will be very calm and very quiet, and say very little. But, to be sure, I may not see him; he keeps out of our way evidently. That would be worse than all. And yet no wonder that he avoids me, believing what he must about me."

She stepped out into the grey afternoon, going rapidly towards the country, trying to drown the rising tide of reflection in the swiftness of her motion.

As she stood on the doorstep at her return, her father came up, his voice warm with relief.

"Good girl!" said he. "You've been to Mrs. Boucher's. I was just meaning to go there, if I had time, before dinner."

"No, papa; I have not," said Margaret, reddening. "I never thought about her. But I will go directly after dinner; I will go while you are taking your nap."

Accordingly Margaret went. Mrs. Boucher was very ill; really ill—not merely ailing. The kind and sensible neighbor who had come the previous day seemed to have taken charge of everything, her presence a sturdy anchor in the chaos. Some of the children were gone to the neighbors; Mary Higgins had fetched the three youngest at dinner-time; and since then Nicholas had gone for the doctor. He had not returned yet; Mrs. Boucher was dying, and there was nothing to do but wait. Margaret thought that she should like to hear his opinion, and that she could not do better than go and see the Higginses in the meantime. She might then possibly hear whether Nicholas had been able to make his application to Mr. Thornton.

She found Nicholas busily engaged in making a penny spin on the dresser, for the amusement of three little children who clung to him in a fearless manner. He, as well as they, was smiling at a good long spin; and Margaret thought that the happy look of interest in his occupation was a good sign. When the penny finally stopped spinning, "little Johnnie" began to cry.

"Come to me," said Margaret, taking him off the dresser and holding him in her arms; she held her watch to his ear, while she asked Nicholas if he had seen Mr. Thornton.

The look on his face changed instantly, shifting from playful engagement to a grim, guarded expression.

"Ay!" said he. "I've seen and heerd too much on him."

"He refused you, then?" said Margaret, sorrowfully.

"To be sure. I knew he'd do it all along. It's no good expecting marcy at the hands o' them measters. Yo'r a stranger and a foreigner, and aren't likely to know their ways; but I knowed it."

"I am sorry I asked you. Was he angry? He did not speak to you as Hamper did, did he?"

"He weren't o'er-civil!" said Nicholas, spinning the penny again, as much for his own amusement as for that of the children. "Never yo' fret, I'm only where I was. I'll go on tramp to-morrow. I gave him as good as I got. I telled him, I'd not that good opinion on him that I'd ha' come a second time of mysel'; but yo'd advised me for to come, and I were beholden to yo'."

"You told him I sent you?"

"I dunno, if I ca'd yo' by your name. I dunnot think I did. I said a woman who knew no better had advised me for to come and see if there was a soft place in his heart."

"And he—?" asked Margaret.

"Said I were to tell yo' to mind yo'r own business.—That's the longest spin yet, my lads.—And them's civil words to what he used to me. But ne'er mind. We're but where we was; and I'll break stones on the road afore I let these little uns clem."

Margaret put the struggling Johnnie out of her arms, back into his former place on the dresser.

"I am sorry I asked you to go to Mr. Thornton's. I am disappointed in him."

There was a slight noise behind her. Both she and Nicholas turned round at the same moment, and there stood Mr. Thornton, with a look of displeased surprise upon his face. Obeying her swift impulse, Margaret passed out before him, saying not a word, only bowing low to hide the sudden paleness that she felt had come over her face. He bent equally low in return, and then closed the door after her. As she hurried to Mrs. Boucher's, she heard the clang, and it seemed to fill up the measure of her mortification. He too was annoyed to find her there.

Inside the Higgins household, the atmosphere was thick with tension. Mr. Thornton had tenderness in his heart—"a soft place," as Nicholas Higgins called it; but he had some pride in concealing it; he kept it very sacred and safe, and was jealous of every circumstance that tried to gain admission. But if he dreaded exposure of his tenderness, he was equally desirous that all men should recognize his justice; and he felt that he had been unjust in giving so scornful a hearing to anyone who had waited, with humble patience, for five hours, to speak to him. That the man had spoken saucily to him when he had the opportunity was nothing to Mr. Thornton. He rather liked him for it; and he was conscious of his own irritability of temper at the time, which probably made them both quits. It was the five hours of waiting that struck Mr. Thornton. He had not five hours to spare, himself; but one hour—two hours, of his hard penetrating intellectual, as well as
