CHAPTER V.

WHY THE IRON SLIDE REMAINED STATIONARY.


The rest must be told in Thomas's own words, as it forms the chief part
of the confession he made before the detectives:

According to my promise, I took my young wife to Felix's house on the
day and at the hour proposed. We went on foot, for it was not far from
the hotel where we were then staying, and were received at the door by
an old servant who I had been warned could neither speak nor hear. At
sight of him and the dim, old-fashioned hall stretching out in
aristocratic gloom before us, Eva turned pale and cast me an inquiring
look. But I reassured her with a smile that most certainly contradicted
my own secret dread of the interview before us, and taking her on my
arm, followed the old man down the hall, past the open drawing-room door
(where I certainly thought we should pause), into a room whose plain
appearance made me frown, till Bartow, as I have since heard him called,
threw aside the portière at one end and introduced us into my brother's
study, which at that moment looked like fairyland, or would have, if
Felix, who was its sole occupant, had not immediately drawn our
attention to himself by the remarkable force of his personality, never
so impressive as at that moment.

Eva, to whom I had said little of this brother, certainly nothing which
would lead her to anticipate seeing either so handsome a man or one of
such mental poise and imposing character, looked frightened and a trifle
awe-struck. But she advanced quite bravely toward him, and at my
introduction smiled with such an inviting grace that I secretly expected
to see him more or less disarmed by it.

And perhaps he was, for his already pale features turned waxy in the
yellow glare cast by the odd lantern over our heads, and the hand he had
raised in mechanical greeting fell heavily, and he could barely stammer
out some words of welcome. These would have seemed quite inadequate to
the occasion if his eyes which were fixed on her face, had not betrayed
the fact that he was not without feeling, though she little realized the
nature of that feeling or how her very life (for happiness is life) was
trembling in the balance under that indomitable will.

I who did know--or thought I did--cast him an imploring glance, and,
saying that I had some explanations to make, asked if Mrs. Adams might
not rest here while we had a few words apart.

He answered me with a strange look. Did he feel the revolt in my tone
and understand then as well as afterward what the nature of my
compliance had been? I shall never know. I only know that he stopped
fumbling with some small object on the table before him, and, bowing
with a sarcastic grace that made me for the first time in my intercourse
with him feel myself his inferior, even in size, led the way to a small
door I had failed to notice up to this moment.

"Your wife will find it more comfortable here," he observed, with slow
pauses in his speech that showed great, but repressed, excitement. And
he opened the door into what had the appearance of a small but elegant
sleeping-apartment. "What we have to say cannot take long. Mrs. Adams
will not find the wait tedious."

"No," she smiled, with a natural laugh, born, as I dare hope, of her
perfect happiness. Yet she could not but have considered the proceeding
strange, and my manner, as well as his, scarcely what might be expected
from a bridegroom introducing his bride to his only relative.

"I will call you--" I began, but the vision of her dimpled face above
the great cluster of roses she carried made me forget to complete my
sentence, and the door closed, and I found myself face to face with
Felix.

He was breathing easier, and his manner seemed more natural now that we
were alone, yet he did not speak, but cast a strange, if not inquiring,
glance about the room (the weirdest of apartments, as you all well
know), and seeming satisfied with what he saw, why I could not tell, led
the way up to the large table which from the first had appeared to exert
a sort of uncanny magnetism upon him, saying:

"Come further away. I need air, breathing place in this close room, and
so must you. Besides, why should she hear what we have to say? She will
know the worst soon enough. She seems a gentle-hearted woman."

"An angel!" I began, but he stopped me with an imperious gesture.

"We will not discuss your wi--Mrs. Adams," he protested. "Where is John
Poindexter?"

"At the hotel," I rejoined. "Or possibly he has returned home. I no
longer take account of his existence. Felix, I shall never leave my
wife. I had rather prove recreant to the oath I took before I realized
the worth of the woman whose happiness I vowed to destroy. This is what
I have come to tell you. Make it easy for me, Felix. You are a man who
has loved and suffered. Let us bury the past; let us----"

Had I hoped I could move him? Perhaps some such child's notion had
influenced me up to this moment. But as these words left my lips, nay,
before I had stumbled through them, I perceived by the set look of his
features, which were as if cast in bronze, that I might falter, but that
he was firm as ever, firmer, it seemed to me, and less easy to be
entreated.

Yet what of that? At the worst, what had I to fear? A struggle which
might involve Eva in bitter unpleasantness and me in the loss of a
fortune I had come to regard almost as my own. But these were petty
considerations. Eva must know sooner or later my real name and the story
of her father's guilt. Why not now? And if we must start life poor, it
was yet life, while a separation from her----

Meanwhile Felix had spoken, and in language I was least prepared to
hear.

"I anticipated this. From the moment you pleaded with me for the
privilege of marrying her, I have looked forward to this outcome and
provided against it. Weakness on the part of her bridegroom was to be
expected; I have, therefore, steeled myself to meet the emergency; for
your oath must be kept!"

Crushed by the tone in which these words were uttered, a tone that
evinced power against which any ordinary struggle would end in failure,
I cast my eyes about the room in imitation of what I had seen him do a
few minutes before. There was nothing within sight calculated to awaken
distrust, and yet a feeling of distrust (the first I had really felt)
had come with the look he had thrown above and around the mosque-like
interior of the room he called his study. Was it the calm confidence he
showed, or the weirdness of finding myself amid Oriental splendors and
under the influence of night effects in high day and within sound of the
clanging street cars and all the accompanying bustle of every-day
traffic? It is hard to say; but from this moment on I found myself
affected by a vague affright, not on my own account, but on hers whose
voice we could plainly hear humming a gay tune in the adjoining
apartment. But I was resolved to suppress all betrayal of uneasiness. I
even smiled, though I felt the eyes of Evelyn's pictured countenance
upon me; Evelyn's, whose portrait I had never lost sight of from the
moment of entering the room, though I had not given it a direct look and
now stood with my back to it. Felix, who faced it, but who did not raise
his eyes to it, waited a moment for my response, and finding that my
words halted, said again:

"That oath must be kept!"

This time I found words with which to answer. "Impossible!" I burst out,
flinging doubt, fear, hesitancy, everything I had hitherto trembled at
to the winds. "It was in my nature to take it, worked upon as I was by
family affection, the awfulness of our father's approaching death, and a
thousand uncanny influences all carefully measured and prepared for this
end. But it is not in my nature to keep it after four months of natural
living in the companionship of a man thirty years removed from his
guilt, and of his guileless and wholly innocent daughter. And you cannot
drive me to it, Felix. No man can force another to abandon his own wife
because of a wicked oath taken long before he knew her. If you think
your money----"

"Money?" he cried, with a contempt that did justice to my
disinterestedness as well as his own. "I had forgotten I had it. No,
Thomas, I should never weigh money against the happiness of living with
such a woman as your wife appears to be. But her life I might. Carry out
your threat; forget to pay John Poindexter the debt we owe him, and the
matter will assume a seriousness for which you are doubtless poorly
prepared. A daughter dead in her honeymoon will be almost as great a
grief to him as a dishonored one. And either dead or dishonored he must
find her, when he comes here in search of the child he cannot long
forget. Which shall it be? Speak!"

Was I dreaming? Was this Felix? Was this myself? And was it in my ears
these words were poured?

With a spring I reached his side where he stood close against the table,
and groaned rather than shrieked the words:

"You would not kill her! You do not meditate a crime of blood--here--on
her--the innocent--the good----"

"No," he said; "it will be you who will do that. You who will not wish
to see her languish--suffer--go mad--Thomas, I am not the raving being
you take me for. I am merely a keeper of oaths. Nay, I am more. I have
talents, skill. The house in which you find yourself is proof of this.
This room--see, it has no outlet save those windows, scarcely if at all
perceptible to you, above our heads, and that opening shielded now by a
simple curtain, but which in an instant, without my moving from this
place, I can so hermetically seal that no man, save he be armed with
crowbar and pickaxe, could enter here, even if man could know of our
imprisonment, in a house soon to be closed from top to bottom by my
departing servant."

"May God protect us!" fell from my lips, as, stiff with horror, I let my
eyes travel from his determined face, first to the windows high over my
head and then to the opening of the door, which, though but a few steps
from where I stood, was as far as possible from the room into which my
darling had been induced to enter.

Felix, watching me, uttered his explanations as calmly as if the matter
were one of every-day significance. "You are looking for the windows,"
he remarked. "They are behind those goblin faces you see outlined on the
tapestries under the ceiling. As for the door, if you had looked to the
left when you entered, you would have detected the edge of a huge steel
plate hanging flush with the casing. This plate can be made to slide
across that opening in an instant just by the touch of my hand on this
button. This done, no power save such as I have mentioned can move it
back again, not even my own. I have forces at my command for sending it
forward, but none for returning it to its place. Do you doubt my
mechanical skill or the perfection of the electrical apparatus I have
caused to be placed here? You need not, Thomas; nor need you doubt the
will that has only to exert itself for an instant to--Shall I press the
button, brother?"

"No, no!" I shouted in a frenzy, caused rather by my knowledge of the
nature of this man than any especial threat apparent in his voice or
gesture. "Let me think; let me know more fully what your requirements
are--what she must suffer if I consent--and what I."

He let his hand slip back, that smooth white hand which I had more than
once surveyed in admiration. Then he smiled.

"I knew you would not be foolish," he said. "Life has its charms even
for hermits like me; and for a _beau garçon_ such as you are----"

"Hush!" I interposed, maddened into daring his full anger. "It is not my
life I am buying, but hers, possibly yours; for it seems you have
planned to perish with us. Is it not so?"

"Certainly," was his cold reply. "Am I an assassin? Would you expect me
to live, knowing you to be perishing?"

I stared aghast. Such resolve, such sacrifice of self to an idea was
beyond my comprehension.

"Why--what?" I stammered. "Why kill us, why kill yourself----"

The answer overwhelmed me.

"Remember Evelyn!" shrilled a voice, and I paused, struck dumb with a
superstitious horror I had never believed myself capable of
experiencing. For it was not Felix who spoke, neither was it any
utterance of my own aroused conscience. Muffled, strange, and startling
it came from above, from the hollow spaces of that high vault lit with
the golden glow that henceforth can have but one meaning for me--death.

"What is it?" I asked. "Another of your mechanical contrivances?"

He smiled; I had rather he had frowned.

"Not exactly. A favorite bird, a starling. Alas! he but repeats what he
has heard echoed through the solitude of these rooms. I thought I had
smothered him up sufficiently to insure his silence during this
interview. But he is a self-willed bird, and seems disposed to defy the
wrappings I have bound around him; which fact warns me to be speedy and
hasten our explanations. Thomas, this is what I require: John
Poindexter--you do not know where he is at this hour, but I do--received
a telegram but now, which, if he is a man at all, will bring him to this
house in a half-hour or so from the present moment. It was sent in your
name, and in it you informed him that matters had arisen which demanded
his immediate attention; that you were on your way to your brother's
(giving him this address), where, if you found entrance, you would await
his presence in a room called the study; but that--and here you will see
how his coming will not aid us if that steel plate is once started on
its course--if the possible should occur and your brother should be
absent from home, then he was to await a message from you at the Plaza.
The appearance of the house would inform him whether he would find you
and Eva within; or so I telegraphed him in your name.

"Thomas, if Bartow fulfils my instructions--and I have never know him to
fail me--he will pass down these stairs and out of this house in just
five minutes. As he is bound on a long-promised journey, and as he
expects me to leave the house immediately after him, he has drawn every
shade and fastened every lock. Consequently, on his exit, the house will
become a tomb, to which, just two weeks from to-day, John Poindexter
will be called again, and in words which will lead to a demolition which
will disclose--what? Let us not forestall the future, our horrible
future, by inquiring. But Thomas, shall Bartow go? Shall I not by signs
he comprehends more readily than other men comprehend speech indicate to
him on his downward passage to the street that I wish him to wait and
open the door to the man whom we have promised to overwhelm in his hour
of satisfaction and pride? You have only to write a line--see! I have
made a copy of the words you must use, lest your self-command should be
too severely taxed. These words left on this table for his
inspection--for you must go and Eva remain--will tell him all he needs
to know from you. The rest can come from my lips after he has read the
signature, which in itself will confound him and prepare the way for
what I have to add. Have you anything to say against this plan?
Anything, I mean, beyond what you have hitherto urged? Anything that I
will consider or which will prevent my finger from pressing the button
on which it rests?"

I took up the paper. It was lying on the table, where it had evidently
been inscribed simultaneously with or just before our entrance into the
house, and slowly read the few lines I saw written upon it. You know
them, but they will acquire a new significance from your present
understanding of their purpose and intent:

     I return you back your daughter. Neither she nor you will ever see
     me again. Remember Evelyn!

     AMOS'S SON.

"You wish me to sign these words, to put them into my own handwriting,
and so to make them mine? Mine!" I repeated.

"Yes, and to leave them here on this table for him to see when he
enters. He might not believe any mere statement from me in regard to
your intentions."

I was filled with horror. Love, life, human hopes, the world's
friendships--all the possibilities of existence, swept in one
concentrated flood of thought and feeling through my outraged
consciousness, and I knew I could never put my name to such a blasphemy
of all that was sacred to man's soul. Tossing the paper in his face, I
cried:

"You have gone too far! Better her death, better mine, better the
destruction of us all, than such dishonor to the purest thing heaven
ever made. I refuse, Felix--I refuse. And may God have mercy on us all!"

The moment was ghastly. I saw his face change, his finger tremble where
it hovered above the fatal button; saw--though only in imagination as
yet--the steely edge of that deadly plate of steel advancing beyond the
lintel, and was about to dare all in a sudden grapple with this man,
when a sound from another direction caught my ear, and looking around in
terror of the only intrusion we could fear, beheld Eva advancing from
the room in which we had placed her.

That moment a blood-red glow took the place of the sickly yellow which
had hitherto filled every recess of this weird apartment. But I scarcely
noticed the change, save as it affected her pallor and gave to her
cheeks the color that was lacking in the roses at her belt.

Fearless and sweet as in the hour when she first told me that she loved
me, she approached and stood before us.

"What is this?" she cried. "I have heard words that sound more like the
utterances of some horrid dream than the talk of men and brothers. What
does it mean, Thomas? What does it mean, Mr. ----"

"Cadwalader," announced Felix, dropping his eyes from her face, but
changing not a whit his features or posture.

"Cadwalader?" The name was not to her what it was to her father.
"Cadwalader? I have heard that name in my father's house; it was
Evelyn's name, the Evelyn who----"

"Whom you see painted there over your head," finished Felix, "my sister,
Thomas's sister--the girl whom your father--but I spare you, child
though you be of a man who spared nothing. From your husband you may
learn why a Cadwalader can never find his happiness with a Poindexter.
Why thirty or more years after that young girl's death, you who were not
then born are given at this hour the choice between death and dishonor.
I allow you just five minutes in which to listen. After that you will
let me know your joint decision. Only you must make your talk where you
stand. A step taken by either of you to right or left, and Thomas knows
what will follow."

Five minutes, with such a justification to make, and such a decision to
arrive at! I felt my head swim, my tongue refuse its office, and stood
dumb and helpless before her till the sight of her dear eyes raised in
speechless trust to mine flooded me with a sense of triumph amid all the
ghastly terrors of the moment, and I broke out in a tumult of speech, in
excuses, explanations, all that comes to one in a more than mortal
crisis.

She listened, catching my meaning rather from my looks than my words.
Then as the minutes fled and my brother raised a warning hand, she
turned toward him, and said:

"You are in earnest? We must separate in shame or perish in this
prison-house with you?"

His answer was mere repetition, mechanical, but firm:

"You have said it. You have but one minute more, madam."

She shrank, and all her powers seemed leaving her, then a reaction came,
and a flaming angel stood where but a moment before the most delicate of
women weakly faltered; and giving me a look to see if I had the courage
or the will to lift my hand against my own flesh and blood (alas for us
both! I did not understand her) caught up an old Turkish dagger lying
only too ready to her hand, and plunged it with one sideways thrust into
his side, crying:

"We cannot part, we cannot die, we are too young, too happy!"

It was sudden; the birth of purpose in her so unexpected and so rapid
that Felix, the ready, who was prepared for all contingencies, for the
least movement or suggestion of escape, faltered and pressed, not the
fatal button, but his heart.

One impulsive act on the part of a woman had overthrown all the
fine-spun plans of the subtlest spirit that ever attempted to work its
will in the face of God and man.

But I did not think of this then; I did not even bestow a thought upon
the narrowness of our escape, or the price which the darling of my heart
might be called upon to pay for this supreme act of self-defence. My
mind, my heart, my interest were with Felix, in whom the nearness of
death had called up all that was strongest and most commanding in his
strong and commanding spirit.

Though struck to the heart, he had not fallen. It was as if the will
which had sustained him through thirty years of mental torture held him
erect still, that he might give her, Eva, one look, the like of which I
had never seen on mortal face, and which will never leave my heart or
hers until we die. Then as he saw her sink shudderingly down and the
delicate woman reappear in her pallid and shrunken figure, he turned his
eyes on me and I saw,--good God!--a tear well up from those orbs of
stone and fall slowly down his cheek, fast growing hollow under the
stroke of death.

"Eva! Eva! I love Eva!" shrilled the voice which once before had
startled me from the hollow vault above.

Felix heard, and a smile faint as the failing rush of blood through his
veins moved his lips and brought a revelation to my soul. He, too, loved
Eva!

When he saw I knew, the will which had kept him on his feet gave way,
and he sank to the floor murmuring:

"Take her away! I forgive. Save! Save! She did not know I loved her."

Eva, aghast, staring with set eyes at her work, had not moved from her
crouching posture. But when she saw that speaking head fall back, the
fine limbs settle into the repose of death, a shock went through her
which I thought would never leave her reason unimpaired.

"I've killed him!" she murmured. "I've killed him!" and looking wildly
about, her eyes fell on the cross that hung behind us on the wall. It
seemed to remind her that Felix was a Catholic. "Bring it!" she gasped.
"Let him feel it on his breast. It may bring him peace--hope."

As I rushed to do her bidding, she fell in a heap on the floor.

"Save!" came again from the lips we thought closed forever in death. And
realizing at the words both her danger and the necessity of her not
opening her eyes again upon this scene, I laid the cross in his arms,
and catching her up from the floor, ran with her out of the house. But
no sooner had I caught sight of the busy street and the stream of
humanity passing before us, than I awoke to an instant recognition of
our peril. Setting my wife down, I commanded life back into her limbs by
the force of my own energy, and then dragging her down the steps,
mingled with the crowd, encouraging her, breathing for her, living in
her till I got her into a carriage and we drove away.

For the silence we have maintained from that time to this you must not
blame Mrs. Adams. When she came to herself--which was not for days--she
manifested the greatest desire to proclaim her act and assume its
responsibility. But I would not have it. I loved her too dearly to see
her name bandied about in the papers; and when her father was taken into
our confidence, he was equally peremptory in enjoining silence, and
shared with me the watch I now felt bound to keep over her movements.

But alas! His was the peremptoriness of pride rather than love. John
Poindexter has no more heart for his daughter than he had for his wife
or that long-forgotten child from whose grave this tragedy has sprung.
Had Felix triumphed he would never have wrung the heart of this man. As
he once said, when a man cares for nothing and nobody, not even for
himself, it is useless to curse him.

As for Felix himself, judge him not, when you realize, as you now must,
that his last conscious act was to reach for and put in his mouth the
paper which connected Eva with his death. At the moment of death his
thought was to save, not to avenge. And this after her hand had struck
him.
