CHAPTER LIII. On San Miniato. “I would speak with you,” said Baldassarre, as Romola looked at him in silent expectation. It was plain that he had followed her, and had been waiting for her. She was going at last to know the secret about him. “Yes,” she said, with the same sort of submission that she might have shown under an imposed penance. “But you wish to go where no one can hear us?” “Where he will not come upon us,” said Baldassarre, turning and glancing behind him timidly. “Out—in the air—away from the streets.” “I sometimes go to San Miniato at this hour,” said Romola. “If you like, I will go now, and you can follow me. It is far, but we can be solitary there.” He nodded assent, and Romola set out. To some women it might have seemed an alarming risk to go to a comparatively solitary spot with a man who had some of the outward signs of that madness which Tito attributed to him.

the sturdy vigour which belonged to it when he first appeared with the rope round him in the Duomo; and under the transient tremor caused by the exertion of walking up the hill, his eyes seemed to have a more helpless vagueness. “The hill is steep,” said Romola, with compassionate gentleness, seating herself by him. “And I fear you have been weakened by want?” He turned his head and fixed his eyes on her in silence, unable, now the moment of speech was come, to seize the words that would convey the thought he wanted to utter: and she remained as motionless as she could, lest he should suppose her impatient. He looked like nothing higher than a common-bred, neglected old man; but she was used now to be very near to such people, and to think a great deal about their troubles.

said Romola, in a low voice, too entirely possessed by the images of the past to take any note of Baldassarre’s question. “Or was it as he said? Did you take him when he was little?” “Ah, you believe me—you know what he is!” said Baldassarre, exultingly, tightening the pressure on her arm, as if the contact gave him power. “You will help me?” “Yes,” said Romola, not interpreting the words as he meant them. She laid her palm gently on the rough hand that grasped her arm, and the tears came to her eyes as she looked at him. “Oh, it is piteous! Tell me—you were a great scholar; you taught him. How is it?” She broke off. Tito’s allegation of this man’s madness had come across her; and where were the signs even of past refinement? But she had the self-command not to move her hand.

gems. He had my gems—he sold them; and he left me in slavery. He never came to seek me, and when I came back poor and in misery, he denied me. He said I was a madman.” “He told us his father was dead—was drowned,” said Romola, faintly. “Surely he must have believed it then. Oh! he could not have been so base then !” A vision had risen of what Tito was to her in those first days when she thought no more of wrong in him than a child thinks of poison in flowers. The yearning regret that lay in that memory brought some relief from the tension of horror. With one great sob the tears rushed forth. “Ah, you are young, and the tears come easily,” said Baldassarre, with some impatience. “But tears are no good; they only put out the fire within, and it is the fire that works.

a longing for something—I did not know what—that never came. And when I was in the ship on the waters I began to know what I longed for; it was for the Boy to come back—it was to find all my thoughts again, for I was locked away outside them all. And I am outside now. I feel nothing but a wall and darkness.” Baldassarre had become dreamy again, and sank into silence, resting his head between his hands; and again Romola’s belief in him had submerged all cautioning doubts. The pity with which she dwelt on his words seemed like the revival of an old pang. Had she not daily seen how her father missed Dino and the future he had dreamed of in that son? “It all came back once,” Baldassarre went on presently. “I was master of everything.

her in sympathy with him. “You hate him,” he went on. “Is it not true? There is no love between you; I know that. I know women can hate; and you have proud blood. You hate falseness, and you can love revenge.” Romola sat paralysed by the shock of conflicting feelings. She was not conscious of the grasp that was bruising her tender arm. “You shall contrive it,” said Baldassarre, presently, in an eager whisper. “I have learned by heart that you are his rightful wife. You are a noble woman. You go to hear the preacher of vengeance; you will help justice. But you will think for me. My mind goes—everything goes sometimes—all but the fire. The fire is God: it is justice: it will not die. You believe that—is it not true? If they will not hang him for robbing me, you will take away his armour—you will make him go without it, and I will stab him.

looking bewildered. “I can remember no more. I only know where she lives. You shall see her. I will take you; but not now,” he added hurriedly, “ he may be there. The night is coming on.” “It is true,” said Romola, starting up with a sudden consciousness that the sun had set and the hills were darkening; “but you will come and take me—when?” “In the morning,” said Baldassarre, dreaming that she, too, wanted to hurry to her vengeance. “Come to me, then, where you came to me to-day, in the church. I will be there at ten; and if you are not there, I will go again towards mid-day. Can you remember?” “Mid-day,” said Baldassarre—“only mid-day. The same place, and mid-day. And, after that,” he added, rising and grasping her arm again with his left hand, while he held the knife in his right; “we will have our revenge.
