"Let no flower of the spring pass by us; let us crown ourselves with rosebuds before they be withered."

It was a pity that Offendene was not the soil of Miss Harleth's childhood, nor a place endeared to her by the roots of memory. A human life, surely, ought to be anchored in some corner of the native land, where it might drink deeply of tender kinship, learn to love the very face of the earth, and find nourishment in the labors of men and the haunting sounds of home. It is a spot where early memories are inwrought with affection, where kindness toward neighbors—even the dogs and donkeys—becomes a sweet habit of the blood rather than a sentimental effort. At five years old, mortals are not yet citizens of the world; they are not prepared to soar above preference into impartiality. That blind prejudice in favor of milk is merely the body and soul learning how to feed themselves for a time. The best introduction to astronomy is to view the nightly heavens as a little lot of stars belonging to one's own homestead.

But this blessed persistence, where affection can take root, had been wanting in Gwendolen's life. It was only a year prior to her recall from Leubronn that Offendene had been chosen as her mother's home, selected simply for its proximity to Pennicote Rectory. On a late October afternoon, when rooks cawed loudly overhead and yellow elm-leaves whirled in the wind, Mrs. Davilow, Gwendolen, and her four half-sisters had been driven along the avenue for the first time, the governess and maid following in another vehicle.

The season suited the aspect of the old oblong red-brick house, which was rather too anxiously ornamented with stone at every line, from the double row of narrow windows to the large square portico. The stone encouraged a greenish lichen, the brick a powdery gray, so that though the building was rigidly rectangular, there was no harshness in its physiognomy as it faced the three avenues cutting through the hundred yards of old plantation. One would have liked the house to stand on a knoll, looking beyond its own little domain to the long thatched roofs of distant villages, the church towers, the scattered homesteads, and the green breadths of undulating park that made up the beautiful face of the earth in that part of Wessex. But standing behind a screen amid flat pastures, it offered on one side a glimpse of the wider world in the lofty curves of the chalk downs, grand steadfast forms played over by the changing days.

The house was just large enough to be called a mansion, moderately rented, and lacking a manor. Its sombre furniture and faded upholstery made it difficult to let, yet inside and out, it was what no beholder could suppose to be inhabited by retired tradespeople—a certainty worth many conveniences to tenants who possessed the taste that shrinks from new finery and dwell in that border-territory of rank where annexation is a burning topic. To take up her abode in a house that had once sufficed for dowager countesses gave a perceptible tinge to Mrs. Davilow's satisfaction in having an establishment of her own. This possibility appeared suddenly, somewhat mysteriously to Gwendolen, on the death of her step-father, Captain Davilow, who had for the last nine years joined his family only in brief, fitful bursts. Yet Gwendolen cared much more for the fact than the explanation. All her prospects had become more agreeable in consequence. She had disliked their former way of life, roving from one foreign watering-place or Parisian apartment to another, always feeling new antipathies to new suites of hired furniture and meeting new people under conditions that made her appear of little importance. The variation of having passed two years at a showy school, where she was put foremost on all occasions of display, had only deepened her sense that so exceptional a person as herself could hardly remain in ordinary circumstances or in a social position less than advantageous. Any fear of this latter evil was banished now that her mother was to have an establishment. On the point of birth, Gwendolen was quite easy. She had no notion how her maternal grandfather acquired the fortune inherited by his two daughters, but he had been a West Indian—which seemed to exclude further question; and she knew that her father's family was so high as to take no notice of her mother, who nevertheless preserved with much pride the miniature of a Lady Molly in that connection. She would probably have known much more about her father but for a little incident when she was twelve. Mrs. Davilow had brought out, at wide intervals, various memorials of her first husband. While showing his miniature to Gwendolen, she recalled with a fervor that seemed to count on peculiar filial sympathy the fact that dear papa had died when his little daughter was in long clothes. Gwendolen, immediately thinking of the unlovable step-father whom she had known while her frocks were short, said, "Why did you marry again, mamma? It would have been nicer if you had not." Mrs. Davilow colored deeply, a slight convulsive movement passing over her face, and straightway shutting up the memorials, she said, with a violence quite unusual in her, "You have no feeling, child!" Gwendolen, who was fond of her mother, felt hurt and ashamed, and had never since dared to ask a question about her father.

This was not the only instance in which she had brought on herself the pain of filial compunction. It was always arranged, when possible, that she should have a small bed in her mother's room, for Mrs. Davilow's motherly tenderness clung chiefly to her eldest girl, who had been born in her happier time. One night, under an attack of pain, she found that the specific regularly placed by her bedside had been forgotten, and begged Gwendolen to get out of bed and reach it for her. That healthy young lady, snug and warm as a rosy infant in her little couch, objected to step out into the cold, lying perfectly still and grumbling a refusal. Mrs. Davilow went without the medicine and never reproached her daughter; but the next day Gwendolen was keenly conscious of what must be in her mother's mind and tried to make amends by caresses which cost her no effort. Having always been the pet and pride of the household, waited on by mother, sisters, governess, and maids as if she had been a princess in exile, she naturally found it difficult to think her own pleasure less important than others made it. When it was positively thwarted, she felt an astonished resentment apt, in her cruder days, to vent itself in one of those passionate acts which look like a contradiction of habitual tendencies. Though never even as a child thoughtlessly cruel—nay, delighting to rescue drowning insects and watch their recovery—there was a disagreeable silent remembrance of her having strangled her sister's canary-bird in a final fit of exasperation at its shrill singing, which had again and again jarringly interrupted her own. She had taken pains to buy a white mouse for her sister in retribution, and though inwardly excusing herself on the ground of a peculiar sensitiveness which was a mark of her general superiority, the thought of that infamous murder had always made her wince. Gwendolen's nature was not remorseless, but she liked to make her penances easy. Now that she was twenty and more, some of her native force had turned into a self-control by which she guarded herself from penitential humiliation. There was more show of fire and will in her than ever, but there was more calculation underneath it.

On this day of arrival at Offendene, which not even Mrs. Davilow had seen before—the place having been taken for her by her brother-in-law, Mr. Gascoigne—when all had got down from the carriage and were standing under the porch in front of the open door, so that they could have a general view of the place and a glimpse of the stone hall and staircase hung with sombre pictures but enlivened by a bright wood fire, no one spoke. Mamma, the four sisters, and the governess all looked at Gwendolen, as if their feelings depended entirely on her decision. Of the girls, from Alice in her sixteenth year to Isabel in her tenth, hardly anything could be said on a first view, but that they were girlish and that their black dresses were getting shabby. Miss Merry was elderly and altogether neutral in expression. Mrs. Davilow's worn beauty seemed the more pathetic for the look of entire appeal which she cast at Gwendolen, who was glancing round at the house, the landscape, and the entrance hall with an air of rapid judgment. Imagine a young race-horse in the paddock among untrimmed ponies and patient hacks.

"Well, dear, what do you think of the place?" said Mrs. Davilow at last, in a gentle, deprecatory tone.

"I think it is charming," said Gwendolen, quickly. "A romantic place; anything delightful may happen in it; it would be a good background for anything. No one need be ashamed of living here."

"There is certainly nothing common about it."

"Oh, it would do for fallen royalty or any sort of grand poverty. We ought properly to have been living in splendor, and have come down to this. It would have been as romantic as could be. But I thought my uncle and aunt Gascoigne would be here to meet us, and my cousin Anna," added Gwendolen, her tone changed to sharp surprise.

"We are early," said Mrs. Davilow, and entering the hall, she said to the housekeeper who came forward, "You expect Mr. and Mrs. Gascoigne?"

"Yes, madam; they were here yesterday to give particular orders about the fires and the dinner. But as to fires, I've had 'em in all the rooms for the last week, and everything is well aired. I could wish some of the furniture paid better for all the cleaning it's had, but I _think_ you'll see the brasses have been done justice to. I _think_ when Mr. and Mrs. Gascoigne come, they'll tell you nothing has been neglected. They'll be here at five, for certain."

This satisfied Gwendolen, who was not prepared to have their arrival treated with indifference; and after tripping a little way up the matted stone staircase to take a survey there, she tripped down again, and followed by all the girls looked into each of the rooms opening from the hall—the dining-room all dark oak and worn red satin damask, with a copy of snarling, worrying dogs from Snyders over the side-board, and a Christ breaking bread over the mantel-piece; the library with a general aspect and smell of old brown-leather; and lastly, the drawing-room, which was entered through a small antechamber crowded with venerable knick-knacks.

"Mamma, mamma, pray come here!" said Gwendolen, Mrs. Davilow having followed slowly in talk with the housekeeper. "Here is an organ. I will be Saint Cecilia: some one shall paint me as Saint Cecilia. Jocosa (this was her name for Miss Merry), let down my hair. See, mamma?"

She had thrown off her hat and gloves and seated herself before the organ in an admirable pose, looking upward; while the submissive and sad Jocosa took out the one comb which fastened the coil of hair, and then shook out the mass till it fell in a smooth light-brown stream far below its owner's slim waist.

Mrs. Davilow smiled and said, "A charming picture, my dear!" not indifferent to the display of her pet, even in the presence of a housekeeper. Gwendolen rose and laughed with delight. All this seemed quite to the purpose on entering a new house which was so excellent a background.

"What a queer, quaint, picturesque room!" she went on, looking about her. "I like these old embroidered chairs, and the garlands on the wainscot, and the pictures that may be anything. That one with the ribs—nothing but ribs and darkness—I should think that is Spanish, mamma."

"Oh, Gwendolen!" said the small Isabel, in a tone of astonishment, while she held open a hinged panel of the wainscot at the other end of the room.

Every one, Gwendolen first, went to look. The opened panel had disclosed the picture of an upturned dead face, from which an obscure figure seemed to be fleeing with outstretched arms. "How horrible!" said Mrs. Davilow, with a look of mere disgust; but Gwendolen shuddered silently, and Isabel, a plain and altogether inconvenient child with an alarming memory, said, "You will never stay in this room by yourself, Gwendolen."

"How dare you open things which were meant to be shut up, you perverse little creature?" said Gwendolen, in her angriest tone. Then snatching the panel out of the hand of the culprit, she closed it hastily, saying, "There is a lock—where is the key? Let the key be found, or else let one be made, and let nobody open it again; or rather, let the key be brought to me."

At this command to everybody in general, Gwendolen turned with a face which was flushed in reaction from her chill shudder, and said, "Let us go up to our own room, mamma."

The housekeeper, on searching, found the key in the drawer of the cabinet close by the panel, and presently handed it to Bugle, the lady's-maid, telling her significantly to give it to her Royal Highness.

"I don't know what you mean, Mrs. Startin," said Bugle, who had been busy up-stairs during the scene in the drawing-room, and was rather offended at this irony in a new servant.

"I mean the young lady that's to command us all—and well worthy for looks and figure," replied Mrs. Startin in propitiation. "She'll know what key it is."

"If you have laid out what we want, go and see to the others, Bugle," Gwendolen had said, when she and Mrs. Davilow entered their black and yellow bedroom, where a pretty little white couch was prepared by the side of the black
