"Her wit
Values itself so highly, that to her
All matter else seems weak."
—_Much Ado About Nothing._

Gwendolen's arrival in the neighborhood was a triumph that perfectly matched her uncle's expectations. From the imposing Brackenshaw Castle down to the cozy Firs at Wanchester, where Mr. Quallon the banker hosted with generous warmth, she was greeted with open admiration. Even those who harbored reservations about her found comfort in her presence; for hostesses, much like ministers assembling their cabinets, must balance their social rosters on grounds far broader than mere personal affection. To secure Gwendolen as a guest, one need not fear the disagreeable, for Mrs. Davilow always cut a quiet, picturesque figure as her chaperone, and Mr. Gascoigne was universally sought after for his own charming sake.

Yet, among the households where Gwendolen was tolerated rather than loved, Quetcham Hall stood out. One of her earliest invitations was to a grand dinner there, a gathering designed to serve as a general introduction for her to the local elite. It was a select assembly of thirty, carefully balanced across ages, leaving few respectable families unrepresented. No youthful figure in the room could rival Gwendolen's as she drifted through the long suites of rooms, illuminated by light and flowers. At first, she appeared as a slim silhouette floating in white drapery, moving from one wide doorway into another until the full brilliance of her presence revealed itself. She had never experienced such a promenade before, and she felt a surge of exultation that it suited her perfectly; to any observer, it seemed as though long galleries and lackeys had always been the backdrop of her life. Her cousin Anna, however, who was genuinely more accustomed to such settings, felt nearly as awkward as a rabbit suddenly dropped into a brightly lit cage.

"Who is that with Gascoigne?" asked the Archdeacon, abandoning his discussion of military maneuvers, to which he had been naturally summoned as a clergyman. Simultaneously, his son, a hopeful young scholar who had recently proposed "not less elegant than ingenious" corrections to Greek texts, murmured, "By George! Who is that girl with the awfully well-set head and jolly figure?"

But to a mind of general benevolence, hoping everyone looked their best, it was maddening to witness how Gwendolen eclipsed all others. Even the handsome Miss Lawe, daughter of Lady Lawe, suddenly appeared broad, heavy, and lifeless in comparison. And Miss Arrowpoint, unfortunately also dressed in white, instantly resembled a *carte-de-visite* where one might suspect the skirt alone had been charged for. Since Miss Arrowpoint was generally cherished for her amiable, unpretending manner of wearing her fortune—and served as a softening screen for her mother's oddities—there seemed a distinct incongruity in Gwendolen appearing so much more like a person of inherent social importance.

"She is not really so handsome if you come to examine her features," Mrs. Arrowpoint confided later that evening to Mrs. Vulcany. "It is a certain style she possesses, which produces a great effect at first, but afterward she becomes less agreeable."

Indeed, Gwendolen, without intending it, had offended her hostess. Though Mrs. Arrowpoint was neither splenetic nor vindictive, she possessed sharp susceptibilities. Several conditions converged in the Lady of Quetcham to create an impression that the neighborhood's reasoners found essential: she was occasionally recalled to be the heiress of a fortune gained through some obscure city business, an origin seemingly linked to her squat figure, harsh parrot-like voice, and systematically high head-dress. Since these external traits rendered her somewhat ridiculous, it appeared natural to many that she should harbor what were termed literary tendencies. A closer comparison, however, would have shown these points were unrelated; daughters of aldermen were often well-grown and well-featured, pretty women sometimes possessed harsh voices, and the production of feeble literature was compatible with every conceivable physique, masculine or feminine.

Gwendolen, possessing a keen sense of absurdity in others but a kindly disposition toward anyone who could make life agreeable, intended to win Mrs. Arrowpoint's favor with special interest and attention. Yet, self-confidence often addresses an imaginary dullness in others; the wealthy cajole the poor, and the vigorous talk artificially to the elderly, hastily assuming them deaf and imbecile. Gwendolen, despite her cleverness and purpose to be agreeable, could not escape this form of stupidity. Unreflectingly, she concluded that because Mrs. Arrowpoint was ridiculous, she must also lack penetration, proceeding through her little scenes without suspicion that her varied behaviors were being closely noted.

"You are fond of books as well as of music, riding, and archery, I hear," Mrs. Arrowpoint said, approaching her for a *tête-à-tête* in the drawing-room after dinner. "Catherine will be very glad to have so sympathetic a neighbor." This remark, which might have seemed the most graceful politeness delivered in a low, melodious tone, carried a twang, fatally loud, that gave Gwendolen a sense of exercising patronage. She answered gracefully:

"It is I who am fortunate. Miss Arrowpoint will teach me what good music is. I shall be entirely a learner. I hear that she is a thorough musician."

"Catherine has certainly had every advantage. We have a first-rate musician in the house now—Herr Klesmer; perhaps you know all his compositions. You must allow me to introduce him to you. You sing, I believe. Catherine plays three instruments, but she does not sing. I hope you will let us hear you. I understand you are an accomplished singer."

"Oh, no!—'die Kraft ist schwach, allein die Lust ist gross,' as Mephistopheles says."

"Ah, you are a student of Goethe. Young ladies are so advanced now. I suppose you have read everything."

"No, really. I shall be so glad if you will tell me what to read. I have been looking into all the books in the library at Offendene, but there is nothing readable. The leaves all stick together and smell musty. I wish I could write books to amuse myself, as you can! How delightful it must be to write books after one's own taste instead of reading other people's! Home-made books must be so nice."

For an instant, Mrs. Arrowpoint's glance sharpened, but the perilous resemblance to satire in the last sentence took the hue of girlish simplicity when Gwendolen added,

"I would give anything to write a book!"

"And why should you not?" said Mrs. Arrowpoint, encouragingly. "You have but to begin as I did. Pen, ink, and paper are at everybody's command. But I will send you all I have written with pleasure."

"Thanks. I shall be so glad to read your writings. Being acquainted with authors must give a peculiar understanding of their books: one would be able to tell then which parts were funny and which serious. I am sure I often laugh in the wrong place." Here Gwendolen herself sensed danger and quickly added, "In Shakespeare, you know, and other great writers that we can never see. But I always want to know more than there is in the books."

"If you are interested in any of my subjects I can lend you many extra sheets in manuscript," said Mrs. Arrowpoint—while Gwendolen felt herself painfully in the position of the young lady who professes to like potted sprats.

"These are things I dare say I shall publish eventually: several friends have urged me to do so, and one doesn't like to be obstinate. My Tasso, for example—I could have made it twice the size."

"I dote on Tasso," said Gwendolen.

"Well, you shall have all my papers, if you like. So many, you know, have written about Tasso; but they are all wrong. As to the particular nature of his madness, and his feelings for Leonora, and the real cause of his imprisonment, and the character of Leonora, who, in my opinion, was a cold-hearted woman, else she would have married him in spite of her brother—they are all wrong. I differ from everybody."

"How very interesting!" said Gwendolen. "I like to differ from everybody. I think it is so stupid to agree. That is the worst of writing your opinions; you make people agree with you." This speech renewed a slight suspicion in Mrs. Arrowpoint, and again her glance became examining. But Gwendolen looked very innocent, continuing with a docile air:

"I know nothing of Tasso except the _Gerusalemme Liberata_, which we read and learned by heart at school."

"Ah, his life is more interesting than his poetry; I have constructed the early part of his life as a sort of romance. When one thinks of his father Bernardo, and so on, there is much that must be true."

"Imagination is often truer than fact," said Gwendolen, decisively, though she could no more have explained these glib words than if they had been Coptic or Etruscan. "I shall be so glad to learn all about Tasso—and his madness especially. I suppose poets are always a little mad."

"To be sure—'the poet's eye in a fine frenzy rolling'; and somebody says of Marlowe,

"For that fine madness still he did maintain,
Which always should possess the poet's brain.'"

"But it was not always found out, was it?" said Gwendolen innocently. "I suppose some of them rolled their eyes in private. Mad people are often very cunning."

Again a shade flitted over Mrs. Arrowpoint's face, but the entrance of the gentlemen prevented any immediate mischief between her and this too-quick young lady, who had over-acted her *naïveté*.

"Ah, here comes Herr Klesmer," said Mrs. Arrowpoint, rising; and presently bringing him to Gwendolen, she left them to a dialogue which was agreeable on both sides. Herr Klesmer was a felicitous combination of the German, the Slav, and the Semite, with grand features, brown hair floating in artistic fashion, and brown eyes behind spectacles. His English had little foreignness except its fluency; and his alarming cleverness was made less formidable just then by a certain softening air of silliness which sometimes befalls even Genius in the desire to be agreeable to Beauty.

Music was soon begun. Miss Arrowpoint and Herr Klesmer played a four-handed piece on two pianos, convincing the company generally that it was long, and Gwendolen in particular that the neutral, placid-faced Miss Arrowpoint possessed a mastery of the instrument that put her own execution out of question—though she was not discouraged regarding her often-praised touch and style. After this, everyone became anxious to hear Gwendolen sing; especially Mr. Arrowpoint, as was natural in a host and a perfect gentleman, of whom no one had anything to say but that he married Miss Cuttler and imported the best cigars. He led her to the piano with easy politeness. Herr Klesmer closed the instrument in readiness for her, smiling with pleasure at her approach, then placed himself a few feet away so he could watch her.

Gwendolen was not nervous; what she undertook to do she did without trembling, and singing was an enjoyment to her. Her voice was a moderately powerful soprano (someone had told her it was like Jenny Lind's), her ear good, and she could keep in tune, so that her singing gave pleasure to ordinary hearers, and she was used to unmingled applause. She had the rare advantage of looking almost prettier when singing than at other times, and the fact that Herr Klesmer was in front of her seemed not disagreeable. Her song, decided upon beforehand, was a favorite aria of Bellini's, in which she felt quite sure of herself.

"Charming!" said Mr. Arrowpoint, who had remained near, and the word was echoed around without more insincerity than we recognize in a brotherly way as human. But Herr Klesmer stood like a statue—if a statue can be imagined wearing spectacles; at least, he was as mute as a statue. Gwendolen was pressed to keep her seat and double the general pleasure, and she did not wish to refuse; but before resolving to do so, she moved a little toward Herr Klesmer, saying with a look of smiling appeal, "It would be too cruel to a great musician. You cannot like to hear poor amateur singing."

"No, truly; but that makes nothing," said Herr Klesmer, suddenly speaking in an odious German fashion with staccato endings, quite unobservable in him before, and apparently depending on a change of mood, as Irishmen resume their strongest brogue when they are fervid or quarrelsome. "That makes nothing. It is always acceptable to see you sing."

Was there ever so unexpected an assertion of superiority—at least before the late Teutonic conquest? Gwendolen colored deeply, but, with her usual presence of mind, did not show an ungraceful resentment by moving away immediately. Miss Arrowpoint, who had been near enough to overhear (and also to observe that Herr Klesmer's mode of looking at Gwendolen was more conspicuously admiring than was quite consistent with good taste), now with the utmost tact and kindness came close to her and said,

"Imagine what I have to go through with this professor! He can hardly tolerate anything we English do in music. We can only put up with his severity, and make use of it to find out the worst that can be said of us. It is a little comfort to know that; and one can bear it when everyone else is admiring."

"I should be very much obliged to him for telling me the worst," said Gwendolen, recovering herself. "I dare say I have been extremely ill taught, in addition to having no talent—only liking for music." This was very well expressed considering that it had never entered her mind before.

"Yes, it is true: you have not been well taught," said Herr Klesmer, quietly. Woman was dear to him, but music was dearer. "Still, you are not quite without gifts. You sing in tune, and you have a pretty fair organ. But you produce your notes badly; and that music which you
