The trouble at the rectory was far more enduring than the fleeting whims of the season. When Rex arrived, he collapsed onto his bed, draped in a heavy cloak of apathy that seemed unbroken until the following day, when the shadows deepened into unmistakable signs of illness. The conversation regarding Southampton died in the throat of the household; instead, the collective energy of his mother and Anna shifted entirely to the care of a patient who refused to heal. The boy who had once been the brightest, most grateful spirit in the house had metamorphosed into a dull-eyed, unresponsive creature, meeting every tender attempt at affection with a weary murmur, "Let me alone."

Mr. Gascoigne viewed the crisis with a pragmatic eye, believing it to be the shortest path out of an unlucky affair. Yet, he could not suppress the pang of sorrow for the inevitable suffering. He would visit Rex in silence, pressing a gentle hand upon the boy's blank brow and whispering, "God bless you, my boy." The younger children and Warham would often peek around the doorframe to witness this strange spectacle of their lively brother laid low, but a sharp shake of a finger from the adults drove them back. The constant guardian was Anna. Her small hand was permitted to rest within her brother's, though he offered no welcoming pressure. Her soul was torn between anguish for Rex and a burning reproach toward Gwendolen.

"Perhaps it is wicked of me, but I think I never *can* love her again," Anna's inner monody recurred like a mournful bell. Even Mrs. Gascoigne harbored an angry feeling toward her niece, which she could not refrain from voicing, albeit apologetically, to her husband.

"I know of course it is better, and we ought to be thankful that she is not in love with the poor boy; but really, Henry, I think she is hard. She has the heart of a coquette. I cannot help thinking that she must have made him believe something, or the disappointment would not have taken hold of him so deeply. And some blame attaches to poor Fanny; she is quite blind about that girl."

Mr. Gascoigne answered imperatively: "The less said on that point the better, Nancy. I ought to have been more awake myself. As to the boy, be thankful if nothing worse ever happens to him. Let the thing die out as quickly as possible; and especially with regard to Gwendolen—let it be as if it had never been."

The rector's dominant feeling was that there had been a great escape. If Gwendolen had loved Rex in return, it would have created a much harder problem, a solution that might have been wrested from his hands. But he faced further difficulties.

One fine morning, Rex asked for his bath and made his toilet as usual. Anna, filled with excitement at this change, could do nothing but listen for his descent. Finally hearing his step, she ran to the foot of the stairs to meet him. For the first time, he gave her a faint smile, but it looked so melancholy on his pale face that she could hardly help crying.

"Nannie!" he said gently, taking her hand and leading her slowly along to the drawing-room. His mother was there, and when she came to kiss him, he sighed, "What a plague I am!"

He sat still, gazing out of the bow-window at the lawn and shrubs covered in hoar-frost, across which the sun sent faint, occasional gleams. Anna thought it resembled that sad smile on Rex's face. He felt as if he had undergone a resurrection into a new world, unsure of what to do with himself there, the old interests left far behind. Anna sat near him, pretending to work, but truly watching him with yearning looks. Beyond the garden hedge lay a road where wagons and carts sometimes passed on field-work; a railed opening had been made in the hedge because the upland, with its bordering wood and clump of ash-trees against the sky, was a pretty sight.

Presently, a wagon laden with timber came along. The horses strained their grand muscles, and the driver, cracking his whip, ran anxiously to guide the leader's head, fearing a swerve. Rex seemed shaken into attention; he rose and watched until the last quivering trunk of timber disappeared, then walked once or twice along the room. Mrs. Gascoigne was no longer there. When Rex sat down again, Anna, seeing a return of speech in her brother's eyes, could not resist the impulse to bring a little stool and seat herself against his knee, looking up at him with an expression that seemed to say, "Do speak to me." And he spoke.

"I'll tell you what I'm thinking of, Nannie. I will go to Canada, or somewhere of that sort." (Rex had not studied the character of our colonial possessions.)

"Oh, Rex, not for always!"

"Yes, to get my bread there. I should like to build a hut, and work hard at clearing, and have everything wild about me, and a great wide quiet."

"And not take me with you?" said Anna, the big tears coming fast.

"How could I?"

"I should like it better than anything; and settlers go with their families. I would sooner go there than stay here in England. I could make the fires, and mend the clothes, and cook the food; and I could learn how to make the bread before we went. It would be nicer than anything—like playing at life over again, as we used to do when we made our tent with the drugget, and had our little plates and dishes."

"Father and mother would not let you go."

"Yes, I think they would, when I explained everything. It would save money; and papa would have more to bring up the boys with."

Further talk of this practical nature occurred at intervals, ending in Rex consenting that Anna should go with him when he spoke to his father on the subject.

Of course, this discussion took place only when the rector was alone in his study. Their mother would eventually reconcile herself to whatever he decided, but mentioning the question to her first would have distressed her.

"Well, my children!" said Mr. Gascoigne, cheerfully, as they entered. It was a comfort to see Rex about again.

"May we sit down with you a little, papa?" said Anna. "Rex has something to say."

"With all my heart."

It was a noticeable group these three creatures made, each with a face of the same structural type—the straight brow, the nose suddenly straightened from an intention of being aquiline, the short upper lip, the short but strong and well-hung chin. There was even the same tone of complexion and set of the eye. The gray-haired father was at once massive and keen-looking; there was a perpendicular line in his brow which deepened when he spoke with any force of interest, and the habit of ruling gave him an air of reserved authoritativeness. Rex would have seemed a vision of his father's youth, if it had been possible to imagine Mr. Gascoigne without distinct plans and without command, smitten with a heart sorrow and having no more notion of concealment than a sick animal; and Anna was a tiny copy of Rex, with hair drawn back and knotted, her face following his in its changes of expression, as if they shared one soul.

"You know all about what has upset me, father," Rex began, and Mr. Gascoigne nodded.

"I am quite done up for life in this part of the world. I am sure it will be no use my going back to Oxford. I couldn't do any reading. I should fail, and cause you expense for nothing. I want to have your consent to take another course, sir."

Mr. Gascoigne nodded more slowly, the perpendicular line on his brow deepening, and Anna's trembling increased.

"If you would allow me a small outfit, I should like to go to the colonies and work on the land there." Rex thought the vagueness of the phrase prudential; "the colonies" necessarily embracing more advantages, and being less capable of being rebutted on a single ground than any particular settlement.

"Oh, and with me, papa," said Anna, not bearing to be left out from the proposal even temporarily. "Rex would want someone to take care of him, you know—someone to keep house. And we shall never, either of us, be married. And I should cost nothing, and I should be so happy. I know it would be hard to leave you and mamma; but there are all the others to bring up, and we two should be no trouble to you any more."

Anna had risen from her seat, using the feminine argument of going closer to her papa as she spoke. He did not smile, but he drew her onto his knee and held her there, as if to put her gently out of the question while he spoke to Rex.

"You will admit that my experience gives me some power of judging for you, and that I can probably guide you in practical matters better than you can guide yourself?"

Rex was obliged to say, "Yes, sir."

"And perhaps you will admit—though I don't wish to press that point—that you are bound in duty to consider my judgment and wishes?"

"I have never yet placed myself in opposition to you, sir." Rex, in his secret soul, could not feel that he was bound not to go to the colonies, but to go to Oxford again—which was the point in question.

"But you will do so if you persist in setting your mind toward a rash and foolish procedure, and deafening yourself to considerations which my experience of life assures me of. You think, I suppose, that you have had a shock which has changed all your inclinations, stupefied your brains, unfitted you for anything but manual labor, and given you a dislike to society? Is that what you believe?"

"Something like that. I shall never be up to the sort of work I must do to live in this part of the world. I have not the spirit for it. I shall never be the same again. And without any disrespect to you, father, I think a young fellow should be allowed to choose his way of life, if he does nobody any harm. There are plenty to stay at home, and those who like might be allowed to go where there are empty places."

"But suppose I am convinced on good evidence—as I am—that this state of mind of yours is transient, and that if you went off as you propose, you would by-and-by repent, and feel that you had let yourself slip back from the point you have been gaining by your education till now? Have you not strength of mind enough to see that you had better act on my assurance for a time, and test it? In my opinion, so far from agreeing with you that you should be free to turn yourself into a colonist and work in your shirt-sleeves with spade and hatchet—in my opinion you have no right whatever to expatriate yourself until you have honestly endeavored to turn to account the education you have received here. I say nothing of the grief to your mother and me."

"I'm very sorry; but what can I do? I can't study—that's certain," said Rex.

"Not just now, perhaps. You will have to miss a term. I have made arrangements for you—how you are to spend the next two months. But I confess I am disappointed in you, Rex. I thought you had more sense than to take up such ideas—to suppose that because you have fallen into a very common trouble, such as most men have to go through, you are loosened from all bonds of duty—just as if your brain had softened and you were no longer a responsible being."

What could Rex say? Inwardly he was in a state of rebellion, but he had no arguments to meet his father's; and while he was feeling, in spite of anything that might be said, that he should like to go off to "the colonies" tomorrow, it lay in a deep fold of his consciousness that he ought to feel—if he had been a better fellow he would have felt—more about his old ties. This is the sort of faith we live by in our soul sicknesses.

Rex got up from his seat, as if he held the conference to be at an end. "You assent to my arrangement, then?" said Mr. Gascoigne, with that distinct resolution of tone which seems to hold one in a vise.

There was a little pause before Rex answered, "I'll try what I can do, sir. I can't promise." His thought was, that trying would be of no use.

His father kept Anna, holding her fast, though she wanted to follow Rex. "Oh, papa," she said, the tears coming with her words when the door had closed; "it is very hard for him. Doesn't he look ill?"

"Yes, but he will soon be better; it will all blow over. And now, Anna, be as quiet as a mouse about it all. Never let it be mentioned when he is gone."

"No, papa. But I would not be like Gwendolen for anything—to have people fall in love with me so. It is very dreadful."

Anna dared not say that she was disappointed at not being allowed to go to the colonies with Rex; but that was her secret feeling, and she often afterward went inwardly over the whole affair, saying to herself, "I should have done with going out, and gloves, and crinoline, and having to talk when I am taken to dinner—and all that!"

I like to mark the time, and connect the course of individual lives with the historic stream, for all classes of thinkers. This was the period when the broadening of gauge in crinolines seemed to demand an agitation for the general enlargement of churches, ball-rooms, and vehicles. But Anna Gascoigne's figure would only allow the size of skirt manufactured for young ladies of fourteen.
