"Philistia, be thou glad of me!"

Having settled his mind on marrying Miss Harleth, Grandcourt displayed a formidable capacity for tailoring means to his ends. For the next fortnight, scarcely a day passed without his arranging a meeting or demonstrating, through emphatic attentions, that she occupied his thoughts. His cousin, Mrs. Torrington, now managed the household affairs, ensuring that Mrs. Davilow and Gwendolen were invited to a grand gathering at Diplow. There, amidst many witnesses, the host lavished distinction upon the dowerless beauty while showing no solicitude for the heiress. The social world—Mr. Gascoigne and all families of consequence within visiting distance of Pennicote—felt a profound assurance regarding the matter. In the rector's mind, this certainty hardened into a resolution to perform his duty by his niece, ensuring the financial settlements were adequate. Indeed, the wonder shared by Mr. Gascoigne and Mrs. Davilow was that an offer, for which so many suitable occasions presented themselves, had not yet been made; and in this wonder, Grandcourt himself was not without a share. Having told Lush of his resolution, he had expected the affair to conclude swiftly. To his own surprise, he had repeatedly promised himself in the morning that he would give Gwendolen the opportunity to accept him that very day, only to find in the evening that the necessary formality remained unaccomplished. This remarkable delay served only to heighten his determination for the next day. He had never admitted to himself that Gwendolen might refuse him, yet—help us all!—we are often unable to act on our certainties. Our objection to a contrary issue, were it possible, rises like a spectral illusion between us and our certainty. We are rationally sure that the blind worm cannot bite us mortally, but the thought of being bitten is so intolerable, and the creature has such a biting look, that we decline to handle it.

He had requested a beautiful horse be brought for Gwendolen to ride. Mrs. Davilow was to accompany her in the carriage, and they were to travel to Diplow for lunch, with Grandcourt conducting them. It was a fine mid-harvest time, neither too warm nor too cool for a noonday ride of five miles to be delightful. Poppies glowed along the borders of the fields; a gentle breeze moved like a social spirit among the ears of uncut corn, winging the shadow of a cloud across the soft gray downs. Here, sheaves stood ready; there, horses strained their muscles under the last load from a wide space of stubble. Everywhere, the green pasture made a broader setting for the corn-fields, and cattle rested under wide branches. The road lay through a stretch of country where dairy-farms looked much as they did in the days of our forefathers—a place where peace and permanence seemed to find a home away from the busy change that sent the railway train flying in the distance.

Yet the spirit of peace and permanence did not penetrate poor Mrs. Davilow's mind enough to overcome her habit of uneasy foreboding. Watching Gwendolen and Grandcourt canter ahead, then slackening their pace to a conversational walk until the carriage caught up, presented a gratifying sight. However, it served chiefly to fuel the conflict of hopes and fears regarding her daughter's lot. Here was an irresistible opportunity for a lover to speak and end all uncertainties, and Mrs. Davilow could only hope with trembling that Gwendolen's decision would be favorable. Certainly, if Rex's love had been repugnant to her, Mr. Grandcourt possessed the advantage of being in complete contrast to him. That he had produced some quite novel impression on her seemed evident in her marked abstinence from satirical observations, nay, her total silence about his characteristics—a silence Mrs. Davilow dared not break. "Is he a man she would be happy with?" was a question that inevitably arose in the mother's mind. "Well, perhaps as happy as she would be with anyone else—or as most other women are"—was the answer with which she tried to quiet herself; for she could not imagine Gwendolen under the influence of any feeling that would make her satisfied in what we traditionally call "mean circumstances."

Grandcourt's own thoughts looked in the same direction: he wanted to be done with the uncertainty of not having spoken. As to any further uncertainty, well, it was something without any reasonable basis, some quality in the air that acted as an irritant to his wishes.

Gwendolen enjoyed the riding, but her pleasure did not break forth in girlish, unpremeditated chat and laughter as it had on that morning with Rex. She spoke a little, and even laughed, but with a lightness as of a far-off echo. For her too, there was some peculiar quality in the air—not, she was sure, any subjugation of her will by Mr. Grandcourt, nor the splendid prospects he meant to offer her. Gwendolen desired everyone, that dignified gentleman included, to understand that she was going to do just as she liked, and that they had better not calculate on her pleasing them. If she chose to take this husband, she would have him know that she was not going to renounce her freedom, or, according to her favorite formula, "not going to do as other women did."

Grandcourt's speeches this morning were, as usual, of that brief sort which never fails to make a conversational figure when the speaker is held important in his circle. Stopping so soon, they gave signs of a suppressed and formidable ability to say more, and possessed the meritorious quality of allowing lengthiness to others.

"How do you like Criterion's paces?" he said after they had entered the park and were slackening from a canter to a walk.

"He is delightful to ride. I should like to have a leap with him, if it would not frighten mamma. There was a good wide channel we passed five minutes ago. I should like to have a gallop back and take it."

"Pray do. We can take it together."

"No, thanks. Mamma is so timid—if she saw me it might make her ill."

"Let me go and explain. Criterion would take it without fail."

"No—indeed—you are very kind—but it would alarm her too much. I dare take any leap when she is not by; but I do it and don't tell her about it."

"We can let the carriage pass and then set off."

"No, no, pray don't think of it any more: I spoke quite randomly," said Gwendolen. She began to feel a new objection to carrying out her own proposition.

"But Mrs. Davilow knows I shall take care of you."

"Yes, but she would think of you as having to take care of my broken neck."

There was a considerable pause before Grandcourt said, looking toward her, "I should like to have the right always to take care of you."

Gwendolen did not turn her eyes on him. It seemed to her a long while that she was first blushing, and then turning pale, but to Grandcourt's rate of judgment she answered soon enough, with the lightest flute-tone and a careless movement of the head, "Oh, I am not sure that I want to be taken care of: if I chose to risk breaking my neck, I should like to be at liberty to do it."

She checked her horse as she spoke and turned in her saddle, looking toward the advancing carriage. Her eyes swept across Grandcourt as she made this movement, but there was no language in them to correct the carelessness of her reply. At that very moment, she was aware that she was risking something—not her neck, but the possibility of finally checking Grandcourt's advances—and she did not feel contented with that possibility.

"Damn her!" thought Grandcourt as he too checked his horse. He was not a wordy thinker, and this explosive phrase stood for mixed impressions which eloquent interpreters might have expanded into sentences full of an irritated sense that he was being mystified, and a determination that this girl should not make a fool of him. Did she want him to throw himself at her feet and declare that he was dying for her? It was not by that gate that she could enter on the privileges he could give her. Or did she expect him to write his proposals? Equally a delusion. He would not make his offer in any way that could place him definitely in the position of being rejected. But as to her accepting him, she had done it already in accepting his marked attentions; and anything which happened to break them off would be understood to her disadvantage. She was merely coquetting, then?

However, the carriage came up, and no further tête-à-tête could well occur before their arrival at the house, where there was abundant company. To whom Gwendolen, clad in riding-dress with her hat laid aside, and clad also in the repute of being chosen by Mr. Grandcourt, was naturally a centre of observation. Since the objectionable Mr. Lush was not there to look at her, this stimulus of admiring attention heightened her spirits and dispersed, for the time, the uneasy consciousness of divided impulses which threatened her with repentance of her own acts. Whether Grandcourt had been offended or not there was no judging: his manners were unchanged, but Gwendolen's acuteness had not gone deeper than to discern that his manners were no clue for her, and because these were unchanged she was not the less afraid of him.

She had not been at Diplow before except to dine. Since certain points of view from the windows and the garden were worth showing, Lady Flora Hollis proposed after luncheon, when some of the guests had dispersed and the sun was sloping toward four o'clock, that the remaining party should make a little exploration. Here came frequent opportunities when Grandcourt might have retained Gwendolen apart and spoken to her unheard. But no! He indeed spoke to no one else, but what he said was nothing more eager or intimate than it had been in their first interview. He looked at her not less than usual; and some of her defiant spirit having come back, she looked full at him in return, not caring—rather preferring—that his eyes had no expression in them.

But at last it seemed as if he entertained some contrivance. After they had nearly made the tour of the grounds, the whole party stopped by the pool to be amused with Fetch's accomplishment of bringing a water lily to the bank like Cowper's spaniel Beau, and having been disappointed in his first attempt insisted on his trying again.

Here Grandcourt, who stood with Gwendolen outside the group, turned deliberately, fixing his eyes on a knoll planted with American shrubs and having a winding path up it. He said languidly, "This is a bore. Shall we go up there?"

"Oh, certainly—since we are exploring," said Gwendolen. She was rather pleased, and yet afraid.

The path was too narrow for him to offer his arm, and they walked up in silence. When they were on the bit of platform at the summit, Grandcourt said, "There is nothing to be seen here: the thing was not worth climbing."

How was it that Gwendolen did not laugh? She was perfectly silent, holding up the folds of her robe like a statue, and giving a harder grasp to the handle of her whip, which she had snatched up automatically with her hat when they had first set off.

"What sort of a place do you prefer?" said Grandcourt.

"Different places are agreeable in their way. On the whole, I think, I prefer places that are open and cheerful. I am not fond of anything sombre."

"Your place of Offendene is too sombre...."

"It is, rather."

"You will not remain there long, I hope."

"Oh, yes, I think so. Mamma likes to be near her sister."

Silence for a short space.

"It is not to be supposed that *you* will always live there, though Mrs. Davilow may."

"I don't know. We women can't go in search of adventures—to find out the North-West Passage or the source of the Nile, or to hunt tigers in the East. We must stay where we grow, or where the gardeners like to transplant us. We are brought up like the flowers, to look as pretty as we can, and be dull without complaining. That is my notion about the plants; they are often bored, and that is the reason why some of them have got poisonous. What do you think?" Gwendolen had run on rather nervously, lightly whipping the rhododendron bush in front of her.

"I quite agree. Most things are bores," said Grandcourt, his mind having been pushed into an easy current, away from its intended track. But, after a moment's pause, he continued in his broken, refined drawl, "But a woman can be married."

"Some women can."

"You, certainly, unless you are obstinately cruel."

"I am not sure that I am not both cruel and obstinate." Here Gwendolen suddenly turned her head and looked full at Grandcourt, whose eyes she had felt to be upon her throughout their conversation. She was wondering what the effect of looking at him would be on herself rather than on him.

He stood perfectly still, half a yard or more away from her; and it flashed through her mind what a sort of lotus-eater's stupor had begun in him and was taking possession of her. Then he said, "Are you as uncertain about yourself as you make others about you?"

"I am quite uncertain about myself; I don't know how uncertain others may be."

"And you wish them to understand that you don't care?" said Grandcourt, with a touch of new hardness in his tone.

"I did not say that," Gwendolen replied, hesitatingly, and turning her eyes away whipped the rhododendron bush again. She wished she were on horseback that she might set off on a canter. It was impossible to set off running down the knoll.

"You do care, then," said Grandcourt, not more quickly, but with a softened drawl.

"Ha! my whip!" said Gwendolen, in a little scream of distress. She had let it go—what could be more natural in a slight agitation?—and—but this seemed less natural in a gold-handled whip which had been left altogether to itself
