Life is a fickle mother: sometimes she adorns herself in jewels, strides up marble staircases with chin high, ignoring the servants trailing behind; at other times, she wears rags, wanders dark alleys, swallows hot gin, and screams amidst the chaos of the poor. Yet tonight, she arrived as a frugal matron, neat and efficient, brimming with cheerful morning thoughts and a clever knack for finding abundance in scarcity.

Mrs. Meyrick's home was quiet. The front parlor overlooked the river, the rear faced the gardens, allowing the window to remain open even as she read aloud to her daughters, refreshing the air of the small double room where a lamp and two candles burned. The candles sat on a separate table for Kate, who was sketching illustrations for a publisher; the lamp served not only the reader but also Amy and Mab, who were embroidering satin cushions destined for "the great world."

From the outside, the house appeared narrow and shabby, the bright light filtering through the holland blind revealing a heavy, old-fashioned window frame. Yet there is a profound comfort in knowing that many such grim-walled slices of space in our foggy London have been, and still are, the homes of a culture spotlessly free from vulgarity. Poverty renders display an impersonal question, turning the grand shows of the world into mere spectacles that stir only petty rivalry or vain efforts at possession.

The Meyricks belonged to this kind of home. They clung to this specific row-house because its interior was filled with objects always in their proper places. For the mother, these items held memories of her marriage; for the young ones, they were as necessary and unquestioned a part of their world as the stars of the Great Bear seen from the back windows. Mrs. Meyrick had endured much financial stinginess to preserve certain engravings specially cherished by her husband. The narrow walls held a world history in scenes and heads the children had memorized since childhood. The chairs and tables were old friends preferred to anything new. In these two little parlors, devoid of furniture a broker would have cared to cheapen except for the prints and piano, there existed space and apparatus for a wide-glancing, nicely-selected life, opened to the highest things in music, painting, and poetry. Even in times of greatest scarcity, before Kate could earn paid work, they likely never lacked a servant to light fires and sweep rooms. Yet they remained fastidious, unable to believe that the manners of ladies in the fashionable world were as coarse, selfish, and laced with slang as depicted in so-called literary photographs. The Meyricks possessed their little oddities, streaks of eccentricity flowing from both mother and father; their minds were like medieval houses with unexpected recesses and openings, flights of steps, and sudden outlooks.

Mother and daughters were bound by a triple knot: family love, admiration for the finest work and best actions, and habitual industry. Hans's desire to spend his money on making their lives more luxurious had been resisted by all. Both they and he were thus saved from regretting the threatened triumph of his artistic yearning over the attractions of secured income—a triumph that would eventually force him to give up his fellowship. They could all laugh at his Gavarni caricatures and hold him blameless for following a natural bent, their unselfishness and independence leaving no obstacle in his path. It was enough for them to continue as before, enjoying only a grand treat of opera-going in the gallery when Hans visited.

Seeing the group they made that evening, one could hardly wish them to change their way of life. They were all alike small, perfectly proportioned to their miniature rooms. Mrs. Meyrick was reading aloud from a French book; she was a lively little woman, half French, half Scotch, with a pretty articulateness of speech that seemed to bring daylight into her hearer's understanding. Though not yet fifty, her rippling hair, covered by a Quakerish net cap, was chiefly gray, while her eyebrows were brown as the bright eyes below them. Her black dress, almost like a priest's cassock with its rows of buttons, suited a neat figure hardly five feet high. The daughters matched the mother, except that Mab possessed Hans's light hair and complexion, with a bossy, irregular brow and other quaintnesses reminding one of him. Everything about them was compact: from the firm coils of their hair, fastened back *à la Chinoise*, to their gray skirts in Puritan nonconformity with the fashion, which at that time would have demanded that four feminine circumferences fill all the free space in the front parlor. All four, if they had been wax figures, might have been packed easily into a fashionable lady's traveling trunk. Their faces seemed full of speech, as if their minds had been shelled, after the manner of horse-chestnuts, becoming brightly visible. The only large thing of its kind in the room was Hafiz, the Persian cat, comfortably poised on the brown leather back of a chair, opening his large eyes now and then to ensure the lower animals were not causing mischief.

The book Mrs. Meyrick held was Erckmann-Chatrian's *Historie d'un Conscrit*. She had just finished reading it aloud when Mab, who had let her work fall on the floor while stretching her head forward to fix her eyes on the reader, exclaimed, "I think that is the finest story in the world."

"Of course, Mab!" said Amy. "It is the last you have heard. Everything that pleases you is the best in its turn."

"It is hardly to be called a story," said Kate. "It is a bit of history brought near us with a strong telescope. We can see the soldiers' faces: no, it is more than that—we can hear everything—we can almost hear their hearts beat."

"I don't care what you call it," said Mab, flicking away her thimble. "Call it a chapter in Revelations. It makes me want to do something good, something grand. It makes me so sorry for everybody. It makes me like Schiller—I want to take the world in my arms and kiss it. I must kiss you instead, little mother!" She threw her arms around her mother's neck.

"Whenever you are in that mood, Mab, down goes your work," said Amy. "It would be doing something good to finish your cushion without soiling it."

"Oh—oh—oh!" groaned Mab as she stooped to pick up her work and thimble. "I wish I had three wounded conscripts to take care of."

"You would spill their beef tea while you were talking," said Amy.

"Poor Mab! Don't be hard on her," said the mother. "Give me the embroidery now, child. You go on with your enthusiasm, and I will go on with the pink and white poppy."

"Well, ma, I think you are more caustic than Amy," said Kate, drawing her head back to look at her drawing.

"Oh—oh—oh!" cried Mab again, rising and stretching her arms. "I wish something wonderful would happen. I feel like the deluge. The waters of the great deep are broken up, and the windows of heaven are opened. I must sit down and play the scales."

Mab began opening the piano while the others laughed at this climax, when a cab stopped before the house, followed immediately by a quick rap of the knocker.

"Dear me!" said Mrs. Meyrick, starting up. "It is after ten, and Phoebe is gone to bed." She hastened out, leaving the parlor door open.

"Mr. Deronda!" The girls heard this exclamation from their mother. Mab clasped her hands, whispering loudly, "There now! Something *is* going to happen." Kate and Amy abandoned their work in amazement. But Deronda's tone in reply was so low they could not hear his words, and Mrs. Meyrick immediately closed the parlor door.

"I know I am trusting to your goodness in a most extraordinary way," Deronda continued after giving his brief narrative. "But you can imagine how helpless I feel with a young creature like this on my hands. I could not go with her among strangers, and in her nervous state I should dread taking her into a house full of servants. I have trusted to your mercy. I hope you will not think my act unwarrantable."

"On the contrary. You have honored me by trusting me. I see your difficulty. Pray bring her in. I will go and prepare the girls."

While Deronda returned to the cab, Mrs. Meyrick turned back into the parlor and said, "Here is somebody to take care of instead of your wounded conscripts, Mab: a poor girl who was going to drown herself in despair. Mr. Deronda found her only just in time to save her. He brought her along in his boat and did not know what else it would be safe to do with her, so he has trusted us and brought her here. It seems she is a Jewess, but quite refined, he says—knowing Italian and music."

The three girls, wondering and expectant, came forward and stood near each other in mute confidence that they were all feeling alike under this appeal to their compassion. Mab looked rather awe-stricken, as if this answer to her wish were something preternatural.

Meanwhile, Deronda approached the door of the cab where the pale face was now gazing out with roused observation. "I have brought you to some of the kindest people in the world," he said. "There are daughters like you. It is a happy home. Will you let me take you to them?"

She stepped out obediently, putting her hand in his and forgetting her hat. When Deronda led her into the full light of the parlor where the four little women awaited her, she made a picture that would have stirred much duller sensibilities than theirs. At first, she was a little dazed by the sudden light, and before she could concentrate her glance, he had put her hand into the mother's. He was inwardly rejoicing that the Meyricks were so small; the dark-curled head was the highest among them. The poor wanderer could not be afraid of these gentle faces so near hers. Now she looked at each of them in turn while the mother said, "You must be weary, poor child."

"We will take care of you—we will comfort you—we will love you," cried Mab, no longer able to restrain herself, and taking the small right hand caressingly between both her own. This gentle welcoming warmth penetrated the bewildered one. She hung back just enough to see better the four faces in front of her, whose goodwill was being reflected in hers, not in any smile, but in that undefinable change which tells us that anxiety is passing into contentment. For an instant she looked up at Deronda, as if referring all this mercy to him, and then, turning to Mrs. Meyrick with more collectedness in her sweet tones than he had heard before, she said, "I am a stranger. I am a Jewess. You might have thought I was wicked."

"No, we are sure you are good," burst out Mab.

"We think no evil of you, poor child. You shall be safe with us," said Mrs. Meyrick. "Come now and sit down. You must have some food, and then you must go to rest."

The stranger looked up again at Deronda, who asked, "You will have no more fears with these friends? You will rest tonight?"

"Oh, I should not fear. I should rest. I think these are the ministering angels."

Mrs. Meyrick wanted to lead her to a seat, but again hanging back gently, the poor weary thing spoke as if with a scruple at being received without a further account of herself. "My name is Mirah Lapidoth. I am come a long way, all the way from Prague by myself. I made my escape. I ran away from dreadful things. I came to find my mother and brother in London. I had been taken from my mother when I was little, but I thought I could find her again. I had trouble—the houses were all gone—I could not find her. It has been a long while, and I had not much money. That is why I am in distress."

"Our mother will be good to you," cried Mab. "See what a nice little mother she is!"

"Do sit down now," said Kate, moving a chair forward, while Amy ran to get some tea.

Mirah resisted no longer but seated herself with perfect grace, crossing her little feet, laying her hands one over the other on her lap, and looking at her friends with placid reverence. Whereupon Hafiz, who had been watching the scene restlessly, came forward with tail erect and rubbed himself against her ankles. Deronda felt it time to go.

"Will you allow me to come again and inquire—perhaps at five tomorrow?" he said to Mrs. Meyrick.

"Yes, pray; we shall have had time to make acquaintance then."

"Good-bye," said Deronda, looking down at Mirah and putting out his hand. She rose as she took it, and the moment brought back to them both strongly the other moment when she had first taken that outstretched hand. She lifted her eyes to his and said with reverential fervor, "The God of our fathers bless you and deliver you from all evil as you have delivered me. I did not believe there was any man so good. None before have thought me worthy of the best. You found me poor and miserable, yet you have given me the best."

Deronda could not speak, but with silent adieux to the Meyricks, he hurried away.
