Knowledge is often hailed as power, yet few pause to consider the terrifying magnitude of Ignorance. While knowledge slowly constructs through patient centuries, ignorance can dismantle in a single hour. It burns the records of discovery to fuel a fleeting roast, shriveling the many-colored creation into blackness with a careless "Let there not be." Knowledge operates with a conscience, reined by scruple; ignorance, however, is a blind giant who, once unbound, treats the pillars of human good as toys, turning joy into a buried Babylon. In the growth of a single life, it is this blindness—the false conceit that one can compel sequences without understanding their bonds—that precipitates the soul onto destruction.

It was half-past ten when Gwendolen Harleth arrived at the station for Offendene, her gloomy journey from Leubronn finally ended. No carriage awaited her; a telegram sent in haste from Dover had specified a later train, and her impatience had driven her forward without picturing the solitude of arriving unannounced at a remote halt. Deposited as a *femme sole* amidst her large trunks, she waited in the Railway Inn's waiting-room. The dirty paint, the dusty decanter of flat water, and the large, admonishing texts calling for repentance formed a dreary tableau that mirrored her family's troubles. Hurrying to the outer door, she found the sunshine itself melancholy, casting shadows on autumnal leaves shivering in the wind. A cock and two hens, having lost their offspring, wandered aimlessly, mirroring her own disorientation. The railway official, a new man with a suspicious cast in his eye, regarded her and her luggage with an innocence that felt like contempt. The vehicle approaching was a dirty old barouche, being prepared by an elderly laborer. These were contemptible details, yet they accumulated with the force of a theory, weighing heavily on a young lady of fastidious taste and Indian shawls, stimulating an imagination eager for disagreeables.

During the slow, lumbering drive, Gwendolen's discontent rang its sad changes. Her vision from Leubronn had been that the family would go abroad, living poorly but not destitutely. Instead, she faced a dull existence in England, surrounded by her sisters growing up in tediousness while her mother grew more melancholy. She refused to submit, though weariness and disgust began to replace her resistance. The self-delight of her past faded before the futility of being charming or clever when events turned against her. Men, she decided, were hateful—not merely as thieves, but as obstacles that prevented her from using stolen goods for her own ends. She had begun to hate Grandcourt specifically for being the barrier that kept her from marriage.

As the vehicle drew near the house, a figure appeared under the portico, bringing a rush of less selfish feeling. When Gwendolen saw her mother's dear, beautiful face marked with fresh lines of sadness, she threw her arms around her neck, momentarily feeling all sorrow only in relation to her mother's pain. Behind them stood the four superfluous girls, each possessing a peculiar world of no importance to others, yet all feeling Gwendolen's presence as a relief from misfortune. Good Miss Merry, usually a meek governess, busied herself with the trunks and coachman's pay, while Mrs. Davilow and Gwendolen hastened upstairs to the black-and-yellow bedroom.

"Never mind, mamma dear," Gwendolen said, pressing her handkerchief against her mother's tears. "I will do something. Things will come right." She felt every word of her speech, a rush of compassionate tenderness stirring her capacity for resolution. The vague projects of her journey sprang into new definiteness. Suddenly, she perceived how she could be "something." Her mother, forgetting their dire straits, looked at her with adoration. "Bless you, my good, good darling! I can be happy, if you can!"

But later that day, the courage ebbed. The old slippery rocks and weedy places reappeared. The immediate comforts of the large house—the roomy stillness, the cared-for luxuries, the private tray of favorite food—remained, but the reality of their misfortune was now a grievous tyrannical inmate. When Gwendolen descended to the drawing-room, fresh as a newly-dipped swan, she sat beside her mother with deliberate intention.

"What have you thought of doing, exactly, mamma?"

"Oh, my dear, the next thing is to move away. Mr. Haynes is glad to have the house back. Lord Brackenshaw's agent, Bazley, will arrange everything."

"I cannot help thinking that Lord Brackenshaw would let you stay here rent-free," Gwendolen said, her talents applied to discerning admiration rather than business.

"My dear child, Lord Brackenshaw is in Scotland. Besides, what could we do in this house without servants or money to warm it? We have nothing to carry but our clothes."

"I suppose you mean to go abroad?"

"Oh, no. How could we travel? You never learned anything about income and expenses." Mrs. Davilow tried to smile, adding mournfully, "that makes it so much harder for you."

"But where are we to go?" Gwendolen asked, a new current of fear passing through her.

"It is Sawyer's Cottage."

At first, Gwendolen remained silent, paling with anger. Then, with haughtiness, she declared, "That is impossible. Something else ought to have been thought of. I will not submit to it."

"My sweet child, what else could have been thought of? Your uncle is suffering; he has his family to bring up. We have absolutely nothing except what he and my sister give us. We must try to earn something. I and the girls are going to work a table-cloth border for the Ladies' Charity at Winchester."

Mrs. Davilow spoke timidly, dreading the shock to Gwendolen more than her own fate. She hoped there was something better in the background.

"But surely somewhere else than Sawyer's Cottage might have been found," Gwendolen persisted, haunted by the image of the house where an exciseman had lived.

"No, indeed. Houses are scarce. It is not so very bad. You shall sit alone whenever you like."

The sympathy for her mother had gone so low that Gwendolen ignored these deprecatory words. "I cannot conceive that all your property is gone at once," she said, coloring with fresh anger. "How can you be sure in so short a time? It is not a week since you wrote to me."

"The first news came much earlier. But I would not spoil your pleasure."

"Oh, how vexatious!" Gwendolen exclaimed. "If I had known, I could have brought home the money I had won... I had nearly two hundred pounds." She paused, then added impetuously, "Everything has gone against me. People have come near me only to blight me."

Among the "people" she included Deronda. If he had not interfered, she might have returned to the gaming-table and won back her losses.

"We must resign ourselves to the will of Providence," said Mrs. Davilow, startled by the revelation of gambling but daring no more. She assumed "people" meant Grandcourt.

"But I don't resign myself," Gwendolen countered. "What is the good of calling people's wickedness Providence? You said in your letter it was Mr. Lassman's fault. Has he run away with it all?"

"No, dear. Great speculations. He risked too much."

"I don't call that Providence. It was his improvidence. Can't we go to law? My uncle ought to take measures."

"My dear child, law can never bring back money lost in that way. Besides, one must have a fortune to get any law: there is no law for people who are ruined."

"But I don't resign myself to live at Sawyer's Cottage and see you working for sixpences... I shall do what is more befitting our rank and education."

"I am sure your uncle will admire you," Mrs. Davilow said, glad of an opening. "Both your uncle and aunt have felt that your abilities were a fortune for you. They have heard of something within your reach."

"What is that, mamma?" Gwendolen asked, anger giving way to interest.

"There are two situations. One in a bishop's family with three daughters, the other in a high-class school. Your French, music, dancing, and manners are exactly what is wanted. Each pays a hundred a year. Just for the present, to save you from the petty way of living..."

"What! Be like Miss Graves at Madame Meunier's? No."

"I think Dr. Monpert's would be more suitable. There could be no hardship in a bishop's family."

"Excuse me, mamma. There are hardships everywhere for a governess. I don't see that it would be pleasanter to be looked down on in a bishop's family. Besides, I hate teaching. I would rather emigrate than be a governess."

What emigration entailed, Gwendolen was not called upon to explain. Mrs. Davilow was mute, fearing the collision with Gwendolen's uncle and aunt. There was an air of reticence in Gwendolen's haughty speeches implying a definite plan in reserve.

"I have some ornaments, mamma, and I could sell them," Gwendolen said. "I want a little sum to go on with. Jocosa might go and ask Marshall at Wanchester."

"She would do anything she could," Mrs. Davilow replied. "She wanted me to take all her savings—three hundred pounds. I told her to set up a little school."

"Oh, recommend her for the bishop's daughters," Gwendolen said with a sudden gleam of laughter. "I am sure she will do better than I should."

"Do take care not to say such things to your uncle," Mrs. Davilow warned. "He will be hurt at your despising what he has exerted himself about."

"There is some one else I want to consult first. Are the Arrowpoints at Quetcham still, and is Herr Klesmer there?"

"Oh, my dear, Jeffries is not here, and the dealer has taken the horses. But some one could go from Leek's farm. The Arrowpoints are at Quetcham. Do you want to send before tomorrow?"

"Yes, as soon as possible. I will write a note," Gwendolen said, rising.

"What can you be thinking of, Gwen?" Mrs. Davilow asked, relieved by signs of alacrity.

"Don't mind what, there's a dear, good mamma," Gwendolen said, reseating herself to give atoning caresses. "I mean to do something. Never mind what until it is all settled. And then you shall be comforted." Holding her mother's head, she kissed the trembling eyelids. "But mind you don't contradict me or put hindrances in my way. I must decide for myself. My life is my own affair. And I think"—her tone took an edge of scorn—"I think I can do better for you than let you live in Sawyer's Cottage."

Rising again, Gwendolen went to a desk and wrote the following note to Klesmer:

*Miss Harleth presents her compliments to Herr Klesmer, and ventures to request of him the very great favor that he will call upon her, if possible, to-morrow. Her reason for presuming so far on his kindness is of a very serious nature. Unfortunate family circumstances have obliged her to take a course in which she can only turn for advice to the great knowledge and judgment of Herr Klesmer.*

"Pray get this sent to Quetcham at once," Gwendolen instructed. "The man must be told to wait for an answer. Let no time be lost."

For the moment, the absorbing purpose was to dispatch the letter. But when assured of this, another anxiety arose, keeping her in a state of uneasy excitement. If Klesmer were not at Quetcham, what could she do next? Gwendolen's belief in her star had suffered bruises. A splendid marriage had shown a hideous flaw; the chances of roulette had not adjusted to her claims; a stranger had thrust himself between her and her intentions. The conduct of those uninteresting people who managed the world's business had been culpable in points most injurious to her. Gwendolen Harleth, with all her beauty and conscious force, felt the close threats of humiliation. For the first time, the conditions of this world seemed like a hurrying, roaring crowd in which she had got astray, no more cared for than a myriad of other girls. If Klesmer were not there, that would be all of a piece with the rest: the unwelcome negative urged itself as a probability, setting her brain working at desperate alternatives to deliver her from Sawyer's Cottage or the ultimate necessity of "taking a situation," a phrase that summed up the disagreeables most wounding to her pride.

Still, Klesmer might be there. Gwendolen thought of the result with a hopefulness that cast a satisfactory light over her peculiar troubles, as what might well enter into the biography of celebrities and remarkable persons. And if she had heard her immediate acquaintances cross-examined as to whether they thought her remarkable, the first who said "No" would have surprised her.
