How does one map the labyrinth of a mind stripped bare by the sterile hunger of a fastidious egoism? Here, all direct desire has dulled, shrinking from motive into a mere, wavering expectation of what others might desire. It is a landscape of shifting moods, where a sudden, rank impulse sprouts amidst a sea of general weediness. Such a condition often befalls a life lived too freely, unmolded by the heavy, shaping pressure of obligation. As the old maxim warns, "As you like" is a terrible signpost; it leads nowhere but into the fog.

Powerful men announce their intentions with the economy of a single word. When Grandcourt learned Gwendolen had fled Leubronn, his casual dismissal of the fashionable resort as a "beastly hole"—worse even than Baden—was a decree to Mr. Lush that his patron intended to return immediately to Diplow. Yet, the execution of such decrees is rarely swift. Grandcourt loitered through the following day, offering no distinct orders. Perhaps he sensed Lush's anticipation; he lingered over his grooming, descending upon the terrace and the gambling rooms with a faded, perfect distinction that made the flushed vitality of others seem merely vulgar. He cultivated an indifference to everyone and everything, except when Lady Mallinger approached. Then, he raised his hat, paused, and offered a reply that proved he had listened to her recommendation of the waters: "Yes; I heard somebody say how providential it was that there always happened to be springs at gambling places."

"Oh, that was a joke," said innocent Lady Mallinger, misled by his languid gravity, "an imitation of the old one about towns and rivers."

"Ah, perhaps," Grandcourt replied, his face unchanged. Lady Mallinger deemed this worth reporting to Sir Hugo, who chuckled. "Oh, my dear, he is not a fool. Do not suppose he cannot see a joke. He can play his cards as well as most of us."

"He has never seemed to me a very sensible man," Lady Mallinger admitted, excusing herself. She harbored a secret aversion to Grandcourt; to her, he was merely a living monument to her own failure as a wife—the failure to present Sir Hugo with a son. She constantly reflected that her husband might fairly regret his choice, and that a gentleman, naturally disinclined to disappointment, might treat her with roughness if he felt slighted.

Deronda, too, received a nod from Grandcourt. He felt no gratitude for it, yet he returned it with perfect civility. No amount of reasoning could erase the early-rooted feeling that his birth had been attended with injury for which his father was to blame. Seeing that but for this injury, Grandcourt's prospects might have been his own, Deronda was proudly resolute not to behave in any way that could be interpreted as irritation. He saw the easy descent into mean, unreasoning rancor and triumph in another's frustration, and determined not to slide into that ugly pit. Instead, he clung to the kinder affections within him as a possession. Pride served him well—the pride of refusing to recognize a disadvantage for oneself that vulgar minds exaggerate, such as the shabby equipage of poverty. He would not allow a man like Grandcourt to suppose himself envied. Yet, there is no guarding against interpretation. Grandcourt believed that Deronda, the poor devil he was certain was his cousin by the father's side, inwardly winced under their mutual position. Therefore, the presence of this less fortunate relative was more agreeable to Grandcourt than it would otherwise have been. An imaginary envy, the idea that others feel their comparative deficiency, is the ordinary train of egoism; and his pet dogs were not the only beings he liked to feel his power over, making them jealous. Thus, he was civil enough to exchange words with Deronda on the terrace about the hunting round Diplow, even saying, "You had better come over for a run or two when the season begins."

Lush, not displeased by the delay, amused himself with gossip among Sir Hugo and answering questions about Grandcourt's affairs regarding his willingness to part with his interest in Diplow. He spoke freely of his patron's personal entanglements, knowing enough already to feel released from silence on a sunny autumn day when nothing was more agreeable than to speak of a tyrannous patron behind his back. Sir Hugo willingly inclined his ear to this good-humored scandal, which he called *traits de mœurs*, though he was strict about keeping such communications from hearers who might take them too seriously. Whatever knowledge he held of his nephew's secrets, he had never spoken of it to Deronda, who considered Grandcourt a pale-blooded mortal but was far from wishing to hear how the red corpuscles had been washed out of him. It was Lush's policy to gratify everyone when he had no reason not to; the baronet always treated him well, as one of those easy-handled personages who, frequenting the society of gentlemen without being exactly gentlemen themselves, can be the more serviceable, like the second-best articles of our wardrobe, used with comfortable freedom from anxiety.

"Well, you will let me know the turn of events," said Sir Hugo, "if this marriage seems likely to come off after all, or if anything else happens to make the want of money pressing. My plan would be much better for him than burdening Ryelands."

"That's true," said Lush, "only it must not be urged on him—just placed in his way that the scent may tickle him. Grandcourt is not a man to be always led by what makes for his own interest; especially if you let him see that it makes for your interest too. I'm attached to him, of course. I've given up everything else for the sake of keeping by him, and it has lasted a good fifteen years now. He would not easily get any one else to fill my place. He's a peculiar character, is Henleigh Grandcourt, and it has been growing on him of late years. However, I'm of a constant disposition, and I've been a sort of guardian to him since he was twenty; an uncommonly fascinating fellow he was then, to be sure—and could be now, if he liked. I'm attached to him; and it would be a good deal worse for him if he missed me at his elbow."

Sir Hugo did not think it needful to express sympathy or even assent, and perhaps Lush himself did not expect this sketch of his motives to be taken as exact. But how can a man avoid himself as a subject in conversation? And he must make some sort of decent toilet in words, as in cloth and linen. Lush's listener was not severe: a member of Parliament could allow for the necessities of verbal toilet; and the dialogue went on without any change of mutual estimate.

However, Lush's easy prospect of indefinite procrastination was cut off the next morning by Grandcourt's saluting him with the question, "Are you making all the arrangements for our starting by the Paris train?"

"I didn't know you meant to start," said Lush, not exactly taken by surprise.

"You might have known," said Grandcourt, looking at the burned length of his cigar and speaking in that lowered tone usual with him when he meant to express disgust and be peremptory. "Just see to everything, will you? and mind no brute gets into the same carriage with us. And leave my P. P. C. at the Mallingers'."

In consequence, they were in Paris the next day. Here, Lush was gratified by the proposal that he should go straight on to Diplow to see that everything was right, while Grandcourt and the valet remained behind. It was not until several days later that Lush received the telegram ordering the carriage to the Wanchester station.

He had used the interim actively, not only in carrying out Grandcourt's orders about the stud and household but in learning all he could of Gwendolen and how things were going on at Offendene. What was the probable effect that the news of the family misfortunes would have on Grandcourt's fitful obstinacy he felt to be quite incalculable. So far as the girl's poverty might be an argument that she would accept an offer from him now in spite of any previous coyness, it might remove that bitter objection to risk a repulse which Lush divined to be one of Grandcourt's deterring motives; on the other hand, the certainty of acceptance was just "the sort of thing" to make him lapse hither and thither with no more apparent will than a moth. Lush had had his patron under close observation for many years and knew him perhaps better than he knew any other subject; but to know Grandcourt was to doubt what he would do in any particular case. It might happen that he would behave with an apparent magnanimity, like the hero of a modern French drama, whose sudden start into moral splendor after much lying and meanness leaves you little confidence as to any part of his career that may follow the fall of the curtain. Indeed, what attitude would have been more honorable for a final scene than that of declining to seek an heiress for her money, and determining to marry the attractive girl who had none? But Lush had some general certainties about Grandcourt, and one was that of all inward movements those of generosity were least likely to occur in him. Of what use, however, is a general certainty that an insect will not walk with his head hindmost, when what you need to know is the play of inward stimulus that sends him hither and thither in a network of possible paths? Thus, Lush was much at fault as to the probable issue between Grandcourt and Gwendolen, when what he desired was a perfect confidence that they would never be married. He would have consented willingly that Grandcourt should marry an heiress, or that he should marry Mrs. Glasher: in the one match there would have been the immediate abundance that prospective heirship could not supply, in the other there would have been the security of the wife's gratitude, for Lush had always been Mrs. Glasher's friend; and that the future Mrs. Grandcourt should not be socially received could not affect his private comfort. He would not have minded, either, that there should be no marriage in question at all; but he felt himself justified in doing his utmost to hinder a marriage with a girl who was likely to bring nothing but trouble to her husband—not to speak of annoyance if not ultimate injury to her husband's old companion, whose future Mr. Lush earnestly wished to make as easy as possible, considering that he had well deserved such compensation for leading a dog's life, though that of a dog who enjoyed many tastes undisturbed, and who profited by a large establishment. He wished for himself what he felt to be good, and was not conscious of wishing harm to any one else; unless perhaps it were just now a little harm to the inconvenient and impertinent Gwendolen. But the easiest-humored of luxury and music, the toad-eater the least liable to nausea, must be expected to have his susceptibilities. And Mr. Lush was accustomed to be treated by the world in general as an apt, agreeable fellow: he had not made up his mind to be insulted by more than one person.

With this imperfect preparation of a war policy, Lush awaited Grandcourt's arrival, doing little more than wondering how the campaign would begin. The first day Grandcourt was much occupied with the stables, and amongst other things he ordered a groom to put a side-saddle on Criterion and let him review the horse's paces. This marked indication of purpose set Lush on considering over again whether he should incur the ticklish consequences of speaking first, while he was still sure that no compromising step had been taken; and he rose the next morning almost resolved that if Grandcourt seemed in as good a humor as yesterday and entered at all into talk, he would let drop the interesting facts about Gwendolen and her family, just to see how they would work, and to get some guidance. But Grandcourt did not enter into talk, and in answer to a question even about his own convenience, no fish could have maintained a more unwinking silence. After he had read his letters he gave various orders to be executed or transmitted by Lush, and then thrust his shoulder toward that useful person, who accordingly rose to leave the room. But before he was out of the door, Grandcourt turned his head slightly and gave a broken, languid "Oh."

"What is it?" said Lush, who, it must have been observed, did not take his dusty puddings with a respectful air.

"Shut the door, will you? I can't speak into the corridor."

Lush closed the door, came forward, and chose to sit down.

After a little pause, Grandcourt said, "Is Miss Harleth at Offendene?" He was quite certain that Lush had made it his business to inquire about her, and he had some pleasure in thinking that Lush did not want *him* to inquire.

"Well, I hardly know," said Lush, carelessly. "The family's utterly done up. They and the Gascoignes too have lost all their money. It's owing to some rascally banking business. The poor mother hasn't a *sou*, it seems. She and the girls have to huddle themselves into a little cottage like a laborer's."

"Don't lie to me, if you please," said Grandcourt, in his lowest audible tone. "It's not amusing, and it answers no other purpose."

"What do you mean?" said Lush, more nettled than was common with him—the prospect before him being more than commonly disturbing.

"Just tell me the truth, will you?"

"It's no invention of mine. I have heard the story from several—Bazley, Brackenshaw's man, for one. He is getting a new tenant for Offendene."

"I don't mean that. Is Miss Harleth there, or is she not?" said Grandcourt, in his former tone.

"Upon my soul, I can't tell," said Lush, rather sulkily. "She may have left yesterday. I heard she had taken a situation as governess; she may be gone to it for what I know. But if you wanted to see her no doubt the mother would send for her back." This sneer slipped off his tongue without strict intention.

"Send Hutchins
