'Tis a hard and ill-rewarded task to chart the course of all things by the rigid rule of our own security, as Machiavelli hinted regarding Cæsar Borgia, who planned for every contingency save one: that upon his father's death, his own would swiftly follow.

Grandcourt's significance to this realm was of a grandly passive sort, rooted solely in the inheritance of land. Political storms and social upheavals brushed against him only through the thin wire of his rental income. He glanced over the finest newspaper columns on Schleswig-Holstein, Bismarck's policies, trade unions, and household suffrage, yet his views lacked breadth, embracing all Germans, all merchants, and all voters prone to using the wrong soap under the single epithet of "brutes." Beyond casting a sidelong glance from beneath his eyelids at anyone who mentioned these topics, he retained a silence that shook the convictions of timid thinkers. Yet, within his own sphere, Grandcourt displayed qualities akin to the wildest continental diplomacy.

No movement of Gwendolen in relation to Deronda escaped him. He would deny jealousy, for that would imply doubt in his power to hinder what he had determined against. That his wife should incline toward another man's society would not pain him; what he required was that she be as fully aware as she would be of a locked handcuff that her inclination was helpless to contradict his resolve. Though his entrance into matrimony had been marked by vacillating whim, his interpretation of the bond showed none. He had not repented of his marriage; it had brought aim and new objects for his will. His taste was fastidious, and Gwendolen satisfied it: he would not have liked a wife who had not received elevation from him, nor one who did not command admiration, nor one whose nails were not shaped correctly, nor one whose ear lobes were too large and red, nor one who, despite such perfection, was a ninny unable to make spirited answers. Fewer perhaps may follow him in his contentment that his wife should be in a temper to fly out if she dared, and that she had been urged into marrying him by feelings other than passionate attachment. Still, for those who prefer command to love, one sees no reason why the habit of mind should change precisely at the point of matrimony.

Grandcourt did not feel he had chosen the wrong wife, nor was he going to be fooled or seen in a pitiable light. This was his state of mind—not jealousy, yet his behavior resembled it as yellow resembles yellow, a color resulting from very different causes. He had come to town earlier than usual for legal consultations regarding his will, the transference of mortgages, and the transaction with his uncle concerning the succession to Diplow, which the bait of ready money had finally won him to accept. Another acceptable accompaniment to his presence in town was the presentation of himself with the beautiful bride he had chosen in spite of expectations. True, Grandcourt went about with the sense that he did not care a languid curse for anyone's admiration; yet this state of not-caring, just as much as desire, required its related object—a world of admiring or envying spectators. For if you are fond of looking stonily at smiling persons, the persons must smile, a rudimentary truth forgotten by those who complain of mankind as generally contemptible, since any other aspect of the race must disappoint the voracity of their contempt. Grandcourt, in town for the first time with his wife, enlarged his non-caring abstinence from curses with splendid receptions, conspicuous rides, and distinguished occasions. He wished her to be sought after; he liked that "fellows" should be eager to talk with her and escort her within his observation. There was even a kind of lofty coquetry on her part that he would not have objected to. But what he did not like were her ways in relation to Deronda.

After the musical party at Lady Mallinger's, when Grandcourt had observed the dialogue on the settee as keenly as Hans had, it was characteristic of him to name Deronda for invitation along with the Mallingers, tenaciously avoiding any suggestion that Deronda's presence or absence mattered to him. He made no direct observation to Gwendolen on her behavior that evening, lest the expression of his disgust be too strong for his own pride. But a few days afterward, he remarked, without being careful of the *à propos*, "Nothing makes a woman more of a gawky than looking out after people and showing tempers in public. A woman ought to have good manners. Else it's intolerable to appear with her."

Gwendolen made the expected application, and was not without alarm at the notion of being a gawky. For she, too, with her melancholy distaste for things, preferred that her distaste should include admirers. But the sense of overhanging rebuke only intensified the strain of expectation toward any meeting with Deronda. The novelty and excitement of her town life were like the hurry and constant change of foreign travel; whatever might be the inward despondency, there was a programme to be fulfilled, not without gratification to her many-sided self. But, as always happens with a deep interest, the comparatively rare occasions on which she could exchange words with Deronda had a diffusive effect in her consciousness, magnifying their communication and enlarging the place she imagined it to have in his mind. How could Deronda help this? He certainly did not avoid her; rather, he wished to convince her by every delicate indirect means that her confidence in him had not been indiscreet since it had not lowered his respect. Moreover, he liked being near her—how could it be otherwise? She was something more than a problem: she was a lovely woman, for the turn of whose mind and fate he had a care which, however futile it might be, kept soliciting him as a responsibility, perhaps all the more that, when he dared to think of his own future, he saw it lying far away from this splendid sad-hearted creature, who, because he had once been impelled to arrest her attention momentarily, as he might have seized her arm with warning to hinder her from stepping where there was danger, had turned to him with a beseeching persistent need.

One instance in which Grandcourt stimulated a feeling in Gwendolen that he would have liked to suppress without seeming to care about it had relation to Mirah. Gwendolen's inclination lingered over the project of singing lessons as a sort of obedience to Deronda's advice, but day followed day with that want of perceived leisure which belongs to lives where there is no work to mark off intervals; and the continual liability to Grandcourt's presence and surveillance seemed to flatten every effort to the level of the boredom which his manner expressed; his negative mind was as diffusive as fog, clinging to all objects and spoiling all contact.

But one morning when they were breakfasting, Gwendolen, in a recurrent fit of determination to exercise the old spirit, said, dallying prettily over her prawns without eating them, "I think of making myself accomplished while we are in town, and having singing lessons."

"Why?" said Grandcourt, languidly.

"Why?" echoed Gwendolen, playing at sauciness; "because I can't eat *pâté de foie gras* to make me sleepy, and I can't smoke, and I can't go to the club to make me like to come away again—I want a variety of *ennui*. What would be the most convenient time, when you are busy with your lawyers and people, for me to have lessons from that little Jewess, whose singing is getting all the rage."

"Whenever you like," said Grandcourt, pushing away his plate, and leaning back in his chair while he looked at her with his most lizard-like expression and played with the ears of the tiny spaniel on his lap (Gwendolen had taken a dislike to the dogs because they fawned on him).

Then he said, languidly, "I don't see why a lady should sing. Amateurs make fools of themselves. A lady can't risk herself in that way in company. And one doesn't want to hear squalling in private."

"I like frankness: that seems to me a husband's great charm," said Gwendolen, with her little upward movement of her chin, as she turned her eyes away from his, and lifting a prawn before her, looked at the boiled ingenuousness of its eyes as preferable to the lizard's. "But," she added, having devoured her mortification, "I suppose you don't object to Miss Lapidoth's singing at our party on the fourth? I thought of engaging her. Lady Brackenshaw had her, you know: and the Raymonds, who are very particular about their music. And Mr. Deronda, who is a musician himself and a first-rate judge, says there is no singing in such good taste as hers for a drawing-room. I think his opinion is an authority."

She meant to sling a small stone at her husband in that way.

"It's very indecent of Deronda to go about praising that girl," said Grandcourt in a tone of indifference.

"Indecent!" exclaimed Gwendolen, reddening and looking at him again, overcome by startled wonder, and unable to reflect on the probable falsity of the phrase—"to go about praising."

"Yes; and especially when she is patronized by Lady Mallinger. He ought to hold his tongue about her. Men can see what is his relation to her."

"Men who judge of others by themselves," said Gwendolen, turning white after her redness, and immediately smitten with a dread of her own words.

"Of course. And a woman should take their judgment—else she is likely to run her head into the wrong place," said Grandcourt, conscious of using pinchers on that white creature. "I suppose you take Deronda for a saint."

"Oh dear no!" said Gwendolen, summoning desperately her almost miraculous power of self-control, and speaking in a high hard tone. "Only a little less of a monster."

She rose, pushed her chair away without hurry, and walked out of the room with something like the care of a man who is afraid of showing that he has taken more wine than usual. She turned the keys inside her dressing-room doors, and sat down for some time looking pale and quiet as when she was leaving the breakfast-room. Even in the moments after reading the poisonous letter she had hardly had more cruel sensations than now; for emotion was at the acute point, where it is not distinguishable from sensation. Deronda, unlike what she had believed him to be, was an image which affected her as a hideous apparition would have done, quite apart from the way in which it was produced. It had taken hold of her as pain before she could consider whether it were fiction or truth; and further to hinder her power of resistance came the sudden perception of how very slight were the grounds of her faith in Deronda—how little she knew of his life—how childish she had been in her confidence. His rebukes and his severity to her began to seem odious, along with all the poetry and lofty doctrine in the world, whatever it might be; and the grave beauty of his face seemed the most unpleasant mask that the common habits of men could put on.

All this went on in her with the rapidity of a sick dream; and her start into resistance was very much like a waking. Suddenly from out the gray sombre morning there came a stream of sunshine, wrapping her in warmth and light where she sat in stony stillness. She moved gently and looked round her—there was a world outside this bad dream, and the dream proved nothing; she rose, stretching her arms upward and clasping her hands with her habitual attitude when she was seeking relief from oppressive feeling, and walked about the room in this flood of sunbeams.

"It is not true! What does it matter whether *he* believes it or not?" This is what she repeated to herself—but this was not her faith come back again; it was only the desperate cry of faith, finding suffocation intolerable. And how could she go on through the day in this state? With one of her impetuous alternations, her imagination flew to wild actions by which she would convince herself of what she wished: she would go to Lady Mallinger and question her about Mirah; she would write to Deronda and upbraid him with making the world all false and wicked and hopeless to her—to him she dared pour out all the bitter indignation of her heart. No; she would go to Mirah. This last form taken by her need was more definitely practicable, and quickly became imperious. No matter what came of it. She had the pretext of asking Mirah to sing at her party on the fourth. What was she going to say beside? How satisfy? She did not foresee—she could not wait to foresee. If that idea which was maddening her had been a living thing, she would have wanted to throttle it without waiting to foresee what would come of the act. She rang her bell and asked if Mr. Grandcourt were gone out: finding that he was, she ordered the carriage, and began to dress for the drive; then she went down, and walked about the large drawing-room like an imprisoned dumb creature, not recognizing herself in the glass panels, not noting any object around her in the painted gilded prison. Her husband would probably find out where she had been, and punish her in some way or other—no matter—she could neither desire nor fear anything just now but the assurance that she had not been deluding herself in her trust.

She was provided with Mirah's address. Soon she was on the way with all the fine equipage necessary to carry about her poor uneasy heart, depending in its palpitations on some answer or other to questioning which she did not know how she should put. She was as heedless of what happened before she found that Miss Lapidoth was at home, as one is of lobbies and passages on the way to a court of justice—heedless of everything till she was in a room where there were folding-doors, and she heard Deronda's voice behind it. Doubtless the identification was helped by forecast, but she was as certain of it as if she had seen him. She was frightened at her own agitation, and began to unbutton her gloves that she might button them again, and bite her lips over the pretended difficulty, while the door opened, and Mirah presented herself with perfect quietude and a sweet smile of recognition. There was relief in
