"Philistia, be thou glad of me!"

Having settled his mind on marrying Miss Harleth, Grandcourt displayed a remarkable capacity for tailoring means to his ends. For the next fortnight, scarcely a day passed without some arrangement ensuring he saw her, or some emphatic attention proving she occupied his thoughts. With his cousin, Mrs. Torrington, now managing the hospitality of his household, Mrs. Davilow and Gwendolen were invited to a grand party at Diplow. There, amidst many witnesses, the host distinguished the dowerless beauty with singular favor, while showing no solicitude whatsoever regarding the heiress.

The world—at least Mr. Gascoigne and the families of consequence within visiting distance of Pennicote—felt a growing assurance on the subject. In the rector's mind, this conviction hardened into a resolution to do his duty by his niece and ensure the settlements were adequate. Indeed, the wonder to both him and Mrs. Davilow was that the offer, for which so many suitable occasions presented themselves, had not already been made; and in this wonder, Grandcourt himself shared a significant portion. When he had first told Lush of his resolution, he had thought the affair would conclude swiftly. To his own surprise, he had repeatedly promised himself in the morning that he would give Gwendolen the opportunity to accept him that day, only to find by evening that the necessary formality remained unaccomplished. This remarkable fact served to heighten his determination for another day. He had never admitted to himself that Gwendolen might refuse him, yet heaven help us all! We are often unable to act on our certainties. Our objection to a contrary issue—even if it were possible—is so strong that it rises like a spectral illusion between us and our certainty. We are rationally sure that the blind worm cannot bite us mortally, but the thought of being bitten is so intolerable, and the creature has such a biting look, that we decline to handle it.

He had requested permission to bring a beautiful horse for Gwendolen to ride. Mrs. Davilow was to accompany her in the carriage, and they were to travel to Diplow for lunch, with Grandcourt conducting them. It was a fine mid-harvest time, neither too warm nor too cool for a noonday ride of five miles to be delightful. Poppies glowed along the borders of the fields, and a gentle breeze moved softly among the uncut corn, winging the shadow of clouds across the soft gray downs. Here, the sheaves stood tall; there, horses strained their muscles under the last loads from wide spaces of stubble. Everywhere, the green pasture made a broader setting for the corn-fields, and cattle rested beneath wide branches. The road lay through a corner of country where dairy farms looked much as they did in the days of our forefathers—a place where peace and permanence seemed to find a home away from the busy changes sending railway trains flying in the distance.

Yet the spirit of peace and permanence failed to penetrate poor Mrs. Davilow's mind enough to overcome her habit of uneasy foreboding. Watching Gwendolen and Grandcourt canter ahead of her, then slackening their pace to a conversational walk until the carriage caught up, created a gratifying sight. However, it served chiefly to fuel the conflict of hopes and fears swirling in her heart regarding her daughter's fate. Here lay an irresistible opportunity for a lover to speak and end all uncertainties. Mrs. Davilow could only hope, with trembling, that Gwendolen's decision would be favorable. Certainly, if Rex's love had been repugnant to her, Mr. Grandcourt offered a complete contrast. That he had produced some quite novel impression on her seemed evident in her marked abstinence from satirical observations, nay, her total silence concerning his characteristics—a silence Mrs. Davilow dared not break. "Is he a man she would be happy with?" was the question that inevitably arose in the mother's mind. "Well, perhaps as happy as she would be with anyone else—or as most other women are"—was the answer with which she tried to quiet herself; for she could not imagine Gwendolen under the influence of any feeling that would make her satisfied in what we traditionally call "mean circumstances."

Grandcourt's own thoughts looked in the same direction: he wanted to be done with the uncertainty of not having spoken. As to any further uncertainty, well, it was something without any reasonable basis, some quality in the air which acted as an irritant to his wishes.

Gwendolen enjoyed the riding, but her pleasure did not break forth in girlish, unpremeditated chat and laughter as it had on that morning with Rex. She spoke a little, and even laughed, but with a lightness as of a far-off echo. For her, too, there was some peculiar quality in the air—not, she was sure, any subjugation of her will by Mr. Grandcourt, nor the splendid prospects he meant to offer. Gwendolen desired everyone, that dignified gentleman himself included, to understand that she was going to do just as she liked, and that they had better not calculate on her pleasing them. If she chose to take this husband, she wanted him to know she was not going to renounce her freedom, or, according to her favorite formula, "not going to do as other women did."

Grandcourt's speeches that morning were, as usual, of that brief sort which never fails to make a conversational figure when the speaker is held important in his circle. Stopping so soon, they gave signs of a suppressed and formidable ability to say more, and possessed the meritorious quality of allowing lengthiness to others.

"How do you like Criterion's paces?" he said after they had entered the park and were slackening from a canter to a walk.

"He is delightful to ride. I should like to have a leap with him, if it would not frighten mamma. There was a good wide channel we passed five minutes ago. I should like to have a gallop back and take it."

"Pray do. We can take it together."

"No, thanks. Mamma is so timid—if she saw me it might make her ill."

"Let me go and explain. Criterion would take it without fail."

"No—indeed—you are very kind—but it would alarm her too much. I dare take any leap when she is not by; but I do it and don't tell her about it."

"We can let the carriage pass and then set off."

"No, no, pray don't think of it any more: I spoke quite randomly," said Gwendolen. She began to feel a new objection to carrying out her own proposition.

"But Mrs. Davilow knows I shall take care of you."

"Yes, but she would think of you as having to take care of my broken neck."

A considerable pause ensued before Grandcourt said, looking toward her, "I should like to have the right always to take care of you."

Gwendolen did not turn her eyes on him. It seemed to her a long while that she was first blushing, and then turning pale, but to Grandcourt's rate of judgment she answered soon enough, with the lightest flute-tone and a careless movement of the head, "Oh, I am not sure that I want to be taken care of: if I chose to risk breaking my neck, I should like to be at liberty to do it."

She checked her horse as she spoke and turned in her saddle, looking toward the advancing carriage. Her eyes swept across Grandcourt as she made this movement, but there was no language in them to correct the carelessness of her reply. At that very moment, she was aware that she was risking something—not her neck, but the possibility of finally checking Grandcourt's advances—and she did not feel contented with that possibility.

"Damn her!" thought Grandcourt as he too checked his horse. He was not a wordy thinker, and this explosive phrase stood for mixed impressions which eloquent interpreters might have expanded into sentences full of an irritated sense that he was being mystified, and a determination that this girl should not make a fool of him. Did she want him to throw himself at her feet and declare that he was dying for her? It was not by that gate that she could enter on the privileges he could give her. Or did she expect him to write his proposals? Equally a delusion. He would not make his offer in any way that could place him definitely in the position of being rejected. But as to her accepting him, she had done it already in accepting his marked attentions: and anything which happened to break them off would be understood to her disadvantage. She was merely coquetting, then?

However, the carriage came up, and no further *tête-à-tête* could well occur before their arrival at the house, where there was abundant company. To whom Gwendolen, clad in riding-dress with her hat laid aside, and clad also in the repute of being chosen by Mr. Grandcourt, was naturally a centre of observation. Since the objectionable Mr. Lush was not there to look at her, this stimulus of admiring attention heightened her spirits and dispersed, for the time, the uneasy consciousness of divided impulses which threatened her with repentance of her own acts. Whether Grandcourt had been offended or not there was no judging: his manners were unchanged, but Gwendolen's acuteness had not gone deeper than to discern that his manners were no clue for her, and because these were unchanged she was not the less afraid of him.

She had not been at Diplow before except to dine. And since certain points of view from the windows and the garden were worth showing, Lady Flora Hollis proposed after luncheon
