Now, this is a subject on which I flatter myself I am truly an expert. The gentleman who, when I was young, baptized me at the font of wisdom for nine guineas a term—no extras—used to claim he'd never known a boy capable of doing less work in more time. I also recall my poor grandmother, during a lesson on the Prayer-book, casually noting that it was highly improbable I'd ever do much I shouldn't, but she was convinced beyond a doubt that I'd leave undone pretty well everything I should.

I fear I've partially disproven the dear old lady's prophecy. Heaven help me! I've done quite a few things I shouldn't have, despite my laziness. But I've fully confirmed her judgment regarding neglecting much that I shouldn't have neglected. Idling has always been my forte. I take no credit for it—it's a gift. Few possess it. There are plenty of lazy people and plenty of slow-coaches, but a genuine idler is a rarity. He isn't a man who slouches about with his hands in his pockets. On the contrary, his most startling characteristic is that he is always intensely busy.

It's impossible to enjoy idling thoroughly unless one has plenty of work to do. There's no fun in doing nothing when you have nothing to do. Wasting time is merely an occupation then, and a most exhausting one. Idleness, like kisses, must be stolen to be sweet.

Many years ago, when I was a young man, I fell very ill—I never could quite see what was the matter with me, except that I had a beastly cold. But I suppose it was something serious, for the doctor said I should have come to him a month prior, and if it had gone on another week, he wouldn't have answered for the consequences. It's extraordinary, but I've never known a doctor called into a case yet without it turning out that another day's delay would have made cure hopeless. Our medical guide, philosopher, and friend is like the hero in a melodrama—he always arrives just, and only just, in the nick of time. It is Providence, that is what it is.

Well, as I was saying, I was very ill and ordered to Buxton for a month, with strict injunctions to do absolutely nothing while there. "Rest is what you require," said the doctor, "perfect rest."

It seemed a delightful prospect. "This man evidently understands my complaint," I thought, picturing a glorious four weeks of *dolce far niente* with a dash of illness. Not too much illness, but just enough to give it the flavor of suffering and make it poetical. I imagined getting up late, sipping chocolate, and having breakfast in slippers and a dressing-gown. I pictured lying in a garden hammock reading sentimental novels with melancholy endings until they fell from my listless hand, reclining there to gaze dreamily into the deep blue sky, watching fleecy clouds float like white-sailed ships across its depths, listening to the joyous song of birds and the rustling of trees. Or, if too weak to go out, sitting propped with pillows at the open window of the ground-floor front, looking wasted and interesting so that all the pretty girls would sigh as they passed.

Twice a day, I would descend in a Bath chair to the Colonnade to drink the waters. Oh, those waters! I knew nothing about them then and was rather taken with the idea. "Drinking the waters" sounded fashionable and Queen Anne-esque, and I thought I'd like them. But, ugh! After the first three or four mornings! Sam Weller's description of them as "having a taste of warm flat-irons" conveys only a faint idea of their hideous nauseousness. If anything could make a sick man get well quickly, it would be knowing he must drink a glassful every day until recovered. I drank them neat for six consecutive days, and they nearly killed me; but after that, I adopted the plan of taking a stiff glass of brandy-and-water immediately on top, finding much relief thereby. I've been informed since by various eminent medical gentlemen that the alcohol must have entirely counteracted the chalybeate properties of the water. I'm glad I was lucky enough to hit upon the right thing.

But "drinking the waters" was only a small portion of the torture I experienced during that memorable month—the most miserable I have ever spent. For the best part of it, I religiously followed the doctor's mandate and did nothing except moon about the house and garden and go out for two hours a day in a Bath chair. That broke the monotony to a certain extent. There is more excitement about Bath-chairing—especially if you aren't used to the exhilarating exercise—than might appear to the casual observer. A sense of danger, such as a mere outsider might not understand, is ever present to the mind of the occupant. He feels convinced every minute that the whole concern is going over, a conviction especially lively whenever a ditch or a stretch of newly macadamized road comes in sight. Every passing vehicle he expects will run him over; and he never ascends or descends a hill without immediately speculating on his chances, supposing—as seems extremely probable—that the weak-kneed controller of his destiny should let go.

But even this diversion failed to enliven after a while, and the *ennui* became perfectly unbearable. I felt my mind giving way under it. It's not a strong mind, and I thought it unwise to tax it too far. So, somewhere about the twentieth morning, I got up early, had a good breakfast, and walked straight off to Hayfield, at the foot of Kinder Scout—a pleasant, busy little town reached through a lovely valley, with two sweetly pretty women in it. At least they were sweetly pretty then; one passed me on the bridge and, I think, smiled; the other stood at an open door, making an unremunerative investment of kisses upon a red-faced baby. But it's years ago, and I dare say they've both grown stout and snappish since. Coming back, I saw an old man breaking stones, and it roused such a strong longing in me to use my arms that I offered him a drink to let me take his place. He was a kindly old man and humored me. I went for those stones with the accumulated energy of three weeks, doing more work in half an hour than he had done all day. But it didn't make him jealous.

Having taken the plunge, I went further into dissipation, going out for long walks every morning and listening to the band in the pavilion every evening. But the days still passed slowly notwithstanding, and I was heartily glad when the last one came and I was whirled away from gouty, consumptive Buxton to London with its stern work and life. I looked out of the carriage as we rushed through Hendon in the evening. The lurid glare overhanging the mighty city seemed to warm my heart, and when, later on, my cab rattled out of St. Pancras' station, the old familiar roar swelling around me sounded the sweetest music I had heard in many a long day.

I certainly did not enjoy that month's idling. I like idling when I ought not to be idling; not when it's the only thing I have to do. That is my pig-headed nature. The time I like best to stand with my back to the fire, calculating how much I owe, is when my desk is heaped highest with letters that must be answered by the next post. When I like to dawdle longest over my dinner is when I have a heavy evening's work before me. And if, for some urgent reason, I ought to be up particularly early, it is then, more than at any other time, that I love to lie an extra half-hour in bed.

Ah! How delicious it is to turn over and go to sleep again: "just for five minutes." Is there any human being, I wonder, besides the hero of a Sunday-school "tale for boys," who ever gets up willingly? There are some men to whom getting up at the proper time is an utter impossibility. If eight o'clock happens to be the time they should turn out, they lie till half-past. If circumstances change and half-past eight becomes early enough, then it's nine before they can rise. They are like the statesman of whom it was said he was always punctually half an hour late. They try all manner of schemes. They buy alarm-clocks (artful contrivances that go off at the wrong time and alarm the wrong people). They tell Sarah Jane to knock at the door and call them, and Sarah Jane does knock and does call, and they grunt back "awri" and then go comfortably to sleep again. I knew one man who would actually get out and have a cold bath; and even that was of no use, for afterward he'd jump into bed again to warm himself.

I think myself I could keep out of bed all right if I once got out. It's the wrenching away of the head from the pillow that I find so hard, and no amount of overnight determination makes it easier. I say to myself, after wasting the whole evening, "Well, I won't do any more work tonight; I'll get up early tomorrow morning;" and I am thoroughly resolved to do so—then. In the morning, however, I feel less enthusiastic about the idea, reflecting that it would have been much better if I had stopped up last night. And then there's the trouble of dressing, and the more one thinks about that, the more one wants to put it off.

It's a strange thing this bed, this mimic grave, where we stretch our tired limbs and sink quietly into silence and rest. "O bed, O bed, delicious bed, that heaven on earth to the weary head," as sang poor Hood. You are a kind old nurse to us fretful boys and girls. Clever and foolish, naughty and good, you take us all in your motherly lap and hush our wayward crying. The strong man full of care—the sick man full of pain—the little maiden sobbing for her faithless lover—like children, we lay our aching heads on your white bosom, and you gently soothe us off to by-by.

Our trouble is sore indeed when you turn away and will not comfort us. How long the dawn seems coming when we cannot sleep! Oh! Those hideous nights when we toss and turn in fever and pain, when we lie, like living men among the dead, staring out into the dark hours drifting slowly between us and the light. And oh! Those still more hideous nights when we sit by another in pain, when the low fire startles us every now and then with a falling cinder, and the tick of the clock seems a hammer beating out the life we are watching.

But enough of beds and bedrooms. I've kept to them too long, even for an idle fellow. Let us come out and have a smoke. That wastes time just as well and doesn't look so bad. Tobacco has been a blessing to us idlers. What the civil-service clerk before Sir Walter's time found to occupy their minds with it is hard to imagine. I attribute the quarrelsome nature of Middle Ages young men entirely to the want of the soothing weed. They had no work to do and could not smoke, and the consequence was they were forever fighting and rowing. If, by any extraordinary chance, there was no war going, they got up a deadly family feud with the next-door neighbor, and if, in spite of this, they still had spare moments, they occupied them with discussions as to whose sweetheart was the best-looking, the arguments employed on both sides being battle-axes, clubs, etc. Questions of taste were soon decided in those days. When a twelfth-century youth fell in love, he didn't take three steps backward, gaze into her eyes, and tell her she was too beautiful to live. He said he'd step outside and see about it. And if, when he got out, he met a man and broke his head—the other man's head, I mean—then that proved his girl was pretty. But if the other fellow broke *his* head—not his own, you know, but the other fellow's—then the other fellow's girl was pretty. That was their method of conducting art criticism.

Nowadays we light a pipe and let the girls fight it out among themselves.

They do it very well. They're getting to do all our work. They're doctors, barristers, and artists. They manage theaters, promote swindles, and edit newspapers. I'm looking forward to the time when we men shall have nothing to do but lie in bed till twelve, read two novels a day, have nice little five-o'clock teas all to ourselves, and tax our brains with nothing more trying than discussions upon the latest patterns in trousers and arguments as to what Mr. Jones' coat was made of and whether it fitted him. It's a glorious prospect—for idle fellows.
