CHAPTER LXI

The Princess Claelia ordered a full-length portrait of herself. Gerard
advised her to employ his friend Pietro Vanucci.

But she declined. “'Twill be time to put a slight on the Gerardo, when
his work discontents me.” Then Gerard, who knew he was an excellent
draughtsman, but not so good a colourist, begged her to stand to him
as a Roman statue. He showed her how closely he could mimic marble
on paper. She consented at first; but demurred when this enthusiast
explained to her that she must wear the tunic, toga, and sandals of the
ancients.

“Why, I had as lieve be presented in my smock,” said she, with mediaeval
frankness.

“Alack! signorina,” said Gerard, “you have surely never noted the
ancient habit; so free, so ample, so simple, yet so noble; and most
becoming your highness, to whom Heaven hath given the Roman features,
and eke a shapely arm and hand, his in modern guise.”

“What, can you flatter, like the rest, Gerardo? Well, give me time to
think on't. Come o' Saturday, and then I will say ay or nay.”

The respite thus gained was passed in making the tunic and toga, etc.,
and trying them on in her chamber, to see whether they suited her style
of beauty well enough to compensate their being a thousand years out of
date.

Gerard, hurrying along to this interview, was suddenly arrested, and
rooted to earth at a shop window.

His quick eye had discerned in that window a copy of Lactantius lying
open. “That is fairly writ, anyway,” thought he.

He eyed it a moment more with all his eyes.

It was not written at all. It was printed.

Gerard groaned.

“I am sped; mine enemy is at the door. The press is in Rome.”

He went into the shop, and affecting nonchalance, inquired how long the
printing-press had been in Rome. The man said he believed there was no
such thing in the city. “Oh, the Lactantius; that was printed on the top
of the Apennines.”

“What, did the printing-press fall down there out o' the moon?”

“Nay, messer,” said the trader, laughing; “it shot up there out of
Germany. See the title-page!”

Gerard took the Lactantius eagerly, and saw the following--

     Opera et impensis Sweynheim et Pannartz
     Alumnorum Joannis Fust.
     Impressum Subiacis. A.D. 1465.

“Will ye buy, messer? See how fair and even be the letters. Few are left
can write like that; and scarce a quarter of the price.”

“I would fain have it,” said Gerard sadly, “but my heart will not let
me. Know that I am a caligraph, and these disciples of Fust run after me
round the world a-taking the bread out of my mouth. But I wish them no
ill. Heaven forbid!” And he hurried from the shop.

“Dear Margaret,” said he to himself, “we must lose no time; we must
make our hay while shines the sun. One month more and an avalanche of
printer's type shall roll down on Rome from those Apennines, and lay us
waste that writers be.”

And he almost ran to the Princess Claelia.

He was ushered into an apartment new to him. It was not very large,
but most luxurious; a fountain played in the centre, and the floor was
covered with the skins of panthers, dressed with the hair, so that no
footfall could be heard. The room was an ante-chamber to the princess's
boudoir, for on one side there was no door, but an ample curtain of
gorgeous tapestry.

Here Gerard was left alone till he became quite uneasy, and doubted
whether the maid had not shown him to the wrong place.

These doubts were agreeably dissipated.

A light step came swiftly behind the curtain; it parted in the middle,
and there stood a figure the heathens might have worshipped. It was not
quite Venus, nor quite Minerva; but between the two; nobler than Venus,
more womanly than Jupiter's daughter. Toga, tunic, sandals; nothing was
modern. And as for beauty, that is of all times.

Gerard started up, and all the artist in him flushed with pleasure.

“Oh!” he cried innocently, and gazed in rapture.

This added the last charm to his model: a light blush tinted her cheeks,
and her eyes brightened, and her mouth smiled with delicious complacency
at this genuine tribute to her charms.

When they had looked at one another so some time, and she saw Gerard's
eloquence was confined to ejaculating and gazing, she spoke. “Well,
Gerardo, thou seest I have made myself an antique monster for thee.”

“A monster? I doubt Fra Colonna would fall down and adore your highness,
seeing you so habited.”

“Nay, I care not to be adored by an old man. I would liever be loved by
a young one: of my own choosing.”

Gerard took out his pencils, arranged his canvas, which he had covered
with stout paper, and set to work; and so absorbed was he that he had
no mercy on his model. At last, after near an hour in one posture,
“Gerardo,” said she faintly, “I can stand so no more, even for thee.”

“Sit down and rest awhile, Signora.”

“I thank thee,” said she; and sinking into a chair turned pale and
sighed.

Gerard was alarmed, and saw also he had been inconsiderate. He took
water from the fountain and was about to throw it in her face; but she
put up a white hand deprecatingly: “Nay, hold it to my brow with thine
hand: prithee, do not fling it at me!”

Gerard timidly and hesitating applied his wet hand to her brow.

“Ah!” she sighed, “that is reviving. Again.”

He applied it again. She thanked him, and asked him to ring a little
hand-bell on the table. He did so, and a maid came, and was sent to
Floretta with orders to bring a large fan.

Floretta speedily came with the fan.

She no sooner came near the princess, than that lady's highbred nostrils
suddenly expanded like a bloodhorse's. “Wretch!” said she; and rising
up with a sudden return to vigour, seized Floretta with her left hand,
twisted it in her hair, and with the right hand boxed her ears severely
three times.

Floretta screamed and blubbered; but obtained no mercy.

The antique toga left quite disengaged a bare arm, that now seemed as
powerful as it was beautiful: it rose and fell like the piston of a
modern steam-engine, and heavy slaps resounded one after another on
Floretta's shoulders; the last one drove her sobbing and screaming
through the curtain, and there she was heard crying bitterly for some
time after.

“Saints of heaven!” cried Gerard, “what is amiss? what has she done?”

“She knows right well. 'Tis not the first time. The nasty toad! I'll
learn her to come to me stinking of the musk-cat.”

“Alas! Signora, 'twas a small fault, methinks.”

“A small fault? Nay, 'twas a foul fault.” She added with an amazing
sudden descent to humility and sweetness, “Are you wroth with me for
beating her, Gerar-do?”

“Signora, it ill becomes me to school you; but methinks such as Heaven
appoints to govern others should govern themselves.”

“That is true, Gerardo. How wise you are, to be so young.” She then
called the other maid, and gave her a little purse. “Take that to
Floretta, and tell her 'the Gerardo' hath interceded for her; and so I
must needs forgive her. There, Gerardo.”

Gerard coloured all over at the compliment; but not knowing how to
turn a phrase equal to the occasion, asked her if he should resume her
picture.

“Not yet; beating that hussy hath somewhat breathed me. I'll sit awhile,
and you shall talk to me. I know you can talk, an it pleases you, as
rarely as you draw.”

“That were easily done.

“Do it then, Gerardo.”

Gerard was taken aback.

“But, signora, I know not what to say. This is sudden.”

“Say your real mind. Say you wish you were anywhere but here.”

“Nay, signora, that would not be sooth. I wish one thing though.”

“Ay, and what is that?” said she gently.

“I wish I could have drawn you as you were beating that poor lass. You
were awful, yet lovely. Oh, what a subject for a Pythoness!”

“Alas! he thinks but of his art. And why keep such a coil about my
beauty, Gerardo? You are far fairer than I am. You are more like Apollo
than I to Venus. Also, you have lovely hair and lovely eyes--but you
know not what to do with them.”

“Ay, do I. To draw you, signora.”

“Ah, yes; you can see my features with them; but you cannot see what any
Roman gallant had seen long ago in your place. Yet sure you must have
noted how welcome you are to me, Gerardo?”

“I can see your highness is always passing kind to me; a poor stranger
like me.”

“No, I am not, Gerardo. I have often been cold to you; rude sometimes;
and you are so simple you see not the cause. Alas! I feared for my own
heart. I feared to be your slave. I who have hitherto made slaves. Ah!
Gerardo, I am unhappy. Ever since you came here I have lived upon
your visits. The day you are to come I am bright. The other days I am
listless, and wish them fled. You are not like the Roman gallants. You
make me hate them. You are ten times braver to my eye; and you are
wise and scholarly, and never flatter and lie. I scorn a man that lies.
Gerar-do, teach me thy magic; teach me to make thee as happy by my side
as I am still by thine.”

As she poured out these strange words, the princess's mellow voice sunk
almost to a whisper, and trembled with half-suppressed passion, and her
white hand stole timidly yet earnestly down Gerard's arm, till it rested
like a soft bird upon his wrist, and as ready to fly away at a word.

Destitute of vanity and experience, wrapped up in his Margaret and his
art, Gerard had not seen this revelation coming, though it had come by
regular and visible gradations.

He blushed all over. His innocent admiration of the regal beauty that
besieged him, did not for a moment displace the absent Margaret's image.
Yet it was regal beauty, and wooing with a grace and tenderness he had
never even figured in imagination. How to check her without wounding
her?

He blushed and trembled.

The siren saw, and encouraged him.

“Poor Gerardo,” she murmured, “fear not; none shall ever harm thee under
my wing. Wilt not speak to me, Gerar-do mio?”

“Signora!” muttered Gerard deprecatingly.

At this moment his eye, lowered in his confusion, fell on the shapely
white arm and delicate hand that curled round his elbow like a tender
vine, and it flashed across him how he had just seen that lovely limb
employed on Floretta.

He trembled and blushed.

“Alas!” said the princess, “I scare him. Am I then so very terrible? Is
it my Roman robe? I'll doff it, and habit me as when thou first camest
to me. Mindest thou? 'Twas to write a letter to yon barren knight Ercole
d'Orsini. Shall I tell thee? 'twas the sight of thee, and thy pretty
ways, and thy wise words, made me hate him on the instant. I liked the
fool well enough before; or wist I liked him. Tell me now how many times
hast thou been here since then. Ah! thou knowest not; lovest me not, I
doubt, as I love thee. Eighteen times, Gerardo. And each time dearer
to me. The day thou comest not 'tis night, not day, to Claelia. Alas!
I speak for both. Cruel boy, am I not worth a word? Hast every day a
princess at thy feet? Nay, prithee, prithee, speak to me, Gerar-do.”

“Signora,” faltered Gerard, “what can I say, that were not better left
unsaid? Oh, evil day that ever I came here.”

“Ah! say not so. 'Twas the brightest day ever shone on me or indeed on
thee. I'll make thee confess so much ere long, ungrateful one.”

“Your highness,” began Gerard, in a low, pleading voice.

“Call me Claelia, Gerar-do.”

“Signora, I am too young and too little wise to know how I ought to
speak to you, so as not to seem blind nor yet ungrateful. But this I
know, I were both naught and ungrateful, and the worst foe e'er you had,
did I take advantage of this mad fancy. Sure some ill spirit hath had
leave to afflict you withal. For 'tis all unnatural that a princess
adorned with every grace should abase her affections on a churl.”

The princess withdrew her hand slowly from Gerard's wrist.

Yet as it passed lightly over his arm it seemed to linger a moment at
parting.

“You fear the daggers of my kinsmen,” said she, half sadly, half
contemptuously.

“No more than I fear the bodkins of your women,” said Gerard haughtily.
“But I fear God and the saints, and my own conscience.”

“The truth, Gerardo, the truth! Hypocrisy sits awkwardly on thee.
Princesses, while they are young, are not despised for love of God, but
of some other woman. Tell me whom thou lovest; and if she is worthy thee
I will forgive thee.”

“No she in Italy, upon my soul.”

“Ah! there is one somewhere then. Where? where?”

“In Holland, my native country.”

“Ah! Marie de Bourgoyne is fair, they say. Yet she is but a child.”

“Princess, she I love is not noble. She is as I am. Nor is she so
fair as thou. Yet is she fair; and linked to my heart for ever by her
virtues, and by all the dangers and griefs we have borne together, and
for one another. Forgive me; but I would not wrong my Margaret for all
the highest dames in Italy.”

The slighted beauty started to her feet, and stood opposite him, as
beautiful, but far more terrible than when she slapped Floretta, for
then her cheeks were red, but now they were pale, and her eyes full of
concentrated fury.

“This to my face, unmannered wretch,” she cried. “Was I born to be
insulted, as well as scorned, by such as thou? Beware! We nobles brook
no rivals. Bethink thee whether is better, the love of a Cesarini, or
her hate: for after all I have said and done to thee, it must be love or
hate between us, and to the death. Choose now!”

He looked up at her with wonder and awe, as she stood towering over him
in her Roman toga, offering this strange alternative.

He seemed to have affronted a goddess of antiquity; he a poor puny
mortal.

He sighed deeply, but spoke not.

Perhaps something in his deep and patient sigh touched a tender chord in
that ungoverned creature; or perhaps the time had come for one passion
to ebb and another to flow. The princess sank languidly into a seat, and
the tears began to steal rapidly down her cheeks.

“Alas! alas!” said Gerard. “Weep not, sweet lady; your tears they
do accuse me, and I am like to weep for company. My kind patron, be
yourself; you will live to see how much better a friend I was to you
than I seemed.”

“I see it now, Gerardo,” said the princess. “Friend is the word! the
only word can ever pass between us twain. I was mad. Any other man had
ta'en advantage of my folly. You must teach me to be your friend and
nothing more.”

Gerard hailed this proposition with joy; and told her out of Cicero how
godlike a thing was friendship, and how much better and rarer and more
lasting than love: to prove to her he was capable of it, he even told
her about Denys and himself.

She listened with her eyes half shut, watching his words to fathom his
character, and learn his weak point.

At last, she addressed him calmly thus: “Leave me now, Gerardo, and come
as usual to-morrow. You will find your lesson well bestowed.”

She held out her hand to him: he kissed it; and went away pondering
deeply this strange interview, and wondering whether he had done
prudently or not.

The next day he was received with marked distance, and the princess
stood before him literally like a statue, and after a very short
sitting, excused herself and dismissed him. Gerard felt the chilling
difference; but said to himself, “She is wise.” So she was in her way.

The next day he found the princess waiting for him surrounded by young
nobles flattering her to the skies. She and they treated him like a
dog that could do one little trick they could not. The cavaliers in
particular criticised his work with a mass of ignorance and insolence
combined that made his cheeks burn.

The princess watched his face demurely with half-closed eyes at each
sting the insects gave him; and when they had fled, had her doors closed
against every one of them for their pains.

The next day Gerard found her alone: cold and silent. After standing to
him so some time, she said, “You treated my company with less respect
than became you.”

“Did I, Signora?”

“Did you? you fired up at the comments they did you the honour to make
on your work.”

“Nay, I said nought,” observed Gerard.

“Oh, high looks speak as plain as high words. Your cheeks were red as
blood.”

“I was nettled a moment at seeing so much ignorance and ill-nature
together.”

“Now it is me, their hostess, you affront.”

“Forgive me, Signora, and acquit me of design. It would ill become me to
affront the kindest patron and friend I have in Rome but one.”

“How humble we are all of a sudden. In sooth, Ser Gerardo, you are a
capital feigner. You can insult or truckle at will.”

“Truckle? to whom?”

“To me, for one; to one, whom you affronted for a base-born girl like
yourself; but whose patronage you claim all the same.”

Gerard rose, and put his hand to his heart. “These are biting words,
signora. Have I really deserved them?”

“Oh, what are words to an adventurer like you? cold steel is all you
fear?”

“I am no swashbuckler, yet I have met steel with steel and methinks I
had rather face your kinsmen's swords than your cruel tongue, lady. Why
do you use me so?”

“Gerar-do, for no good reason, but because I am wayward, and shrewish,
and curst, and because everybody admires me but you.”

“I admire you too, Signora. Your friends may flatter you more; but
believe me they have not the eye to see half your charms. Their babble
yesterday showed me that. None admire you more truly, or wish you
better, than the poor artist, who might not be your lover, but hoped
to be your friend; but no, I see that may not be between one so high as
you, and one so low as I.”

“Ay! but it shall, Gerardo,” said the princess eagerly. “I will not be
so curst. Tell me now where abides thy Margaret; and I will give thee a
present for her; and on that you and I will be friends.”

“She is a daughter of a physician called Peter, and they bide at
Sevenbergen; ah me, shall I e'er see it again?”

“'Tis well. Now go.” And she dismissed him somewhat abruptly.

Poor Gerard. He began to wade in deep waters when he encountered this
Italian princess; callida et calida selis filia. He resolved to go no
more when once he had finished her likeness. Indeed he now regretted
having undertaken so long and laborious a task.

This resolution was shaken for a moment by his next reception, which was
all gentleness and kindness.

After standing to him some time in her toga, she said she was fatigued,
and wanted his assistance in another way: would he teach her to draw a
little? He sat down beside her, and taught her to make easy lines. He
found her wonderfully apt. He said so.

“I had a teacher before thee, Gerar-do. Ay, and one as handsome as
thyself.” She then went to a drawer, and brought out several heads
drawn with a complete ignorance of the art, but with great patience and
natural talent. They were all heads of Gerard, and full of spirit; and
really not unlike. One was his very image. “There,” said she. “Now thou
seest who was my teacher.”

“Not I, signora.”

“What, know you not who teaches us women to do all things? 'Tis love,
Gerar-do. Love made me draw because thou draweth, Gerar-do. Love prints
thine image in my bosom. My fingers touch the pen, and love supplies the
want of art, and lo thy beloved features lie upon the paper.”

Gerard opened his eyes with astonishment at this return to an
interdicted topic. “Oh, Signora, you promised me to be friends and
nothing more.”

She laughed in his face. “How simple you are: who believes a woman
promising nonsense, impossibilities? Friendship, foolish boy, who
ever built that temple on red ashes? Nay Gerardo,” she added gloomily,
“between thee and me it must be love or hate.”

“Which you will, signora,” said Gerard firmly. “But for me I will
neither love nor hate you; but with your permission I will leave you.”
 And he rose abruptly.

She rose too, pale as death, and said, “Ere thou leavest me so, know thy
fate; outside that door are armed men who wait to slay thee at a word
from me.”

“But you will not speak that word, signora.”

“That word I will speak. Nay, more, I shall noise it abroad it was for
proffering brutal love to me thou wert slain; and I will send a special
messenger to Sevenbergen: a cunning messenger, well taught his lesson.
Thy Margaret shall know thee dead, and think thee faithless; now, go to
thy grave; a dog's. For a man thou art not.”

Gerard turned pale, and stood dumb-stricken. “God have mercy on us
both.”

“Nay, have thou mercy on her, and on thyself. She will never know in
Holland what thou dost in Rome; unless I be driven to tell her my tale.
Come, yield thee, Gerar-do mio: what will it cost thee to say thou
lovest me? I ask thee but to feign it handsomely. Thou art young: die
not for the poor pleasure of denying a lady what-the shadow of a heart.
Who will shed a tear for thee? I tell thee men will laugh, not weep
over thy tombstone-ah!” She ended in a little scream, for Gerard threw
himself in a moment at her feet, and poured out in one torrent of
eloquence the story of his love and Margaret's. How he had been
imprisoned, hunted with bloodhounds for her, driven to exile for her;
how she had shed her blood for him, and now pined at home. How he
had walked through Europe environed by perils, torn by savage brutes,
attacked by furious men with sword and axe and trap, robbed, shipwrecked
for her.

The princess trembled, and tried to get away from him; but he held
her robe, he clung to her, he made her hear his pitiful story and
Margaret's; he caught her hand, and clasped it between both his, and his
tears fell fast on her hand, as he implored her to think on all the
woes of the true lovers she would part; and what but remorse, swift
and lasting, could come of so deep a love betrayed, and so false a love
feigned, with mutual hatred lurking at the bottom.

In such moments none ever resisted Gerard.

The princess, after in vain trying to get away from him, for she felt
his power over her, began to waver, and sigh, and her bosom to rise and
fall tumultuously, and her fiery eyes to fill.

“You conquer me,” she sobbed. “You, or my better angel. Leave Rome!”

“I will, I will.”

“If you breathe a word of my folly, it will be your last.”

“Think not so poorly of me. You are my benefactress once more. Is it for
me to slander you?”

“Go! I will send you the means. I know myself; if you cross my path
again, I shall kill you. Addio; my heart is broken.”

She touched her bell. “Floretta,” said she, in a choked voice, “take him
safe out of the house, through my chamber, and by the side postern.”

He turned at the door; she was leaning with one hand on a chair, crying,
with averted head. Then he thought only of her kindness, and ran back
and kissed her robe. She never moved.

Once clear of the house he darted home, thanking Heaven for his escape,
soul and body.

“Landlady,” said he, “there is one would pick a quarrel with me. What is
to be done?”

“Strike him first, and at vantage! Get behind him; and then draw.”

“Alas, I lack your Italian courage. To be serious, 'tis a noble.”

“Oh, holy saints, that is another matter. Change thy lodging awhile, and
keep snug; and alter the fashion of thy habits.”

She then took him to her own niece, who let lodgings at some little
distance, and installed him there.

He had little to do now, and no princess to draw, so he set himself
resolutely to read that deed of Floris Brandt, from which he had
hitherto been driven by the abominably bad writing. He mastered it, and
saw at once that the loan on this land must have been paid over and over
again by the rents, and that Ghysbrecht was keeping Peter Brandt out of
his own.

“Fool! not to have read this before,” he cried. He hired a horse and
rode down to the nearest port. A vessel was to sail for Amsterdam in
four days.

He took a passage; and paid a small sum to secure it.

“The land is too full of cut-throats for me,” said he; “and 'tis lovely
fair weather for the sea. Our Dutch skippers are not shipwrecked like
these bungling Italians.”

When he returned home there sat his old landlady with her eyes
sparkling.

“You are in luck, my young master,” said she. “All the fish run to your
net this day methinks. See what a lackey hath brought to our house! This
bill and this bag.”

Gerard broke the seals, and found it full of silver crowns. The letter
contained a mere slip of paper with this line, cut out of some MS.:--“La
lingua non ha osso, ma fa rompere il dosso.”

“Fear me not!” said Gerard aloud. “I'll keep mine between my teeth.”

“What is that?”

“Oh, nothing. Am I not happy, dame? I am going back to my sweetheart
with money in one pocket, and land in the other.” And he fell to dancing
round her.

“Well,” said she, “I trow nothing could make you happier.”

“Nothing, except to be there.”

“Well, that is a pity, for I thought to make you a little happier with a
letter from Holland.”

“A letter? for me? where? how? who brought it?--Oh, dame!”

“A stranger; a painter, with a reddish face and an outlandish name;
Anselmin, I trow.”

“Hans Memling! a friend of mine. God bless him!”

“Ay, that is it: Anselmin. He could scarce speak a word, but a had the
wit to name thee; and a puts the letter down, and a nods and smiles, and
I nods and smiles, and gives him a pint o' wine, and it went down him
like a spoonful.”

“That is Hans, honest Hans. Oh, dame, I am in luck to-day; but I
deserve it. For, I care not if I tell you, I have just overcome a great
temptation for dear Margaret's sake.”

“Who is she?”

“Nay, I'd have my tongue cut out sooner than betray her, but oh, it was
a temptation. Gratitude pushing me wrong, Beauty almost divine pulling
me wrong: curses, reproaches, and hardest of all to resist, gentle tears
from eyes used to command. Sure some saint helped me Anthony belike. But
my reward is come.”

“Ay, is it, lad; and no farther off than my pocket. Come out, Gerard's
reward,” and she brought a letter out of her capacious pocket.

Gerard threw his arm round her neck and hugged her.

“My best friend,” said he, “my second mother, I'll read it to you.

“Ay, do, do.”

“Alas! it is not from Margaret. This is not her hand.” And he turned it
about.

“Alack; but maybe her bill is within. The lasses are aye for gliding in
their bills under cover of another hand.”

“True. Whose hand is this? sure I have seen it. I trow 'tis my dear
friend the demoiselle Van Eyck. Oh, then Margaret's bill will be
inside.” He tore it open. “Nay, 'tis all in one writing. 'Gerard, my
well beloved son' (she never called me that before that I mind), 'this
letter brings thee heavy news from one would liever send thee joyful
tidings. Know that Margaret Brandt died in these arms on Thursday
sennight last.' (What does the doting old woman mean by that?) 'The last
word on her lips was “Gerard:” she said, “Tell him I prayed for him at
my last hour; and bid him pray for me.” She died very comfortable, and
I saw her laid in the earth, for her father was useless, as you shall
know. So no more at present from her that is with sorrowing heart thy
loving friend and servant,

“MARGARET VAN EYCK.'”

“Ay, that is her signature sure enough. Now what d'ye think of that,
dame?” cried Gerard, with a grating laugh. “There is a pretty letter to
send to a poor fellow so far from home. But it is Reicht Heynes I blame
for humouring the old woman and letting her do it; as for the old woman
herself, she dotes, she has lost her head, she is fourscore. Oh, my
heart, I'm choking. For all that she ought to be locked up, or her hands
tied. Say this had come to a fool; say I was idiot enough to believe
this; know ye what I should do? run to the top of the highest church
tower in Rome and fling myself off it, cursing Heaven. Woman! woman!
what are you doing?” And he seized her rudely by the shoulder. “What are
ye weeping for?” he cried, in a voice all unlike his own, and loud and
hoarse as a raven. “Would ye scald me to death with your tears? She
believes it. She believes it. Ah! ah! ah! ah! ah! ah!--Then there is no
God.”

The poor woman sighed and rocked herself.

“And must be the one to bring it thee all smiling and smirking? I could
kill myself for't. Death spares none,” she sobbed. “Death spares none.”

Gerard staggered against the window sill. “But He is master of death,”
 he groaned. “Or they have taught me a lie. I begin to fear there is no
God, and the saints are but dead bones, and hell is master of the world.
My pretty Margaret; my sweet, my loving Margaret. The best daughter! the
truest lover! the pride of Holland! the darling of the world! It is a
lie. Where is this caitiff Hans? I'll hunt him round the town. I'll cram
his murdering falsehood down his throat.”

And he seized his hat and ran furiously about the streets for hours.

Towards sunset he came back white as a ghost. He had not found Memling;
but his poor mind had had time to realise the woman's simple words, that
Death spares none.

He crept into the house bent, and feeble as an old man, and refused
all food. Nor would he speak, but sat, white, with great staring eyes,
muttering at intervals, “There is no God.” Alarmed both on his account
and on her own (for he looked a desperate maniac), his landlady ran for
her aunt.

The good dame came, and the two women, braver together, sat one on each
side of him, and tried to soothe him with kind and consoling voices.
But he heeded them no more than the chairs they sat on. Then the younger
held a crucifix out before him, to aid her. “Maria, mother of heaven,
comfort him,” they sighed. But he sat glaring, deaf to all external
sounds.

Presently, without any warning, he jumped up, struck the crucifix rudely
out of his way with a curse, and made a headlong dash at the door. The
poor women shrieked. But ere he reached the door, something seemed to
them to draw him up straight by his hair, and twirl him round like a
top. He whirled twice round with arms extended; then fell like a dead
log upon the floor, with blood trickling from his nostrils and ears.
