Cheerfulness, it would seem, is a matter dependent far more upon the internal state of affairs than upon the external world surrounding us. I venture this observation because I observe that Messrs. Helstone and Moore emerged from the mill-yard gates, leading their diminutive retinue, in spirits of the highest order. As the beam of a lantern—each of the three walkers carried one—fell upon Mr. Moore's countenance, one could discern an unusual, indeed a lively, spark dancing in his eyes, a newfound vivacity blooming across his dark features. Similarly, when the light touched the rector's face, his stern visage was transformed, aglow with a radiant, infectious glee. Yet, consider the circumstances: a drizzling night, a somewhat perilous expedition. One might assume such conditions were calculated to dampen spirits rather than enliven them. If any laborer who had worked on Stilbro' Moor had witnessed this procession, they would have taken great pleasure in taking aim at either of the leaders from behind a wall. And the leaders knew this perfectly. Being men of steely nerves and steady hearts, they were elated precisely by this knowledge.

Now, I am aware, dear reader, and need not be reminded, that it is a dreadful thing for a parson to be warlike. I am aware that he ought to be a man of peace. I possess a vague understanding of a clergyman's mission among mankind, and I recall distinctly whose servant he serves and whose example he should emulate. Nevertheless, if you are a parson-hater, do not expect me to accompany you every step of your dismal, downward-trending, unchristian path. Do not expect me to join in your deep anathemas, which are at once so narrow and so sweeping, in your poisonous rancour, so intense and so absurd, against "the cloth." Nor will I raise my eyes and hands in the manner of Supplehough, nor inflate my lungs with the breath of Barraclough, in horror and denunciation of the diabolical rector of Briarfield.

He was not diabolical at all. The simple truth was that he had missed his vocation. He should have been a soldier, and circumstances had conspired to make him a priest. For the rest, he was a conscientious, hard-headed, hard-handed, brave, stern, implacable, faithful little man—a man almost devoid of sympathy, ungentle, prejudiced, and rigid, yet a man true to principle, honorable, sagacious, and sincere. It seems to me that one cannot always trim a man to fit his profession, nor should one curse a man because his profession sometimes hangs upon him ungracefully. Nor will I curse Helstone, though he was a clerical Cossack. Yet he *was* cursed, and by many of his own parishioners, as by others he was adored—which is the frequent fate of men who display partiality in friendship and bitterness in enmity, who are equally devoted to principles and adherent to prejudices.

Since Helstone and Moore were both in excellent spirits and united for the moment in a single cause, one might expect them to converse amicably as they rode side by side. Alas! These two men, both of hard, bilious natures, rarely came into contact without chafing each other's tempers. Their frequent bone of contention was the war. Helstone was a high Tory (there were Tories in those days), and Moore was a bitter Whig—at least, as far as opposition to the war-party was concerned, for that was the sole question affecting his own interests; on no other topic did he profess any British politics. He delighted in infuriating Helstone by declaring his belief in the invincibility of Bonaparte, by taunting England and Europe with the impotence of their efforts to withstand him, and by coolly advancing the opinion that it was as well to yield to him soon as late, since he must, in the end, crush every antagonist and reign supreme.

Helstone could not bear these sentiments. It required only the consideration that Moore was something of an outcast and alien, possessing but half measure of British blood to temper the foreign gall that corroded his veins, before Helstone could bring himself to listen without indulging the fierce wish to cane the speaker. Furthermore, somewhat allaying his disgust, was a fellow-feeling for the dogged tone with which these opinions were asserted, coupled with a profound respect for the consistency of Moore's crabbed contumacy.

As the party turned onto the Stilbro' road, they met whatever little wind there was; the rain dashed in their faces. Moore, having been fretting his companion previously, now braced up by the raw breeze and perhaps irritated by the sharp drizzle, began to goad him anew.

"Does your Peninsular news please you still?" he asked.

"What do you mean?" came the surly demand of the rector.

"I mean, have you still faith in that Baal of a Lord Wellington?"

"And what do you mean now?"

"Do you still believe that this wooden-faced and pebble-hearted idol of England possesses the power to send fire down from heaven to consume the French holocaust you wish to offer up?"

"I believe Wellington will flog Bonaparte's marshals into the sea the day it pleases him to lift his arm."

"But, my dear sir, you cannot be serious in what you say. Bonaparte's marshals are great men, who act under the guidance of an omnipotent master-spirit. Your Wellington is the most humdrum of commonplace martinets, whose slow, mechanical movements are further cramped by an ignorant home government."

"Wellington is the soul of England. Wellington is the right champion of a good cause, the fit representative of a powerful, a resolute, a sensible, and an honest nation."

"Your good cause, as far as I understand it, is simply the restoration of that filthy, feeble Ferdinand to a throne which he disgraced. Your fit representative of an honest people is a dull-witted drover, acting for a duller-witted farmer; and against these are arrayed victorious supremacy and invincible genius."

"Against legitimacy is arrayed usurpation; against modest, single-minded, righteous, and brave resistance to encroachment is arrayed boastful, double-tongued, selfish, and treacherous ambition to possess. God defend the right!"

"God often defends the powerful."

"What! I suppose the handful of Israelites standing dryshod on the Asiatic side of the Red Sea was more powerful than the host of the Egyptians drawn up on the African side? Were they more numerous? Were they better appointed? Were they more mighty, in a word—eh? Don't speak, or you'll tell a lie, Moore; you know you will. They were a poor, overwrought band of bondsmen. Tyrants had oppressed them through four hundred years; a feeble mixture of women and children diluted their thin ranks; their masters, who roared to follow them through the divided flood, were a set of pampered Ethiops, about as strong and brutal as the lions of Libya. They were armed, horsed, and charioted; the poor Hebrew wanderers were afoot. Few of them, it is likely, had better weapons than their shepherds' crooks or their masons' building-tools; their meek and mighty leader himself had only his rod. But bethink you, Robert Moore, right was with them; the God of battles was on their side. Crime and the lost archangel generalled the ranks of Pharaoh, and which triumphed? We know that well. 'The Lord saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians, and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea-shore'—yea, 'the depths covered them, they sank to the bottom as a stone.' The right hand of the Lord became glorious in power; the right hand of the Lord dashed in pieces the enemy!"

"You are all right; only you forget the true parallel. France is Israel, and Napoleon is Moses. Europe, with her old overgorged empires and rotten dynasties, is corrupt Egypt; gallant France is the Twelve Tribes, and her fresh and vigorous Usurper the Shepherd of Horeb."

"I scorn to answer you."

Moore accordingly answered himself—or rather, he subjoined to what he had just said an additional observation in a lower voice.

"Oh, in Italy he was as great as any Moses! He was the right thing there, fit to head and organize measures for the regeneration of nations. It puzzles me to this day how the conqueror of Lodi should have condescended to become an emperor, a vulgar, a stupid humbug; and still more how a people who had once called themselves republicans should have sunk again to the grade of mere slaves. I despise France! If England had gone as far on the march of civilization as France did, she would hardly have retreated so shamelessly."

"You don't mean to say that besotted imperial France is any worse than bloody republican France?" demanded Helstone fiercely.

"I mean to say nothing, but I can think what I please, you know, Mr. Helstone, both about France and England; and about revolutions, and regicides, and restorations in general; and about the divine right of kings, which you often stickle for in your sermons, and the duty of non-resistance, and the sanity of war, and—"

Mr. Moore's sentence was here cut short by the rapid rolling up of a gig and its sudden stoppage in the middle of the
