Moore's spirits remained buoyant as he rose the following morning. He and Joe Scott had both slept in the mill, utilizing makeshift beds concealed within recesses of the front and back counting-houses. The master, invariably an early riser, had awakened somewhat sooner than usual. He roused his man by humming a French melody while attending to his toilette.

"Ye're not custen dahn, then, maister?" cried Joe.

"Not a stiver, mon garçon—which means, my lad. Rise, and we shall tour the mill before the hands arrive, so I may outline my future designs. We shall secure the machinery yet, Joseph. Haven't you heard of Bruce?"

"And th' arrand (spider)? Yes, I've heard. I've read the history of Scotland, and I know as much about it as you do; and I understand you intend to persevere."

"I do."

"Is there many of your kind in your country?" Joe asked as he packed away his temporary bed.

"In my country! Which counts as my country?"

"Why, France—isn't it?"

"Not it, indeed! The circumstance of the French seizing Antwerp, where I was born, does not render me a Frenchman."

"Holland, then?"

"I am not a Dutchman. Now you confuse Antwerp with Amsterdam."

"Flanders?"

"I scorn the insinuation, Joe! I am an Anversois! Do I bear a Flemish visage—the clumsy nose protruding, the mean forehead receding, the pale blue eyes 'à fleur de tête'? Am I all body and no legs, like a typical Flemish man? But you know not what they are like, those Netherlanders. Joe, I am an Anversois. My mother was an Anversoise, though of French lineage, which explains why I speak French."

"But your father was Yorkshire, which makes you a bit Yorkshire too; and everybody sees you're akin to us, you're so keen on making brass and getting ahead."

"Joe, you're an impudent dog; but I've always been accustomed to a boorish sort of insolence since youth. The 'classe ouvrière'—that is, the working people in Belgium—behave brutally towards their employers; and by _brutally_, Joe, I mean _brutalement_—which, perhaps, when properly translated, should be _roughly_."

"We always speak our minds in this country; and those young parsons and grand folks from London are shocked at our 'incivility;' and we'd be delighted to give them something to be shocked at, 'cause it's sport for us to watch 'em turn up the whites of their eyes, and spread out their bits of hands, like as if they're flayed with bogards, and then hear 'em say, cutting off their words short like, 'Dear! dear! Whet savages! How very coarse!'"

"You _are_ savages, Joe. You don't suppose you're civilized, do you?"

"Middling, middling, maister. I reckon that us manufacturing lads in the north are a deal more intelligent, and know a deal more than the farming folk in the south. Trade sharpens our wits; and those who are mechanics like me are forced to think. You know, what with looking after machinery and such like, I've gotten into that habit that when I see an effect, I look straight out for a cause, and I oft lay hold on't to purpose; and then I like reading, and I'm curious to know what those who reckon to govern us aim to do for us and with us. And there are many 'cleverer nor me; there's many a one among them greasy chaps who smell of oil, and among them dyers with blue and black skins, that has a long head, and that can tell what a fool of a law is, as well as you or old Yorke, and a deal better nor soft uns like Christopher Sykes of Whinbury, and that greet hectoring nowts like yond' Irish Peter, Helstone's curate."

"You think yourself a clever fellow, I know, Scott."

"Ay! I'm fairly. I can tell cheese from chalk, and I'm very well aware that I've improved such opportunities as I have had, a deal better than some who reckon to be above me; but there are thousands in Yorkshire that are as good as me, and a two-three that are better."

"You're a great man—you're a sublime fellow; but you're a prig, a conceited noodle with it all, Joe! You need not think that because you've picked up a little knowledge of practical mathematics, and because you have found some scantling of the elements of chemistry at the bottom of a dyeing vat, that therefore you're a neglected man of science; and you need not suppose that because the course of trade does not always run smooth, and you, and such as you, are sometimes short of work and bread, that therefore your class are martyrs, and that the whole form of government under which you live is wrong. And, moreover, you need not for a moment insinuate that the virtues have taken refuge in cottages and wholly abandoned slated houses. Let me tell you, I particularly abominate that sort of trash, because I know so well that human nature is human nature everywhere, whether under tile or thatch, and that in every specimen of human nature that breathes, vice and virtue are ever found blended, in smaller or greater proportions, and that the proportion is not determined by station. I have seen villains who were rich, and I have seen villains who were poor, and I have seen villains who were neither rich nor poor, but who had realized Agar's wish, and lived in fair and modest competency. The clock is going to strike six. Away with you, Joe, and ring the mill bell."

It was now the middle of the month of February; by six o'clock therefore dawn was just beginning to steal upon night, to penetrate with a pale ray its brown obscurity, and give a demi-translucence to its opaque shadows. Pale enough that ray was on this particular morning: no colour tinged the east, no flush warmed it. To see what a heavy lid day slowly lifted, what a wan glance she flung along the hills, you would have thought the sun's fire quenched in last night's floods. The breath of this morning was chill as its aspect; a raw wind stirred the mass of night-cloud, and showed, as it slowly rose, leaving a colourless, silver-gleaming ring all round the horizon, not blue sky, but a stratum of paler vapour beyond. It had ceased to rain, but the earth was sodden, and the pools and rivulets were full.

The mill-windows were alight, the bell still rung loud, and now the little children came running in, in too great a hurry, let us hope, to feel very much nipped by the inclement air; and indeed, by contrast, perhaps the morning appeared rather favourable to them than otherwise, for they had often come to their work that winter through snow-storms, through heavy rain, through hard frost.

Mr. Moore stood at the entrance to watch them pass. He counted them as they went by. To those who came rather late he said a word of reprimand, which was a little more sharply repeated by Joe Scott when the lingerers reached the work-rooms. Neither master nor overlooker spoke savagely. They were not savage men either of them, though it appeared both were rigid, for they fined a delinquent who came considerably too late. Mr. Moore made him pay his penny down ere he entered, and informed him that the next repetition of the fault would cost him twopence.

Rules, no doubt, are necessary in such cases, and coarse and cruel masters will make coarse and cruel rules, which, at the time we treat of at least, they used sometimes to enforce tyrannically; but though I describe imperfect characters (every character in this book will be found to be more or less imperfect, my pen refusing to draw anything in the model line), I have not undertaken to handle degraded or utterly infamous ones. Child-torturers, slave masters and drivers, I consign to the hands of jailers. The novelist may be excused from sullying his page with the record of their deeds.

Instead, then, of harrowing up my reader's soul and delighting his organ of wonder with effective descriptions of stripes and scourgings, I am happy to be able to inform him that neither Mr. Moore nor his overlooker ever struck a child in their mill. Joe had, indeed, once very severely flogged a son of his own for telling a lie and persisting in it; but, like his employer, he was too phlegmatic, too calm, as well as too reasonable a man, to make corporal chastisement other than the exception to his treatment of the young.

Mr. Moore haunted his mill, his mill-yard, his dye-house, and his warehouse till the sickly dawn strengthened into day. The sun even rose—at least a white disc, clear, tintless, and almost chill-looking as ice, peeped over the dark crest of a hill, changed to silver the livid edge of the cloud above it, and looked solemnly down the whole length of the den, or narrow dale, to whose strait bounds we are at present limited. It was eight o'clock; the mill lights were all extinguished; the signal was given for breakfast; the children, released for half an hour from toil, betook themselves to the
