The hour had slipped into dusk, a clear, silver air that seemed to fan the kindling of the stars.

"There will be just light enough to show me the way home," said Miss Keeldar, preparing to bid farewell to Caroline at the rectory garden door.

"You must not go alone, Shirley; Fanny shall accompany you."

"That she shall not." Shirley's chin lifted, defiant against the encroaching shadows. "Of what need I be afraid in my own parish? I would walk from Fieldhead to the church any fine midsummer night, three hours later than this, for the mere pleasure of seeing the stars and the chance of meeting a fairy."

"But wait until the crowd clears away."

"Agreed." Shirley gestured toward the street. "There are the five Misses Armitage streaming by, Mrs. Sykes's phaeton, Mr. Wynne's close carriage, Mrs. Birtwhistle's car. I have no wish to go through the ceremony of bidding them all good-bye. Step into the garden and take shelter amongst the laburnums for an instant."

Inside, the rectors, curates, and churchwardens emerged from the porch. There was a great confabulation—a shaking of hands, congratulations on speeches, urgent recommendations to beware the night air. By degrees, the throng dispersed, the carriages drove off. Miss Keeldar was just emerging from her flowery refuge when Mr. Helstone entered the garden and met her.

"Oh, I want you!" he said, relief coloring his voice. "I was afraid you were already gone.—Caroline, come here."

Caroline approached, expecting, as Shirley did, a lecture on her invisibility during the service. However, other subjects occupied the rector's mind.

"I shall not sleep at home tonight," he continued. "I have just met an old friend and promised to accompany him. I shall return probably about noon tomorrow. Thomas, the clerk, is engaged, and I cannot get him to sleep in the house as I usually do when I am absent for a night. Now..."

"Now," interrupted Shirley, stepping forward with a sudden, sharp alertness, "you want me as a gentleman—the first gentleman in Briarfield, in short—to supply your place, be master of the rectory, and guardian of your niece and maids while you are away?"

"Exactly, Captain. I thought the post would suit you. Will you favor Caroline so far as to be her guest for one night? Will you stay here instead of going back to Fieldhead?"

"And what will Mrs. Pryor do? She expects me home."

"I will send her word. Come, make up your mind to stay. It grows late; the dew falls heavily. You and Caroline will enjoy each other's company, I doubt not."

"I promise you, then, to stay with Caroline," replied Shirley. "As you say, we shall not be separated tonight. Now, rejoin your old friend, and fear nothing for us."

"If there should chance to be any disturbance in the night, Captain," Mr. Helstone warned, his expression grave, "if you hear the picking of a lock, the cutting out of a pane of glass, or a stealthy tread of steps about the house—and I need not fear to tell *you*, who bear a well-tempered, mettlesome heart under your girl's ribbon sash, that such little incidents are very possible in the present time—what would you do?"

"Don't know," Shirley admitted, her gaze searching the shadows. "Faint, perhaps—fall down, and have to be picked up again. But, Doctor, if you assign me the post of honor, you must give me arms. What weapons are there in your stronghold?"

"You could not wield a sword?"

"No; I could manage the carving-knife better."

"You will find a good one in the dining-room sideboard—a lady's knife, light to handle, and as sharp-pointed as a poniard."

"It will suit Caroline. But you must give me a brace of pistols. I know you have pistols."

"I have two pairs. One pair I can place at your disposal. You will find them suspended over the mantelpiece of my study in cloth cases."

"Loaded?"

"Yes, but not on the cock. Cock them before you go to bed. It is paying you a great compliment, Captain, to lend you these. Were you one of the awkward squad, you should not have them."

"I will take care." As the Rector passed out at the garden gate, Shirley remarked softly, "He is gracious to me to lend me his pistols." Turning to Fanny, she commanded, "Come, Lina, let us go in and have some supper. I was too much vexed at tea with the vicinage of Mr. Sam Wynne to be able to eat, and now I am really hungry."

Entering the house, they repaired to the darkened dining-room. Through the open windows, the evening air stole in, bearing the perfume of flowers from the garden, the distant sound of far-retreating steps from the road, and a soft, vague murmur. Caroline, standing at the casement, explained the murmur: "Shirley, I hear the beck in the Hollow."

She rang the bell, asking for a candle and some bread and milk—Miss Keeldar's usual supper and her own. Fanny brought in the tray. When Fanny suggested closing the windows and shutters, Shirley requested she desist. The twilight was too calm, its breath too balmy to be yet excluded. They took their meal in silence. Caroline rose once to remove a glass of flowers from the sideboard; the scent was becoming overpowering for the sultry room. Returning, she half-opened a drawer and took from it something that glittered clear and keen in her hand.

"You assigned this to me, then, Shirley, did you?" she asked, holding the blade. "It is bright, keen-edged, finely tapered; it is dangerous-looking. I never yet felt the impulse which could move me to direct this against a fellow-creature. It is difficult to fancy that circumstances could nerve my arm to strike home with this long knife."

"I should hate to do it," replied Shirley, "but I think I could do it, if goaded by certain exigencies which I can imagine." Miss Keeldar quietly sipped her glass of new milk, looking somewhat thoughtful and a little pale. Though she was never florid, the pallor suited her tonight.

The milk sipped and the bread eaten, Fanny was summoned again. She and Eliza were recommended to go to bed, eager to escape the day's exertions, the cutting of currant-buns, and the endless running with trays. Soon the maid's chamber door closed. Caroline took a candle and quietly inspected the house, ensuring every window was fast and every door barred. She did not evade the haunted back kitchen nor the vault-like cellars. Having visited them, she returned.

"There is neither spirit nor flesh in the house at present," she said, "which should not be there. It is now near eleven o'clock, fully bedtime; yet I would rather sit up a little longer, if you do not object, Shirley." She placed the brace of pistols from her uncle's study on the table. "You may examine them at your leisure."

"Why would you rather sit up longer?" asked Miss Keeldar, taking up the firearms and examining them closely before laying them down.

"Because I have a strange, excited feeling in my heart."

"So have I."

"Is this state of sleeplessness and restlessness caused by something electrical in the air, I wonder?"

"No; the sky is clear, the stars numberless. It is a fine night."

"But very still. I hear the water fret over its stony bed in Hollow's Copse as distinctly as if it ran below the churchyard wall."

"I am glad it is so still a night. A moaning wind or rushing rain would vex me to fever just now."

"Why, Shirley?"

"Because it would baffle my efforts to listen."

"Do you listen towards the Hollow?"

"Yes; it is the only quarter whence we can hear a sound just now."

"The only one, Shirley."

They both sat near the window, leaning their arms on the sill, inclining their heads toward the open lattice. By the starlight and the dim June twilight—which did not wholly fade from the west till dawn began to break in the east—they saw each other's young faces clearly.

"Mr. Helstone thinks we have no idea which way he is gone," murmured Miss Keeldar, "nor on what errand, nor with what expectations, nor how prepared. But I guess much; do not you?"

"I guess something."

"All those gentlemen—your cousin Moore included—think that you and I are now asleep in our beds, unconscious."

"Caring nothing about them," Caroline added softly, "hoping and fearing nothing for them."

Both kept silent for full half an hour. The night was silent too; only the church clock measured its course by quarters. Words were interchanged about the chill of the air. They wrapped their scarves closer, resumed their bonnets, and again watched.

Towards midnight, the teasing, monotonous bark of the house-dog disturbed the quietude of their vigil. Caroline rose and made her way noiselessly through the dark passages to the kitchen, intending to appease him with a piece of bread. She succeeded. On returning to the dining-room, she found it all dark; Miss Keeldar had extinguished
