The road back to the rectory was empty, the two girls walking in silence until the shadows of the house swallowed them. They slipped inside without a sound, ascending the stairs before the breaking dawn could reveal their approach. The light that filtered in was enough for Shirley, who hastened to her bed. Although the chamber was unfamiliar—the first time she had ever slept beneath the roof of the rectory—and although the night's events were a spectacle of terror unlike anything she had known, exhaustion claimed her instantly. As soon as her head touched the pillow, a deep, restorative slumber overtook her, silencing the storm within.

Shirley possessed a constitution of remarkable resilience. Warm-hearted and sympathetic, she was not prone to nervous collapse. Powerful emotions might sweep over her, shaking her to her core, but they left her spirit unbroken and her vitality undiminished. Every day brought her new stirrings, and every night yielded a recreation that restored her completely. Caroline, lying awake beside her, watched the serene lines of Shirley's sleeping face, reading a profound peace in the girl's beautiful countenance.

For Caroline, however, sleep remained elusive. Even the mundane excitement of the tea-drinking and the gathering at school would have kept her restless; the sheer horror of the drama enacted before her eyes was unlikely to fade for days. She found it impossible to lie still, sitting upright by Shirley's side as the June sun climbed higher in the sky, counting the slow, agonizing minutes.

Time seemed to waste itself in vigils like this, which Caroline had kept too often of late. When the mind finds no pleasant food to nourish it, no manna of hope, no honeycomb of joyful memories, it survives on the meagre diet of wishes. Failing to find delight or support in these hollow cravings, the mind feels ready to perish, turning to philosophy, to resolution, to resignation. It cries out to these gods for aid, but the cry goes unheard, unhelped, leaving the sufferer languishing in the dark.

Caroline was a Christian, and in her trouble, she framed prayers according to the Creed, offering them with deep earnestness, begging for patience, strength, and relief. Yet, as the world knows, life is a scene of trial and probation. For any favorable result her petitions had wrought so far, it seemed to her that they fell on deaf ears. Sometimes she believed God had turned His face away from her entirely. At moments, she felt the grip of Calvinism, sinking into a gulf of religious despair where she saw the darkening doom of reprobation hanging over her.

Many have lived through hours like this, when hope hangs on by a thread and the day of fruition is endlessly deferred, causing the heart to truly sicken. It is a terrible hour, yet it is often the darkest point before the dawn—that turning of the year when the icy wind of January sweeps across the land, carrying simultaneously the funeral dirge of departing winter and the prophecy of coming spring. The perishing birds, shivering before the blast, cannot understand it; so little can the suffering soul, in the climax of its affliction, recognize the approaching light of deliverance. Yet, let anyone who still grieves cling fast to love and faith in God. He will never deceive, nor finally desert. "Whom He loveth, He chasteneth." These words are true and must not be forgotten.

At last, the household stirred. The servants were up, and the shutters below clicked open. As Caroline left the couch—which had felt to her like a bed of thorns—she felt that familiar revival of spirits that the return of day and action brings to all but the utterly despairing. She dressed herself with careful attention, arranging her hair and attire so meticulously that no trace of the desolation within her heart should be visible to the outside world. When both were dressed, Shirley looked fresh and bright, while Miss Keeldar's eyes were lively, though Miss Helstone's remained languid.

"To-day I shall have much to say to Moore," Shirley declared as her first words. There was an air of intense interest and expectation in her face. "He will have to undergo cross-examination," she added. "I dare say he thinks he has outwitted me cleverly. And this is the way men deal with women—still concealing danger from them, thinking, I suppose, to spare them pain. They imagined we knew little of where we were to-night. We *know* they little conjectured where we were. Men, I believe, fancy women's minds are something like those of children. Now, that is a mistake."

She said this while standing before the glass, training her naturally waved hair into curls, twining it round her fingers. Five minutes later, as Caroline fastened her dress and clasped her girdle, Shirley took up the theme again.

"If men could see us as we really are, they would be a little amazed; but the cleverest, the acutest men are often under an illusion about women. They do not read them in a true light; they misapprehend them, both for good and evil. Their ideal woman is a queer thing, half doll, half angel; their wicked woman is almost always a fiend. Then to hear them fall into ecstasies with each other's creations—worshipping the heroine of some poem, novel, or drama—thinking it fine, divine! Fine and divine it may be, but often quite artificial—false as the rose in my best bonnet there. If I spoke all I think on this point, if I gave my real opinion of some first-rate female characters in first-rate works, where should I be? Dead under a cairn of avenging stones in half an hour."

"Shirley, you chatter so I can't fasten you. Be still. And, after all, authors' heroines are almost as good as authoresses' heroes."

"Not at all. Women read men more truly than men read women. I'll prove that in a magazine paper some day when I've time; only it will never be inserted. It will be 'declined with thanks,' and left for me at the publisher's."

"To be sure. You could not write cleverly enough. You don't know enough. You are not learned, Shirley."

"God knows I can't contradict you, Cary; I'm as ignorant as a stone. There's one comfort, however: you are not much better."

They descended to breakfast.

"I wonder how Mrs. Pryor and Hortense Moore have passed the night," said Caroline, making the coffee. "Selfish being that I am, I never thought of either of them till just now. They will have heard all the tumult; Fieldhead and the cottage are so near. And Hortense is timid in such matters—as, no doubt, is Mrs. Pryor."

"Take my word for it, Lina, Moore will have contrived to get his sister out of the way. She went home with Miss Mann. He will have quartered her there for the night. As to Mrs. Pryor, I own I am uneasy about her; but in another half-hour we will be with her."

By this time, news of what had happened at the Hollow had spread throughout the neighborhood. Fanny, returning from Fieldhead to fetch milk, panted with tidings that there had been a battle in the night at Mr. Moore's mill, with some saying twenty men killed. Eliza, meanwhile, had been told by the butcher's boy that the mill was burnt to the ground. Both women rushed into the parlour to announce these terrible facts, terminating their clear and accurate narrative with the assertion that they were sure Master Moore must have been in it all. He and Thomas, the clerk, they were confident, must have gone last night to join Mr. Moore and the soldiers. Mr. Malone, too, had not been heard of at his lodgings since yesterday afternoon; and Joe Scott's wife and family were in the greatest distress, wondering what had become of their head.

Scarcely had this information been imparted when a knock at the kitchen door announced the Fieldhead errand-boy, arriving in hot haste with a billet from Mrs. Pryor. It was hurriedly written, urging Miss Keeldar to return directly, as the neighborhood and the house seemed likely to be in total confusion, requiring orders that the mistress of the hall alone could regulate. In a postscript, it was entreated that Miss Helstone not be left alone at the rectory. She was suggested to accompany Miss Keeldar.

"There are not two opinions on that head," said Shirley, tying on her own bonnet and then running to fetch Caroline's.

"But what will Fanny and Eliza do? And if my uncle returns?"

"Your uncle will not return yet; he has other fish to fry. He will be galloping backwards and forwards from Briarfield to Stilbro' all day, rousing the magistrates in the court-house and the officers at the barracks. Fanny and Eliza can have in Joe Scott's and the clerk's wives to bear them company. Besides, of course, there is no real danger to be apprehended now. Weeks will elapse before the rioters can again rally, or plan any other attempt; and I am much mistaken if Moore and Mr. Helstone will not take advantage of last night's outbreak to quell them altogether. They will frighten the authorities of Stilbro' into energetic measures. I only hope they will not be too severe—not pursue the discomfited too relentlessly."

"Robert will not be cruel. We saw that last night," said Caroline.

"But he will be hard,"
