The Story

"With all my heart," the General rasped, the words tearing from him with visible effort. He paused, gathering his scattered thoughts, before launching into the strangest narrative I have ever endured.

"My dear child," he began, his voice thick with emotion, "was looking forward with great pleasure to the visit you so kindly arranged for her to your charming daughter. In the interim, we received an invitation from my old friend, Count Carlsfeld, whose castle lies six leagues beyond Karnstein. It was to attend the series of fetes held in honor of his illustrious guest, the Grand Duke Charles."

"Yes; and very splendid, I believe, they were," my father murmured.

"Princely! Yet his hospitality is truly regal. He possesses Aladdin's lamp. The night from which my sorrow dates was consumed by a magnificent masquerade. The grounds were thrown open, the trees draped in colored lamps, and the sky erupted in fireworks unseen even in Paris. And the music... music is my weakness. Such ravishing sounds! The finest instrumental band in the world, singers gathered from every great opera house in Europe. As one wandered through these fantastically illuminated grounds, the moonlight casting a rosy glow from the chateau's long rows of windows, one would suddenly hear these enchanting voices stealing from the silence of a grove or rising from boats upon the lake. I felt myself, looking and listening, transported back into the romance and poetry of my early youth."

"When the fireworks faded and the ball began, we returned to the noble suites opened to the dancers. A masked ball is a beautiful sight, but I had never witnessed such a brilliant spectacle before.

"It was an assembly of pure aristocracy. I was myself almost the only 'nobody' present.

"My dear child looked quite beautiful. She wore no mask. Her excitement and delight added an unspeakable charm to her features, always lovely. I noticed a young lady dressed magnificently, yet wearing a mask, who appeared to be observing my ward with extraordinary interest. I had seen her earlier in the great hall, and again, for a few minutes, walking near us on the terrace beneath the castle windows, similarly employed. A lady, also masked, richly and gravely dressed with a stately air, like a person of high rank, accompanied her as a chaperon.

Had the young lady not worn a mask, I could, of course, have been much more certain regarding whether she was really watching my poor darling.

I am now well assured that she was.

"We were now in one of the salons. My poor dear child had been dancing and was resting in a chair near the door; I stood nearby. The two ladies I had mentioned approached, and the younger took the seat next to my ward, while her companion stood beside me, addressing herself in a low tone to her charge.

"Availing herself of the privilege of her mask, she turned to me, speaking in the tone of an old friend and calling me by my name, opening a conversation that piqued my curiosity greatly. She referred to many scenes where she had met me—at Court, at distinguished houses. She alluded to little incidents I had long ceased to think of, but which, I found, had only lain dormant in my memory, instantly springing to life at her touch.

"I became increasingly desperate to ascertain her identity. She parried my attempts to discover her very adroitly and pleasantly. The knowledge she displayed of many passages in my life seemed all but unaccountable; she appeared to take a not unnatural pleasure in foiling my curiosity, watching me flounder in eager perplexity, leaping from one conjecture to another.

"In the meantime, the young lady, whom her mother called by the odd name of Millarca when she addressed her, had, with the same ease and grace, engaged my ward in conversation.

"She introduced herself by saying her mother was a very old acquaintance of mine. She spoke of the agreeable audacity a mask rendered practicable; she talked like a friend, admired her dress, and insinuated very prettily her admiration of her beauty. She amused her with laughing criticisms upon the people crowding the ballroom and laughed at my poor child's fun. She was very witty and lively when she pleased, and after a time they had grown very good friends, and the young stranger lowered her mask, displaying a remarkably beautiful face. I had never seen it before, neither had my dear child. But though it was new to us, the features were so engaging, as well as lovely, that it was impossible not to feel the attraction powerfully. My poor girl did so. I never saw anyone more taken with another at first sight, unless, indeed, it was the stranger herself, who seemed quite to have lost her heart to her.

"In the meantime, availing myself of the license of a masquerade, I put not a few questions to the elder lady.

"'You have puzzled me utterly,' I said, laughing. 'Is that not enough? Won't you, now, consent to stand on equal terms, and do me the kindness to remove your mask?'

"'Can any request be more unreasonable?' she replied. 'Ask a lady to yield an advantage! Beside, how do you know you should recognize me? Years make changes.'

"'As you see,' I said, with a bow, and I suppose, a rather melancholy little laugh.

"'As philosophers tell us,' she said; 'and how do you know that a sight of my face would help you?'

"'I should take chance for that,' I answered. 'It is vain trying to make yourself out an old woman; your figure betrays you.'

"'Years, nevertheless, have passed since I saw you, rather since you saw me, for that is what I am considering. Millarca, there, is my daughter; I cannot then be young, even in the opinion of people whom time has taught to be indulgent, and I may not like to be compared with what you remember me. You have no mask to remove. You can offer me nothing in exchange.'

"'My petition is to your pity, to remove it.'

"'And mine to yours, to let it stay where it is,' she replied.

"'Well, then, at least you will tell me whether you are French or German; you speak both languages so perfectly.'

"'I don't think I shall tell you that, General; you intend a surprise, and are meditating the particular point of attack.'

"'At all events, you won't deny this,' I said, 'that being honored by your permission to converse, I ought to know how to address you. Shall I say Madame la Comtesse?'

"She laughed, and she would, no doubt, have met me with another evasion—if, indeed, I can treat any occurrence in an interview every circumstance of which was prearranged, as I now believe, with the profoundest cunning, as liable to be modified by accident.

"'As to that,' she began; but she was interrupted, almost as she opened her lips, by a gentleman dressed in black who looked particularly elegant and distinguished, with this drawback, that his face was the most deadly pale I ever saw, except in death. He was in no masquerade—in the plain evening dress of a gentleman; and he said, without a smile, but with a courtly and unusually low bow:—

"'Will Madame la Comtesse permit me to say a very few words which may interest her?'

"The lady turned quickly to him, touching her lip in token of silence; she then said to me, 'Keep my place for me, General; I shall return when I have said a few words.'

"And with this injunction, playfully given, she walked a little aside with the gentleman in black, talking for some minutes, apparently very earnestly. They then walked away slowly together into the crowd, and I lost them for some minutes.

"I spent the interval in cudgeling my brains for a conjecture as to the identity of the lady who seemed to remember me so kindly, thinking of turning about to join the conversation between my pretty ward and the Countess's daughter, trying whether, by the time she returned, I might not have a surprise in store for her, having her name, title, chateau, and estates at my fingers' ends. But at this moment she returned, accompanied by the pale man in black, who said:

"'I shall return and inform Madame la Comtesse when her carriage is at the door.'

"He withdrew with a bow."
