Mrs. Dashwood was surprised only for a moment at seeing him; for his coming to Barton was, in her opinion, of all things the most natural. Her joy and expression of regard long outlived her wonder. He received the kindest welcome from her; and shyness, coldness, reserve could not stand against such a reception. They had begun to fail him before he entered the house, and they were quite overcome by the captivating manners of Mrs. Dashwood. Indeed a man could not very well be in love with either of her daughters, without extending the passion to her; and Elinor had the satisfaction of seeing him soon become more like himself. His affections seemed to reanimate towards them all, and his interest in their welfare again became perceptible. He was not in spirits, however; he praised their house, admired its prospect, was attentive, and kind; but still he was not in spirits.

with no inclination for expense, no affection for strangers, no profession, and no assurance, you may find it a difficult matter.” “I shall not attempt it. I have no wish to be distinguished; and have every reason to hope I never shall. Thank Heaven! I cannot be forced into genius and eloquence.” “You have no ambition, I well know. Your wishes are all moderate.” “As moderate as those of the rest of the world, I believe. I wish as well as every body else to be perfectly happy; but, like every body else it must be in my own way. Greatness will not make me so.” “Strange that it would!” cried Marianne. “What have wealth or grandeur to do with happiness?” “Grandeur has but little,” said Elinor, “but wealth has much to do with it.” “Elinor, for shame!” said Marianne, “money can only give happiness where there is nothing else to give it.

Magna. “Hunters!” repeated Edward—“but why must you have hunters? Every body does not hunt.” Marianne coloured as she replied, “But most people do.” “I wish,” said Margaret, striking out a novel thought, “that somebody would give us all a large fortune apiece!” “Oh that they would!” cried Marianne, her eyes sparkling with animation, and her cheeks glowing with the delight of such imaginary happiness. “We are all unanimous in that wish, I suppose,” said Elinor, “in spite of the insufficiency of wealth.” “Oh dear!” cried Margaret, “how happy I should be! I wonder what I should do with it!” Marianne looked as if she had no doubt on that point. “I should be puzzled to spend so large a fortune myself,” said Mrs. Dashwood, “if my children were all to be rich without my help.” “You must begin your improvements on this house,” observed Elinor, “and your difficulties will soon vanish.” “What magnificent orders would travel from this family to London,” said Edward, “in such an event!

by talking of former times. You are very right in supposing how my money would be spent—some of it, at least—my loose cash would certainly be employed in improving my collection of music and books.” “And the bulk of your fortune would be laid out in annuities on the authors or their heirs.” “No, Edward, I should have something else to do with it.” “Perhaps, then, you would bestow it as a reward on that person who wrote the ablest defence of your favourite maxim, that no one can ever be in love more than once in their life—your opinion on that point is unchanged, I presume?” “Undoubtedly. At my time of life opinions are tolerably fixed. It is not likely that I should now see or hear any thing to change them.” “Marianne is as steadfast as ever, you see,” said Elinor, “she is not at all altered.” “She is only grown a little more grave than she was.” “Nay, Edward,” said Marianne, “ you need not reproach me.

say of themselves, and very frequently by what other people say of them, without giving oneself time to deliberate and judge.” “But I thought it was right, Elinor,” said Marianne, “to be guided wholly by the opinion of other people. I thought our judgments were given us merely to be subservient to those of neighbours. This has always been your doctrine, I am sure.” “No, Marianne, never. My doctrine has never aimed at the subjection of the understanding. All I have ever attempted to influence has been the behaviour. You must not confound my meaning. I am guilty, I confess, of having often wished you to treat our acquaintance in general with greater attention; but when have I advised you to adopt their sentiments or to conform to their judgment in serious matters?” “You have not been able to bring your sister over to your plan of general civility,” said Edward to Elinor, “Do you gain no ground?” “Quite the contrary,” replied Elinor, looking expressively at Marianne.

some way or other. If I could persuade myself that my manners were perfectly easy and graceful, I should not be shy.” “But you would still be reserved,” said Marianne, “and that is worse.” Edward started—“Reserved! Am I reserved, Marianne?” “Yes, very.” “I do not understand you,” replied he, colouring. “Reserved!—how, in what manner? What am I to tell you? What can you suppose?” Elinor looked surprised at his emotion; but trying to laugh off the subject, she said to him, “Do not you know my sister well enough to understand what she means? Do not you know she calls every one reserved who does not talk as fast, and admire what she admires as rapturously as herself?” Edward made no answer. His gravity and thoughtfulness returned on him in their fullest extent—and he sat for some time silent and dull.
