Sometimes, sitting in bed with my first cup of tea, watching my man Jeeves dart around arranging my clothes for the day, I've found myself wondering what the hell I'd do if he ever decided to quit. It's bearable enough now that I'm in New York, but back in London, the panic was terrifying. There were always low-life scoundrels trying to steal him away. Young Reggie Foljambe once offered him double my wage, and Alistair Bingham-Reeves, whose valet famously pressed trousers sideways, used to look at Jeeves with a glint of hunger that really bothered me. Those were proper pirates!

The real problem, you see, is that Jeeves is just incredibly competent. You can tell immediately by the way he pushes studs into a shirt. I trust him completely in every crisis, and he never fails me. Even better, he always steps in to help any buddy of mine who finds themselves knee-deep in trouble. Take the odd case of dear old Bicky and his uncle, the Hard-Boiled Egg.

This all happened after I'd been in America for a few months. One night, returning late to the flat, Jeeves handed me my final drink and said, "Mr. Bickersteth called to see you this evening, sir, while you were out."

"Oh?" I replied.

"Twice, sir. He appeared a trifle agitated."

"What, pipped?"

"He gave that impression, sir."

I took a sip of the whisky. I felt sorry for Bicky, but honestly, I was glad to have something to discuss freely with Jeeves. Things had been a bit strained between us lately; it was tough to find a topic that wouldn't turn personal. You see, I'd decided—rightly or wrongly—to grow a moustache, and this had cut Jeeves to the bone. He absolutely couldn't tolerate it, and I'd lived in an atmosphere of his fierce disapproval until I was fed up. While Jeeves is undeniably sharp on matters of dress, it seemed excessive if he was also editing my facial hair. I'm not unreasonable, and I usually submit to his judgment on suits or ties, but when a valet stakes a claim on your upper lip, you've gotta show some bulldog pluck and fight back.

"He said he would call again later, sir."

"Something must be up, Jeeves."

"Yes, sir."

I gave the moustache a thoughtful twirl. Since it clearly hurt Jeeves' feelings, I decided to rip it off.

"I see by the paper, sir, that Mr. Bickersteth's uncle is arriving on the *Carmantic*."

"Yes?"

"His Grace the Duke of Chiswick, sir."

News to me, that Bicky had a duke for an uncle. How little one knows about one's pals! I'd met Bicky at a jamboree in Washington Square shortly after arriving in New York. Homesick and bored, I took to him when I discovered he was English and had been at Oxford with me. Plus, he was a complete chump, so we naturally clicked. During a quiet smoke in a corner clear of artists and sculptors, he further endeared himself with an extraordinarily gifted imitation of a bull-terrier chasing a cat up a tree. Though we became great friends, all I really knew was that he was perpetually broke, with an uncle who occasionally sent him monthly remittances to ease the strain.

"If the Duke of Chiswick is his uncle," I said, "why doesn't he have a title? Why isn't he Lord What-Not?"

"Mr. Bickersteth is the son of his grace's late sister, sir, who married Captain Rollo Bickersteth of the Coldstream Guards."

Jeeves knows everything.

"Is Mr. Bickersteth's father dead, too?"

"Yes, sir."

"Leave any money?"

"No, sir."

I began to understand why poor old Bicky was constantly on the rocks. To the casual observer, having a duke for an uncle sounds like a smart move, but the trouble with old Chiswick was that, despite being immensely wealthy and owning half of London plus several northern counties, he was notoriously the most prudent spender in England. He was, as American fellows would say, a hard-boiled egg. Without inheritance from his parents and relying on what he could squeeze from the old duke, Bicky was in deep trouble. But that didn't explain why he was hunting me down, especially since he claimed he never borrowed money. He said he kept his pals, so he never bit anyone's ear off on principle.

Just then, the doorbell rang. Jeeves floated out to answer it.

"Yes, sir. Mr. Wooster has just returned," he announced.

And in trickled Bicky, looking dreadfully sorry for himself.

"Halloa, Bicky!" I said. "Jeeves told me you were trying to get me. Bring another glass, and let the revels commence. What's the trouble, Bicky?"

"I'm in a hole, Bertie. I want your advice."

"Say on, old lad!"

"My uncle's turning up tomorrow, Bertie."

"So Jeeves told me."

"The Duke of Chiswick, you know."

"So Jeeves told me."

Bicky seemed surprised.

"Jeeves seems to know everything."

"Rather rummily, that's exactly what I was thinking."

"Well, I wish," said Bicky gloomily, "that he knew a way to get me out of the hole I'm in."

Jeeves shimmered in with the glass and placed it competently on the table.

"Mr. Bickersteth is in a bit of a hole, Jeeves," I said, "and wants you to rally round."

"Very good, sir."

Bicky looked doubtful.

"Well, of course, you know, Bertie, this thing is by way of being a bit private."

"I shouldn't worry. I bet Jeeves knows all about it already. Don't you, Jeeves?"

"Yes, sir."

"Eh!" said Bicky, rattled.

"I am open to correction, sir, but is not your dilemma due to the fact that you are at a loss to explain to his grace why you are in New York instead of in Colorado?"

Bicky rocked like jelly in a high wind.

"How the deuce do you know anything about it?"

"I chanced to meet his grace's butler before we left England. He informed me that he happened to overhear his grace speaking to you on the matter, sir, as he passed the library door."

Bicky gave a hollow sort of laugh.

"Well, as everybody seems to know all about it, there's no need to try to keep it dark. The old boy turfed me out, Bertie, because he said I was a brainless nincompoop. The idea was that he'd give me a remittance on condition I dash out to some blighted locality named Colorado and learn farming or ranching. I hated the idea. Riding horses and pursuing cows? I loathe horses; they bite. I opposed the scheme, but I needed that money."

"I get you absolutely, dear boy."

"Well, when I got to New York, it looked decent, so I thought it sounded like a sound notion to stop here. I cabled my uncle that I'd dropped into a good business wheeze and wanted to chuck the ranch idea. He wrote back that it was fine, and here I've been ever since. He thinks I'm doing well over here. I never dreamed he'd ever come out. What on earth am I to do?"

"Jeeves," I said, "what on earth is Mr. Bickersteth to do?"

"You see," said Bicky, "I had a wireless from him saying he was coming to stay with me—to save hotel bills, I suppose. I've always given him the impression I live in pretty good style. I can't have him stay at my boarding-house."

"Thought of anything, Jeeves?" I said.

"To what extent, sir, if the question is not delicate, are you prepared to assist Mr. Bickersteth?"

"I'll do anything I can for you, of course, Bicky, old man."

"Then, if I might make the suggestion, sir, you might lend Mr. Bickersteth——"

"No, by Jove!" said Bicky firmly. "I never have touched you, Bertie, and I'm not going to start now. I may be a chump, but it's my boast that I don't owe a penny to a single soul—not counting tradesmen, of course."

"I was about to suggest, sir, that you might lend Mr. Bickersteth this flat. Mr. Bickersteth could give his grace the impression that he owns it. With your permission, I could convey the notion that I am in Mr. Bickersteth's employment, not yours. You would reside here temporarily as Mr. Bickersteth's guest. His grace would occupy the second spare bedroom. I fancy you would find this satisfactory, sir."

Bicky had stopped rocking and stared at Jeeves in awe.

"I would advocate the dispatching of a wireless message to his grace on board the vessel, notifying him of the change of address. Mr. Bickersteth could meet his grace at the dock and proceed directly here. Will that meet the situation,
