One of the most ridiculous entanglements I've ever stumbled into during a career dedicated to meddling in other folks' business was the George Lattaker affair at Monte Carlo. I shan't bore you, truly, but you really ought to hear about it.

We'd arrived at Monte Carlo aboard the yacht *Circe*, owned by a jolly old sport named Marshall. On board were myself, my man Voules, Mrs. Vanderley, her daughter Stella, her maid Pilbeam, and George.

George was a darling old friend. In fact, I'd practically engineered his inclusion in the party. See, George was due to meet his Uncle Augustus, who was supposed to hand over a legacy left by one of George's aunts—George had just turned twenty-five, after all. The aunt had died when George was a toddler, and it was a milestone he'd been anticipating. While George did have an income, a lump sum of "goblins" was quite a different kettle of fish. His uncle was already in Monte Carlo and had written to say he'd come to London, but I figured it was smarter for George to tag along. Two birds with one stone: settle affairs and enjoy a holiday. So, George joined us, and when the trouble started, we were anchored in Monaco Harbor, awaiting Uncle Augustus the next day.

Looking back, I'd say my involvement began at seven in the morning. I was woken from a dreamless slumber by the devil of a racket outside my cabin. The main ingredients were a female voice sobbing, "Oh, Harold!" and a male voice "raised in anger," which, after some effort, I identified as Voules's. I barely recognized it. Officially, Voules speaks like a statue carved from granite; privately, he seems to relax enough to sound human. Having that sort of drama happening in my midst at seven a.m. was simply too much.

"Voules!" I bellowed.

Spion Kop stopped with a jerk. Silence followed, then the fading sobs, and finally a knock at the door. Voules entered with that impressive, "My Lord, the carriage awaits" demeanor that costs me a fortune. You wouldn't have guessed he harbored a single drop of emotion.

"Voules," I said, "are you deluded into thinking I'm going to be Queen of the May? You've called me early enough. It's only just seven."

"I understood you to summon me, sir."

"I summoned you to discover why you were making that infernal noise outside."

"I owe you an apology, sir. In the heat of the moment, I fear I raised my voice."

"It's a miracle you didn't raise the roof. Who was that with you?"

"Miss Pilbeam, sir; Mrs. Vanderley's maid."

"What was all the trouble about?"

"I was breaking our engagement, sir."

I couldn't help gaping. One simply doesn't associate Voules with engagements. Then it hit me: I had no right to intrude on his secret sorrows, so I pivoted the conversation.

"I think I'll rise," I said.

"Yes, sir."

"I can't wait to breakfast with the rest. Can you get me some immediately?"

"Yes, sir."

So I had a solitary breakfast and climbed to the deck to smoke. It was a lovely morning: blue sea, gleaming Casino, cloudless sky, and the entire hippodrome spread out below. Soon, the others began to filter up. Stella Vanderley was among the first. She looked a trifle pale and weary. She claimed she hadn't slept well. Unless you get your eight hours, where are you?

"Seen George?" I asked.

I couldn't help noticing the name seemed to freeze her slightly. Which was peculiar, considering she and George had been particularly close pals throughout the voyage. In fact, at any moment I expected George to come striding over, slip his little hand in mine, and whisper, "I've done it, old scout; she loves muh!"

"I have not seen Mr. Lattaker," she said.

I didn't press the matter. George's stock was clearly low that morning.

The next item on the agenda arrived a few minutes later when the morning papers landed.

Mrs. Vanderley opened hers and let out a scream.

"The poor, dear Prince!" she exclaimed.

"What a shocking thing!" chimed old Marshall.

"I knew him in Vienna," said Mrs. Vanderley. "He waltzed divinely."

Then I tore open mine and saw what they were discussing. The paper was full of it. Late the previous night, His Serene Highness the Prince of Saxburg-Leignitz (I always wonder why they call these chaps "Serene") had been brutally assaulted in a dark alley on his way back from the Casino to his yacht. Apparently, he'd developed the habit of wandering without an escort, and some roughneck, taking advantage of this, had laid for him and delivered a slug with considerable vim. The Prince had been found lying pretty well beaten and insensible by a passing pedestrian, taken back to his yacht, and remained unconscious.

"This is going to do somebody no good," I remarked. "What do you get for slugging a Serene Highness? I wonder if they'll catch the fellow?"

"'Later,'" read old Marshall, "'the pedestrian who discovered His Serene Highness proves to have been Mr. Denman Sturgis, the eminent private investigator. Mr. Sturgis has offered his services to the police, and is understood to be in possession of a most important clue.'" That was the fellow who handled the Chicago kidnapping case. If anyone could catch the man, he could.

About five minutes later, just as the crew was heading for breakfast, a boat hailed us and pulled alongside. A tall, thin man ascended the gangway. He glanced around the group and zeroed in on old Marshall.

"Good morning," he said. "I believe you have a Mr. Lattaker on board—Mr. George Lattaker?"

"Yes," said Marshall. "He's down below. Want to see him? Whom shall I say?"

"He would not know my name. I should like to see him for a moment on somewhat urgent business."

"Take a seat. He'll be up in a moment. Reggie, my boy, go and hurry him up."

I descended to George's cabin.

"George, old man!" I shouted.

No answer. I opened the door and stepped inside. The room was empty. Moreover, the bunk hadn't been slept in. I don't know when I've been more surprised. I went back on deck.

"He isn't there," I announced.

"Not there!" said old Marshall. "Where is he, then? Perhaps he's gone for a stroll ashore. But he'll be back soon for breakfast. You'd better wait for him. Have you breakfasted? No? Then will you join us?"

The stranger agreed, and just then the gong rang, and they trooped down, leaving me alone on deck.

I sat smoking and pondering, then smoked a bit more, when I thought I heard someone calling my name in a sort of hoarse whisper. I looked over my shoulder, and, by Jove, there at the top of the gangway in evening dress, dusty to the eyebrows and hatless, was dear old George.

"Great Scot!" I cried.

"'Sh!" he whispered. "Anyone about?"

"They're all down at breakfast."

He sighed with relief, sank into my chair, and closed his eyes. I regarded him with pity. The poor old boy looked like a wreck.

"I say!" I said, touching him on the shoulder.

He leaped out of the chair with a smothered yell.

"Did you do that? What did you do it for? What's the sense of it? How do you suppose you can ever make yourself popular if you go about touching people on the shoulder? My nerves are sticking a yard out of my body this morning, Reggie!"

"Yes, old boy?"

"I did a murder last night."

"What?"

"It's the sort of thing that might happen to anybody. Directly Stella Vanderley broke off our engagement I—"

"Broke off your engagement? How long were you engaged?"

"About two minutes. It may have been less. I hadn't a stopwatch. I proposed to her at ten last night in the saloon. She accepted me. I was just going to kiss her when we heard someone coming. I went out. Coming along the corridor was that infernal what's-her-name—Mrs. Vanderley's maid—Pilbeam. Have you ever been accepted by the girl you love, Reggie?"

"Never. I've been refused dozens—"

"Then you won't understand how I felt. I was off my head with joy. I hardly knew what I was doing. I just felt I had to kiss the nearest thing handy. I couldn't wait. It might have been the ship's cat. It wasn't. It was Pilbeam."

"You kissed her?"

"I kissed her. And just at that moment the door of the saloon opened and out came Stella."

"Great Scott!"

"Exactly what I said. It flashed across me that to Stella, dear girl, not knowing the circumstances, the thing might seem a little odd. It did. She broke off the engagement, and I got out the dinghy and rowed off. I was mad. I didn't care what became of me. I simply wanted to forget. I went ashore. I—it's just on the cards that I may
