The library was not a sanctuary of light, but a vault of suspended silence. I sat at a steel desk, the surface cool beneath my palms, cataloging the dead weight of a history that had ended eons ago. My task was mechanical: the quiet rearrangement of lies to form a slightly different sequence of lies. Around me, the shelves stretched into a greyness that defied measurement, holding the records of a civilization that had burned itself out in the final breath of the sun.

A clerk brought me a volume. *Memoirs of M. d'Artagnan*. It had been printed in Amsterdam by a man named Pierre Rouge. At the time of its printing, inconvenient honesty led to the Bastille, and so the author had fled to write in the safety of exile. Now, both the author and his jailers were equally forgotten.

I took the book to my rented room—a small cell within the Last Redoubt, a great pyramid of grey metal holding the last millions of this world from the Powers of the Slayers. I turned the pages. There were portraits of the period within it—kings, queens, cardinals, the interchangeable courtiers. They did not interest me. They were the usual statues. But in the margins of this official history, the author described a mundane waiting room. It was the antechamber of M. de Tréville, a captain of the Musketeers. Here, d'Artagnan encountered three young men in uniform.

Athos. Porthos. Aramis.

The names were unnatural. Mythological remnants ending in *os* and *is*. They were obviously false. They were pseudonyms assumed by men who had likely donned a uniform out of financial ruin, social disgrace, or a profound exhaustion with their own given identities. They had erased themselves to become functions of the state. I felt a sudden, inexplicable kinship with this erasure.

Consciousness returned as a sequence of dull, rhythmic aches. The floorboards of the Jolly Miller smelled of stale wine and centuries of trampled mud. Above him, the innkeeper's mouth moved. The words were a ledger of inconveniences: a disturbance had been caused, a departure was required. The world, functioning on a brutal economy of space and quiet, had no use for a bleeding boy.

D'Artagnan assembled his limbs. It was a mechanical effort, the mere function of bone and bruised tissue. He dragged himself toward the light of the doorway. Outside, the gray geometry of the courtyard framed a heavy carriage. Two Norman horses stood breathing steam into the cold air. Inside the carriage sat a woman—pale, blonde, possessing a beautiful and terrifying blankness. Beside her stood the man in the violet doublet.

Observing them, D'Artagnan felt the sudden, exhausting obligation to perform his identity. He had been taught that he was a gentleman; therefore, he was required to be outraged. He pushed himself over the threshold. He formed a shout, a hollow sound against the vast, indifferent sky.

The man in violet did not draw his sword. He merely looked. It was a gaze of absolute detachment, a look that reduced D'Artagnan to a minor atmospheric disturbance. The carriage departed. The man mounted his horse and rode away. D'Artagnan tried to pursue, but the physical reality of his damaged body intervened. He collapsed into the dirt, muttering words of vengeance that dissolved immediately into the dust. He fainted, slipping back into the void.

When he woke again, the inventory of his existence had diminished. Eleven crowns remained in a velvet purse. He sat in the dim kitchen and mixed oil, wine, and rosemary. The recipe was his mother's, a domestic ritual applied to the senseless violence of the world. He rubbed the paste into his skin. The flesh sealed, but the underlying structure remained exactly as fragile as before.

In my earliest knowledge of *that* place, I was a youth, seventeen years grown, and my memory tells me that when first I waked, or came, as it might be said, to myself, in that Future, I stood in one of the embrasures of the Last Redoubt. And so full am I of the knowledge of that Place, that scarce can I believe that none here know; and because I have such difficulty, it may be that I speak over familiarly of those things of which I know; and heed not to explain much that it is needful that I should explain to those who must read here, in this our present day.

For there, as I stood and looked out, I was less the man of years of *this* age, than the youth of *that*, with the natural knowledge of *that* life which I had gathered by living all my seventeen years of life there; though, until that my first vision, I (of this Age) knew not of that other and Future Existence; yet woke to it so naturally as may a man wake here in his bed to the shining of the morning sun, and know it by name, and the meaning of aught else. And yet, as I stood there in the vast embrasure, I had also a knowledge, or memory, of this present life of ours, deep down within me; but touched with a halo of dreams, and yet with a conscious longing for One, known even there in a half memory as Mirdath.

As I have said, in my earliest memory, I mind that I stood in an embrasure, high up in the side of the Pyramid, and looked outwards through a queer spy-glass to the North-West. Aye, full of youth and with an adventurous and yet half-fearful heart.

And in my brain was, as I have told, the knowledge that had come to me in all the years of my life in the Redoubt; and yet until that moment, this *Man of this Present Time* had no knowledge of that future existence; and now I stood and had suddenly the knowledge of a life already spent in that strange land, and deeper within me the misty knowings of this our present Age, and, maybe, also of some others.

To the North-West I looked through the queer spy-glass, and saw a landscape that I had looked upon and pored upon through all the years of that life, so that I knew how to name this thing and that thing, and give the very distances of each and every one from the "Centre-Point" of the Pyramid, which was that which had neither length nor breadth, and was made of polished metal in the Room of Mathematics, where I went daily to my studies.

To the North-West I looked, and in the wide field of my glass, saw plain the bright glare of the fire from the Red Pit, shine upwards against the underside of the vast chin of the North-West Watcher--The Watching Thing of the North-West.... "That which hath Watched from the Beginning, and until the opening of the Gateway of Eternity" came into my thoughts, as I looked through the glass ... the words of Aesworpth, the *Ancient* Poet (though incredibly *future* to this our time). And suddenly they seemed at fault; for I looked deep down into my being, and saw, as dreams are seen, the sunlight and splendour of *this* our Present Age. And I was amazed.

And here I must make it clear to all that, even as I waked from *this* Age, suddenly into *that* life, so must I--*that* youth there in the embrasure--have awakened then to the knowledge of *this* far-back life of ours--seeming to him a vision of the very beginnings of eternity, in the dawn of the world. Oh! I do but dread I make it not sufficient clear that I and he were both *I*--the same soul. He of that far date seeing vaguely the life that *was* (that I do now live in this present Age); and I of this time beholding the life that I yet shall live. How utterly strange!

And yet, I do not know that I speak holy truth to say that I, in that future time, had *no* knowledge of *this* life and Age, before that awakening; for I woke to find that I was one who stood apart from the other youths, in that I had a dim knowledge--visionary, as it were, of the past, which confounded, whilst yet it angered, those who were the men of learning of that age; though of this matter, more anon. But this I do know, that from that time, onwards, my knowledge and assuredness of the Past was tenfold; for this my memory of that life told me.

And so to further my telling. Yet before I pass onwards, one other thing is there of which I shall speak--In the moment in which I waked out of that youthfulness, into the assured awaredness of *this* our Age, in that moment the hunger of this my love flew to me across the ages; so that what had been but a memory-dream, grew to the pain of *Reality*, and I knew suddenly that I *lacked*; and from that time onwards, I went, listening, as even now my life is spent.

And so it was that I (fresh-born in that future time) hungered strangely for My Beautiful One with all the strength of that new life, knowing that she had been mine, and might live again, even as I. And so, as I have said, I hungered, and found that I listened.

And now, to go back from my digression, it was, as I have said, I had amazement at perceiving, in memory,
