Ghysbrecht Van Swieten clutched the iron key to Gerard's prison within the leather pouch of his tunic, waiting until the clock tolled ten. He reasoned to himself that a little hunger served as a sharpening agent, breaking the spirit of the captive just as surely as a hammer breaks bone. At the appointed hour, he ascended the stairwell, carrying a loaf of bread and a pitcher of water, trailed by his trusted servant, Dierich Brower, whose arm rested heavily upon the hilt of his weapon.

Ghysbrecht pressed his ear against the wooden door. Silence answered him, a heavy, suffocating quiet. A grim smile twisted his features. *By this time,* he thought, *he will be as downhearted as Albert Koestein was.* He turned the lock and pushed the door open.

There was no Gerard.

Ghysbrecht stood stupefied. Though his face remained hidden in shadow, his entire body seemed to lose all motion, suspended in a peculiar paralysis. Moments later, he collapsed forward, trembling violently. Behind him, Dierich sensed the shift in the air, stepped closer, and peered over his master's shoulder. Upon seeing the empty cell, the discarded rope, and the removed iron bar, the servant let out a loud exclamation of wonder. Yet his surprise doubled when his master, disregarding everything else, suddenly flung himself to his knees before the vacant chest. With quivering hands, Ghysbrecht frantically raked the surface, as if refusing to trust his own eyes in a matter of such catastrophic importance.

Dierich gazed at him in utter bewilderment. "Why, master, what is the matter?"

Ghysbrecht's pale lips worked, forming shapes of speech, but no sound emerged. His hands fell limp at his sides, and he stared blankly into the hollow cavity of the chest.

"Why, master, what avails glaring into that empty box? The lad is not there. Look here! Note the cunning of the young rogue; he hath taken out the bar—"

"Gone! What is gone, Holy saints! He is planet-struck!"

"STOP THIEF!" shrieked Ghysbrecht, suddenly turning on his servant and collaring him, shaking him with a rage born of desperation. "Do you stand there, knave, and watch your master robbed? Run! Fly! A hundred crowns to him who brings it back to me. No, no! 'Tis in vain. Oh, fool! Fool! To leave that in the same room with him. But none ever found the secret spring before. None ever would but he. It was to be. It is to be. Lost! Lost!"

His years and infirmities now overpowered his short-lived frenzy, and he sank upon the chest, muttering the word like a broken prayer. "Lost! Lost!"

"What is lost, master?" the servant asked, his kindness cutting through the storm.

"House and lands and good name," groaned Ghysbrecht, wringing his hands feebly.

"WHAT?" cried the servant, the word striking Ghysbrecht's ear with the force of a bell.

The tone of eager curiosity struck a chord, reviving Ghysbrecht's natural cunning. "I have lost the town records," he stammered, looking askance at the man like a fox cornered near a hen-roost.

"Oh, is that all?"

"Is't not enough? What will the burghers say to me? What will the burghs do?"

Then he suddenly burst out again, his voice rising. "A hundred crowns to him who shall recover them; all, mind, all that were in this box. If one be missing, I give nothing."

"'Tis a bargain, master: the hundred crowns are in my pouch. See you not that where Gerard Eliassoen is, there are the pieces of sheepskin you rate so highly?"

"That is true; that is true, good Dierich: good, faithful Dierich. All, mind, all that were in the chest."

"Master, I will take the constables to Gerard's house, and seize him for the theft."

"The theft? Ay! Good; very good. It is theft. I forgot that. So, as he is a thief now, we will put him in the dungeons below, where the toads are and the rats. Dierich, that man must never see daylight again. 'Tis his own fault; he must be prying. Quick, quick! Ere he has time to talk, you know, time to talk."

In less than half an hour, Dierich Brower and four constables entered the hosier's house, demanding young Gerard of the panic-stricken Catherine.

"Alas! What has he done now?" she cried, tears welling in her eyes. "That boy will break my heart."

"Nay, dame, but a trick of youth," said Dierich smoothly. "He hath but made off with certain skins of parchment, in a frolic doubtless. But the burgomaster is answerable to the burgh for their safekeeping, so he is in care about them; as for the youth, he will doubtless be quit for a reprimand."

This polished speech completely imposed upon Catherine, but her daughter was more suspicious. Her suspicion was strengthened by the disproportionate anger and disappointment Dierich displayed the moment he learned Gerard was not at home, nor had he been seen that night.

"Come away then," he said roughly. "We are wasting time." He added vehemently, "I'll find him if he is above ground."

Affection sharpens the wits, and often it has made an innocent person more than a match for the wily. As Dierich moved to depart, Kate made him a signal to speak with him privately. He bade his men proceed and waited outside the door. She joined him.

"Hush!" she whispered. "My mother knows not. Gerard has left Tergou."

"How?"

"I saw him last night."

"Ay! Where?" cried Dierich eagerly.

"At the foot of the haunted tower."

"How did he get the rope?"

"I know not; but this I know: my brother Gerard bade me there farewell, and he is many leagues from Tergou ere this. The town, you know, was always unworthy of him, and when it imprisoned him, he vowed never to set foot in it again. Let the burgomaster be content, then. He has imprisoned him, and he has driven him from his birthplace and from his native land. What need now to rob him and us of our good name?"

This might at another moment have struck Dierich as good sense; but he was too mortified at this escape of Gerard and the loss of a hundred crowns.

"What need had he to steal?" he retorted bitterly. "Gerard stole not the trash; he but took it to spite the burgomaster, who stole his liberty; but he shall answer to the Duke for it, he shall. As for these skins of parchment you keep such a coil about, look in the nearest brook or stye, and 'tis odds but you find them."

"Think ye so, mistress? Think ye so?" Dierich's eyes flashed.

"Mayhap you know 'tis so."

"This I know, that Gerard is too good to steal, and too wise to load himself with rubbish, going a journey."

"Give you good day, then," said Dierich sharply. "The sheepskin you scorn, I value it more than the skin of any in Tergou." And he went off hastily on a false scent.

Kate returned into the house and drew Giles aside. "Giles, my heart misgives me; breathe not to a soul what I say to you. I have told Dirk Brower that Gerard is out of Holland, but much I doubt he is not a league from Tergou."

"Why, where is he, then?"

"Where should he be, but with her he loves? But if so, he must not loiter. These be deep and dark and wicked men that seek him. Giles, I see that in Dirk Brower's eye makes me tremble. Oh, why cannot I fly to Sevenbergen and bid him away? Why am I not lusty and active like other girls? God forgive me for fretting at His will; but I never felt till now what it is to be lame and weak and useless. But you are strong, dear Giles," she added coaxingly, "you are very strong."

"Yes, I am strong," thundered Perpusillus; then, catching sight of her meaning, "but I hate to go on foot," he added sulkily.

"Alas! Alas! Who will help me if you will not? Dear Giles, do you not love Gerard?"

"Yes, I like him best of the lot. I'll go to Sevenbergen on Peter Buyskens' mule. Ask you him, for he won't lend her me."

Kate remonstrated. The whole town would follow him. It would be known whither he was gone, and Gerard be in worse danger than before. Giles parried this by promising to ride out of the town the opposite way, and not turn the mule's head towards Sevenbergen till he had got rid of the curious. Kate then assented and borrowed the mule. She charged Giles with a short but meaning message,
