To truly grasp the architecture of Gerard's despair, one must first witness the absolute tyranny of the monastic machine that awaited them. Denys, a man whose patriotism had curdled into a visceral hatred of foreign soil, viewed the approaching Burgundian lands with a mixture of longing and disdain. He constantly chanted the praises of his homeland, using every minor inconvenience to remind Gerard that "things were done better in Burgundy." Above all, he exploited Gerard's deepest foible—the terror of sleeping on bare straw—by promising the pristine, white linens of the polished nations beyond. "I ask no more," the Hollander would declare, his voice dripping with mock piety, "than to think I have not lain once in a naked bed since I left home! When I gaze upon their linen, instead of removing my habit and hose, I wish my very eyes and nose were closed forever." Denys carried this love of country to absurd lengths; he once walked twenty leagues in shoes that had long since exploded rather than purchase new ones from a German churl who would erect insurmountable barriers of incivility between customer and commodity.

As the sun began to dip below the horizon, casting long shadows across the landscape, they found themselves equidistant from a small town and a monastery, the latter lying ominously off the main road. Denys instinctively favored the inn, while Gerard, drawn by the promise of spiritual refuge, leaned toward the convent. Denys yielded, but only on the condition that once they crossed into Burgundy, they would invariably choose the tavern over the temple. Gerard agreed all too readily, for his map, annotated with a list of convents, ended precisely where the road forked. Turning off the path, the air grew thick with unspoken tension. Suddenly, Gerard asked with genuine surprise where this sudden aversion to places that had fed and lodged them freely so often stemmed from. The soldier hesitated, hemming and hawing, until finally, the dam of his suppressed grievances burst forth. It was not a fleeting dislike but an ancient, abiding horror, held at bay only by infinite difficulty and a veneer of politeness.

"I saw they had put poison in your drink," he confessed, his voice trembling with repressed rage, "so I forbade them. However, being the last chance, why not ease my mind? Know then I have been like a fish out of water in all those great dungeons. You straightway leave with some old shaveling; thus you see not my purgatory." "Forgive me! I have been selfish," Gerard murmured. "Ay, ay, I forgive thee, little one; 'tis not thy fault: thou art not the first fool that has been priest-ridden and monk-hunted. But I will not forgive them my misery." Then, speaking as if a century before Henry VIII's commissioners arrived, he delivered his indictment against the gloomy piles of stone. These structures were all built alike; inns might differ, but here everything was a suffocating monotony. A great gate, a little gate, countless steps leading inevitably to a gloomy cloister. There lay the dortoir, and there the great, cold refectory, where one was forced to sit in silent submission, or at least inaudibility, lest one dare to speak their mind aloud.

"And then," he continued, his voice rising in indignation, "no one is a man here, but all are slaves. Slaves to what? To a peevish, tinkling bell that never sleeps. If it were a trumpet now, sounding constant alarms, it wouldn't freeze a man's heart quite so thoroughly. *Tinkle, tinkle, tinkle*, and you must sit to meat with perhaps no stomach for food. Ere your meal settles in your belly, *tinkle, tinkle!* and you must rush to church with perhaps no stomach for devotion. I am not a hog at prayers, for one. *Tinkle, tinkle,* and now you must go to bed with your eyes wide open. Well, by then you have contrived to shut them, some uneasy imp of darkness has seized the bell-rope, and *tinkle, tinkle!* it behoves you to recite a prayer in the dark, whether you know one or not. If they heard the sort of prayers I mutter when they shatter my rest with their incessant ringing! Well, you drop off again and gain a sliver of sleep: lo, it is *tinkle, tinkle* for matins."

"And the only clapper you seem to love is a woman's," Gerard interjected half-contemptuously. "Because there is some music in that even when it scolds," was the stout reply. "And then to be constantly checked. If I merely put my finger in the salt-cellars, straightaway I hear, 'Have you no knife that you touch the salt?' And if I but wipe my blade on the cloth to save time, then it is, 'Wipe thy knife dirty on the bread, and clean upon the cloth!' Oh, small of soul! These petty, peevish pedantries fall chill upon good fellowship like tiny icicles melting down from straw-thatched eaves."

"I hold cleanliness no pedantry," Gerard countered firmly. "Thou shouldst learn better manners once for all." "Nay; 'tis they who lack manners. They stop a fellow's mouth at every word." "At every other word, you mean; every obscene or blasphemous one." "Exaggerator, go to! Why, at the very last of these dungeons, I found poor travelers sitting all chilled and mute around one shaveling, like rogues awaiting their turn to be hanged. So to cheer them up, I did but cry out, 'Courage, tout le monde, le diable...'" "Connu! What befell?" "Marry, this. 'Blaspheme not!' quoth the executioner. 'Plait-il,' I said. Does he not wheel and wryte on me in a sort of Alsatian French, turning all the P's into B's? I had much ado not to laugh in his face." "Being thyself unable to speak ten words of his language without a fault," Gerard noted dryly. "Well, all the world ought to speak French. What avail so many jargons except to put a frontier between men's hearts?"

"But what did he say?" "What signifies it what a fool says?" "Oh, not all the words of a fool are folly, or I should not listen to you." "Well, then, he said, 'Such as begin by making free with the devil's name, aye end by doing it with all the names in heaven.' 'Father,' I said, 'I am a soldier, and this is but my consigne or watchword.' 'Oh, then, it is just a custom?' said he. I, not divining the old fox and thinking to clear myself, said, 'Ay, it was.' 'Then that is ten times worse,' he replied. ''Twill bring him about your ears one of these days. He still comes where he hears his name often called.' Observe! No gratitude for the tidings which neither his missals nor his breviary had ever allowed him to know. Then he was so good as to inform me that soldiers commonly commit the crimes for which all other men are broken on the wheel—a savoir murder, rape, and pillage."

"And is't not true?" "True or not, it was ill manners," Denys replied guardedly. "And so says this courteous host of mine: 'Being the foes of mankind, why make enemies of good spirits into the bargain, by still shouting the names of evil ones?' and a lot more such nonsense." "Well, but, Denys, whether you heed his advice or slight it, wherefore blame a man for raising his voice to save your soul?" "How can his voice save my soul when he keeps turning my P's into B's?" Gerard was staggered; ere he could recover from this thunderbolt of Gallicism, Denys went triumphantly off at a tangent, stigmatizing all monks as hypocrites. "Do but look at them, how they creep about and cannot eye you like honest men." "Nay," said Gerard eagerly, "that modest, downcast gaze is part of their discipline, 'tis custodia oculorum." "Cussed toads eating hoc hac horum? No such thing; just so looks a cutpurse. Can't meet a true man's eye. Doff cowl, monk; and behold, a thief; don cowl, thief, and lo, a monk. Tell me not they will ever be able to look God Almighty in the face when they can't even look a true man in the face down here."

"Ah, here it is, black as ink! Into the well we go, comrade. Misericorde, there goes the tinkle already. 'Tis the best of tinkles though; 'tis for dinner: stay, listen! I thought so: the wolf in my stomach cried 'Amen!'" This last statement he confirmed with two oaths, and marched like a victorious gamecock into the convent, thinking by Gerard's silence he had convinced him, and not dreaming how profoundly he had disgusted him.
