CHAPTER XXXIV

THE END


In the early summer of next year two old men sat reading their
newspapers after breakfast upon the terrace of Broad Place. The elder of
the two turned over a sheet.

"I see Osman Digna's back at Suakin," said he. "There's likely to be
some fighting."

"Oh," said the other, "he will not do much harm." And he laid down his
paper. The quiet English country-side vanished from before his eyes. He
saw only the white city by the Red Sea shimmering in the heat, the brown
plains about it with their tangle of halfa grass, and in the distance
the hills towards Khor Gwob.

"A stuffy place Suakin, eh, Sutch?" said General Feversham.

"Appallingly stuffy. I heard of an officer who went down on parade at
six o'clock of the morning there, sunstruck in the temples right through
a regulation helmet. Yes, a town of dank heat! But I was glad to be
there--very glad," he said with some feeling.

"Yes," said Feversham, briskly; "ibex, eh?"

"No," replied Sutch. "All the ibex had been shot off by the English
garrison for miles round."

"No? Something to do, then. That's it?"

"Yes, that's it, Feversham. Something to do."

And both men busied themselves again over their papers. But in a little
while a footman brought to each a small pile of letters. General
Feversham ran over his envelopes with a quick eye, selected one letter,
and gave a grunt of satisfaction. He took a pair of spectacles from a
case and placed them upon his nose.

"From Ramelton?" asked Sutch, dropping his newspaper on to the terrace.

"From Ramelton," answered Feversham. "I'll light a cigar first."

He laid the letter down on the garden table which stood between his
companion and himself, drew a cigar-case from his pocket, and in spite
of the impatience of Lieutenant Sutch, proceeded to cut and light it
with the utmost deliberation. The old man had become an epicure in this
respect. A letter from Ramelton was a luxury to be enjoyed with all the
accessories of comfort which could be obtained. He made himself
comfortable in his chair, stretched out his legs, and smoked enough of
his cigar to assure himself that it was drawing well. Then he took up
his letter again and opened it.

"From him?" asked Sutch.

"No; from her."

"Ah!"

General Feversham read the letter through slowly, while Lieutenant Sutch
tried not to peep at it across the table. When the general had finished
he turned back to the first page, and began it again.

"Any news?" said Sutch, with a casual air.

"They are very pleased with the house now that it's rebuilt."

"Anything more?"

"Yes. Harry's finished the sixth chapter of his history of the war."

"Good!" said Sutch. "You'll see, he'll do that well. He has imagination,
he knows the ground, he was present while the war went on. Moreover, he
was in the bazaars, he saw the under side of it."

"Yes. But you and I won't read it, Sutch," said Feversham. "No; I am
wrong. You may, for you can give me a good many years."

He turned back to his letter and again Sutch asked:--

"Anything more?"

"Yes. They are coming here in a fortnight."

"Good," said Sutch. "I shall stay."

He took a turn along the terrace and came back. He saw Feversham sitting
with the letter upon his knees and a frown of great perplexity upon his
face.

"You know, Sutch, I never understood," he said. "Did you?"

"Yes, I think I did."

Sutch did not try to explain. It was as well, he thought, that Feversham
never would understand. For he could not understand without much
self-reproach.

"Do you ever see Durrance?" asked the general, suddenly.

"Yes, I see a good deal of Durrance. He is abroad just now."

Feversham turned towards his friend.

"He came to Broad Place when you went to Suakin, and talked to me for
half an hour. He was Harry's best man. Well, that too I never
understood. Did you?"

"Yes, I understood that as well."

"Oh!" said General Feversham. He asked for no explanations, but, as he
had always done, he took the questions which he did not understand and
put them aside out of his thoughts. But he did not turn to his other
letters. He sat smoking his cigar, and looked out across the summer
country and listened to the sounds rising distinctly from the fields.
Sutch had read through all of his correspondence before Feversham spoke
again.

"I have been thinking," he said. "Have you noticed the date of the
month, Sutch?" and Sutch looked up quickly.

"Yes," said he, "this day next week will be the anniversary of our
attack upon the Redan, and Harry's birthday."

"Exactly," replied Feversham. "Why shouldn't we start the Crimean nights
again?"

Sutch jumped up from his chair.

"Splendid!" he cried. "Can we muster a tableful, do you think?"

"Let's see," said Feversham, and ringing a handbell upon the table, sent
the servant for the Army List. Bending over that Army List the two
veterans may be left.

But of one other figure in this story a final word must be said. That
night, when the invitations had been sent out from Broad Place, and no
longer a light gleamed from any window of the house, a man leaned over
the rail of a steamer anchored at Port Said and listened to the song of
the Arab coolies as they tramped up and down the planks with their coal
baskets between the barges and the ship's side. The clamour of the
streets of the town came across the water to his ears. He pictured to
himself the flare of braziers upon the quays, the lighted port-holes,
and dark funnels ahead and behind in the procession of the anchored
ships. Attended by a servant, he had come back to the East again. Early
the next morning the steamer moved through the canal, and towards the
time of sunset passed out into the chills of the Gulf of Suez. Kassassin,
Tel-el-Kebir, Tamai, Tamanieb, the attack upon McNeil's
zareeba--Durrance lived again through the good years of his activity,
the years of plenty. Within that country on the west the long
preparations were going steadily forward which would one day roll up the
Dervish Empire and crush it into dust. Upon the glacis of the ruined
fort of Sinkat, Durrance had promised himself to take a hand in that
great work, but the desert which he loved had smitten and cast him out.
But at all events the boat steamed southwards into the Red Sea. Three
nights more, and though he would not see it, the Southern Cross would
lift slantwise into the sky.




       *       *       *       *       *


By A. E. W. Mason

THE COURTSHIP OF MAURICE BUCKLER

_A ROMANCE_


Being a record of the growth of an English Gentleman, during the years
of 1685-1687, under strange and difficult circumstances, written some
while afterward in his own hand, and now edited by A. E. W. MASON


Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: In spirit and color it reminds us of the
very remarkable books of Mr. Conon Doyle. The author has measurably
caught the fascinating diction of the seventeenth century, and the
strange adventures with which the story is filled are of a sufficiently
perilous order to entertain the most Homeric mind.

Boston Courier: In this elaborately ingenious narrative the adventures
recorded are various and exciting enough to suit the most exacting
reader. The incidents recited are of extreme interest, and are not drawn
out into noticeable tenuity.

The Outlook: "The Courtship of Maurice Buckler" is not only full of
action and stimulating to curiosity, but tells a quite original plot in
a clever way. Perhaps in its literary kinship it approaches more closely
to "The Prisoner of Zenda" than to any other recent novel, but there is
no evidence of imitation; the resemblance is in the spirit and dash of
the narrative. The merit of this story is not solely in its grasp on the
reader's attention and its exciting situations; it is written in
excellent English, the dialogue is natural and brisk, the individual
characters stand out clearly, and the flavor of the time is well
preserved.
