“Look into your own heart and write!” said Herr Cant; and earth's cuckoos echoed the cry. Look into the Rhine where it is deepest, and the Thames where it is thickest, and paint the bottom. Lower a bucket into a well of self-deception, and what comes up must be immortal truth, mustn't it? Now, in the first place, no son of Adam ever reads his own heart at all, except by the habit acquired, and the light gained, from some years perusal of other hearts; and even then, with his acquired sagacity and reflected light, he can but spell and decipher his own heart, not read it fluently. Half way to Sevenbergen Gerard looked into his own heart, and asked it why he was going to Sevenbergen. His heart replied without a moment's hesitation, “We are going out of curiosity to know why she jilted us, and to show her it has not broken our hearts, and that we are quite content with our honours and our benefice in prospectu, and don't want her nor ally of her fickle sex.” He soon found out Peter Brandt's cottage; and there sat a girl in the doorway, plying her needle, and a stalwart figure leaned on a long bow and talked to her.

the youth stood before them. Margaret looked up and dropped her work, and uttered a faint cry, and was white and red by turns. But these signs of emotion were swiftly dismissed, and she turned far more chill and indifferent than she would if she had not betrayed this agitation. “What! is it you, Master Gerard? What on earth brings you here, I wonder?” “I was passing by and saw you; so I thought I would give you good day, and ask after your father.” “My father is well. He will be here anon.” “Then I may as well stay till he comes.” “As you will. Good Martin, step into the village and tell my father here is a friend of his.” “And not of yours?” “My father's friends are mine.” “That is doubtful. It was not like a friend to promise to wait for me, and then make off the moment my back was turned.

came back the moment the Countess let me go; but you were not there.” “Nay, you did not, or you had seen Hans Cloterman at our table; we left him to bring you on.” “I saw no one there, but only a drunken man, that had just tumbled down.” “At our table? How was he clad?” “Nay, I took little heed: in sad-coloured garb.” At this Margaret's face gradually warmed; but presently, assuming incredulity and severity, she put many shrewd questions, all of which Gerard answered most loyally. Finally, the clouds cleared, and they guessed how the misunderstanding had come about. Then came a revulsion of tenderness, all the more powerful that they had done each other wrong; and then, more dangerous still, came mutual confessions. Neither had been happy since; neither ever would have been happy but for this fortunate meeting.

touch of inconsistency she pointed it out to Gerard with her white finger. “Ay,” said he, “but to-day it is all hidden in that great cap.” “It is a comely cap, I'm told by some.” “Maybe; but what it hides is beautiful.” “It is not: it is hideous.” “Well, it was beautiful at Rotterdam.” “Ay, everything was beautiful that day” (with a little sigh). And now Peter came in, and welcomed Gerard cordially, and would have him to stay supper. And Margaret disappeared; and Gerard had a nice learned chat with Peter; and Margaret reappeared with her hair in her silver net, and shot a glance half arch, half coy, and glided about them, and spread supper, and beamed bright with gaiety and happiness. And in the cool evening Gerard coaxed her out, and she objected and came; and coaxed her on to the road to Tergou, and she declined, and came; and there they strolled up and down, hand in hand; and when he must go, they pledged each other never to quarrel or misunderstand one another again; and they sealed the promise with a long loving kiss, and Gerard went home on wings.
