One bright morning unwonted velvet shone, unwonted feathers waved, and horses' hoofs glinted and ran through the streets of Tergou, and the windows and balconies were studded with wondering faces. The French ambassador was riding through to sport in the neighbouring forest. Besides his own suite, he was attended by several servants of the Duke of Burgundy, lent to do him honour and minister to his pleasure. The Duke's tumbler rode before him with a grave, sedate majesty, that made his more noble companions seem light, frivolous persons. But ever and anon, when respect and awe neared the oppressive, he rolled off his horse so ignobly and funnily, that even the ambassador was fain' to burst out laughing. He also climbed up again by the tail in a way provocative of mirth, and so he played his part. Towards the rear of the pageant rode one that excited more attention still--the Duke's leopard.

dust at her, and the Duke made dust of him.” “Gramercy!” “I speak sooth. The good Duke shut him up in prison, in a cell under ground, and the rats cleaned the flesh off his bones in a night. Served him right for molesting the poor thing.” There was a murmur of fear, and the Tergovians shrank from tickling the leopard of their sovereign. But an incident followed that raised their spirits again. The Duke's giant, a Hungarian seven feet four inches high, brought up the rear. This enormous creature had, like some other giants, a treble, fluty voice of little power. He was a vain fellow, and not conscious of this nor any defect. Now it happened he caught sight of Giles sitting on the top of the balcony; so he stopped and began to make fun of him.

came to as singular an end. Giles lost all patience and self-command, and being a creature devoid of fear, and in a rage to boot, he actually dropped upon the giant's neck, seized his hair with one hand, and punched his head with the other. The giant's first impulse was to laugh, but the weight and rapidity of the blows soon corrected that inclination. “He! he! Ah! ha! hallo! oh! oh! Holy saints! here! help! or I must throttle the imp. I can't! I'll split your skull against the--” and he made a wild run backwards at the balcony. Giles saw his danger, seized the balcony in time with both hands, and whipped over it just as the giant's head came against it with a stunning crack. The people roared with laughter and exultation at the address of their little champion.

will marry Cornelis and Sybrandt: for they can wed (good housewives), now, if they will. Gerard will take care of you and Giles, when we are gone.” “Yes, mother, and we can confess to him instead of to a stranger,” said Kate. “Ay, girl! and he can give the sacred oil to your father and me, and close our eyes when our time comes.” “Oh, mother! not for many, many years, I do pray Heaven. Pray speak not of that, it always makes me sad. I hope to go before you, mother dear. No; let us be gay to-day. I am out of pain, mother, quite out of all pain; it does seem so strange; and I feel so bright and happy, that--mother, Can you keep a secret?” “Nobody better, child. Why, you know I can.” “Then I will show you something so beautiful.

a mortal creature. And her beautiful hair of burning gold.” “And to think I have a son that can make the saints live again upon a piece of wood!” “The reason is, he is a young saint himself, mother. He is too good for this world; he is here to portray the blessed, and then to go away and be with them for ever.” Ere they had half done admiring it, a strange voice was heard at the door. By one of the furtive instincts of their sex they hastily hid the picture in the cloth, though there was no need, And the next moment in came, casting his eyes furtively around, a man that had not entered the house this ten years Ghysbrecht Van Swieten. The two women were so taken by surprise, that they merely stared at him and at one another, and said, “The burgomaster!” in a tone so expressive, that Ghysbrecht felt compelled to answer it.

“Your son Gerard is more like to be father of a family than a priest: he is for ever with Margaret, Peter Brandt's red-haired girl, and loves her like a cow her calf.” Mother and daughter both burst out laughing. Ghysbrecht stared at them. “What! you knew it?” “Carry this tale to those who know not my son, Gerard. Women are nought to him.” “Other women, mayhap. But this one is the apple of his eye to him, or will be, if you part them not, and soon. Come, dame, make me not waste time and friendly counsel: my servant has seen them together a score times, handed, and reading babies in one another's eyes like--you know, dame--you have been young, too.” “Girl, I am ill at ease. Yea, I have been young, and know how blind and foolish the young are.

feminine proof of Gerard's purity. His eyes and mouth opened, and remained open: in which state they kept turning, face and all as if on a pivot, from the picture to the women, and from the women to the picture. “Why, it is herself,” he gasped. “Isn't it!” cried Kate, and her hostility was softened. “You admire it? I forgive you for frightening us.” “Am I in a mad-house?” said Ghysbrecht Van Swieten thoroughly puzzled. “You show me a picture of the girl; and you say he painted it; and that is a proof he cannot love her. Why, they all paint their sweethearts, painters do.” “A picture of the girl?” exclaimed Kate, shocked. “Fie! this is no girl; this is our blessed Lady.” “No, no; it is Margaret Brandt.” “Oh blind! It is the Queen of Heaven.” “No; only of Sevenbergen village.” “Profane man! behold her crown!” “Silly child! look at her red hair!

women, for a moment, if you can; who is it, Peter?” “Well, to be sure!” said Peter, in reply; and his eye seemed fascinated by the picture. “Who is it?” repeated Ghysbrecht impetuously. Peter Buyskens smiled. “Why, you know as well as I do; but what have they put a crown on her for? I never saw her in a crown, for my part.” “Man alive! Can't you open your great jaws, and just speak a wench's name plain out to oblige three people?” “I'd do a great deal more to oblige one of you than that, burgomaster. If it isn't as natural as life!” “Curse the man! he won't, he won't--curse him!” “Why, what have I done now?” “Oh, sir!” said little Kate, “for pity's sake tell us; are these the features of a living woman, of--of--Margaret Brandt?” “A mirror is not truer, my little maid.” “But is it she, sir, for very certain?” “Why, who else should it be?” “Now, why couldn't you say so at once?” snarled Ghysbrecht.

him fear some heavy misfortune. “Richart! Jacob!” he gasped. “No, no!” said the burgomaster; “it is nearer home, and nobody is dead or dying, old friend.” “God bless you, burgomaster! Ah! something has gone off my breast that was like to choke me. Now, what is the matter?” Ghysbrecht then told him all that he told the women, and showed the picture in evidence. “Is that all?” said Eli, profoundly relieved. “What are ye roaring and bellowing for? It is vexing--it is angering, but it is not like death, not even sickness. Boys will be boys. He will outgrow that disease: 'tis but skin-deep.” But when Ghysbrecht told him that Margaret was a girl of good character; that it was not to be supposed she would be so intimate if marriage had not been spoken of between them, his brow darkened.

my son. He never disobeyed me in his life: he never shall, Where is he? It is past supper-time. Where is he, Kate?” “Alas! I know not, father.” “I know,” said Ghysbrecht; “he is at Sevenbergen. My servant met him on the road.” Supper passed in gloomy silence. Evening descended--no Gerard! Eight o'clock came--no Gerard! Then the father sent all to bed, except Catherine. “You and I will walk abroad, wife, and talk over this new care.” “Abroad, my man, at this time? Whither?” “Why, on the road to Sevenbergen.” “Oh no; no hasty words, father. Poor Gerard! he never vexed you before.” “Fear me not. But it must end; and I am not one that trusts to-morrow with to-day's work.” The old pair walked hand in hand; for, strange is it may appear to some of my readers, the use of the elbow to couples walking was not discovered in Europe till centuries after this.

One can be firm without being harsh.” “Surely.” “Have you been happy with me, my poor Eli?” “Why, you know I have. Friends I have known, but none like thee. Buss me, wife!” “A heart to share joy and grief with is a great comfort to man or woman. Isn't it, Eli?” “It is so, my lass. 'It doth joy double, And halveth trouble,' runs the byword. And so I have found it, sweetheart. Ah! here comes the young fool.” Catherine trembled, and held her husband's hand tight. The moon was bright, but they were in the shadow of some trees, and their son did not see them. He came singing in the moonlight, and his face shining.
