The courage, like the talent, of common men, runs in a narrow groove. Take them but an inch out of that, and they are done. Martin's courage was perfect as far as it went. He had met and baffled many dangers in the course of his rude life, and these familiar dangers he could face with Spartan fortitude, almost with indifference; but he had never been hunted by a bloodhound, nor had he ever seen that brute's unerring instinct baffled by human cunning. Here then a sense of the supernatural combined with novelty to ungenteel his heart. After going a few steps, he leaned on his bow, and energy and hope oozed out of him. Gerard, to whom the danger appeared slight in proportion as it was distant, urged him to flight. “What avails it?” said Martin sadly; “if we get clear of the wood we shall die cheap; here, hard by, I know a place where we may die dear.” “Alas! good Martin,” cried Gerard, “despair not so quickly; there must be some way to escape.” “Oh, Martin!” cried Margaret, “what if we were to part company?

dead man's blood to the man that shed it that cursed hound will lead them, though Gerard should run through an army or swim the Meuse.” And again he leaned upon his bow, and his head sank. The hound's mellow voice rang through the wood. A cry more tunable Was never halloed to, nor cheered with horn, In Crete, in Sparta, or in Thessaly. Strange that things beautiful should be terrible and deadly' The eye of the boa-constrictor, while fascinating its prey, is lovely. No royal crown holds such a jewel; it is a ruby with the emerald's green light playing ever upon it. Yet the deer that sees it loses all power of motion, and trembles, and awaits his death and even so, to compare hearing with sight, this sweet and mellow sound seemed to fascinate Martin Wittenhaagen. He stood uncertain, bewildered, and unnerved.

cannot shun the hound, and the place is hard by;” then turning to the left, he led the way, as men go to execution. He soon brought them to a thick hazel coppice, like the one that had favoured their escape in the morning. “There,” said he, “this is but a furlong broad, but it will serve our turn.” “What are we to do?” “Get through this, and wait on the other side; then as they come straggling through, shoot three, knock two on the head, and the rest will kill us.” “Is that all you can think of?” said Gerard. “That is all.” “Then, Martin Wittenhaagen, I take the lead, for you have lost your head. Come, can you obey so young a man as I am?” “Oh, yes, Martin,” cried Margaret, “do not gainsay Gerard! He is wiser than his years.” Martin yielded a sullen assent.

Martin gloomily. “I'll hit harder this time, if Heaven gives me the chance,” said Gerard. At last they worked through the coppice, and there was an open wood. The trees were large, but far apart, and no escape possible that way. And now with the hound's bay mingled a score of voices hooping and hallooing. “The whole village is out after us,” said Martin. “I care not,” said Gerard. “Listen, Martin. I have made the track smooth to the dog, but rough to the men, that we may deal with them apart. Thus the hound will gain on the men, and as soon as he comes out of the coppice we must kill him.” “The hound? There are more than one.” “I hear but one.” “Ay! but one speaks, the others run mute; but let the leading hound lose the scent, then another shall give tongue.

death coming on minute by minute, and that death-knell leading it. A trembling hand was laid on Gerard's shoulder. It made him start violently, strung up as he was. “Martin says if we are forced to part company, make for that high ash-tree we came in by.” “Yes! yes! yes! but go back for Heaven's sake! don't come here, all out in the open!” She ran back towards Martin; but, ere she could get to him, suddenly a huge dog burst out of the coppice, and stood erect a moment. Margaret cowered with fear, but he never noticed her. Scent was to him what sight is to us. He lowered his nose an instant, and the next moment, with an awful yell, sprang straight at Gerard's tree and rolled head-over-heels dead as a stone, literally spitted with an arrow from the bow that twanged beside the coppice in Martin's hand.

fresh pursuers reached the spot. The hunters, as usual on a surprise, were wasting time, and the hunted ones were making the most of it. “I hear no more hounds,” whispered Martin to Margaret, and he was himself again. It was Margaret's turn to tremble and despair. “Oh, why did we part with Gerard? They will kill my Gerard, and I not near him.” “Nay, nay! the head to catch him is not on their shoulders. You bade him meet us at the ash-tree?” “And so I did. Bless you, Martin, for thinking of that. To the ash-tree!” “Ay! but with less noise.” They were now nearly at the edge of the coppice, when suddenly they heard hooping and hallooing behind them. The men had satisfied themselves the fugitives were in the coppice, and were beating back. “No matter,” whispered Martin to his trembling companion.

active figure leaped on Ghysbrecht from behind so swiftly, it was like a hawk swooping on a pigeon. A kerchief went over the burgomaster, in a turn of the hand his head was muffled in it, and he was whirled from his seat and fell heavily upon the ground, where he lay groaning with terror; and Gerard jumped down after him. “Hist, Martin! Martin!” Martin and Margaret came out, the former openmouthed crying, “Now fly! fly! while they are all in the thicket; we are saved.” At this crisis, when safety seemed at hand, as fate would have it, Margaret, who had borne up so bravely till now, began to succumb, partly from loss of blood. “Oh, my beloved, fly!” she gasped. “Leave me, for I am faint.” “No! no!” cried Gerard. “Death together, or safety. Ah! the mule! mount her, you, and I'll run by your side.” In a moment Martin was on Ghysbrecht's mule, and Gerard raised the fainting girl in his arms and placed her on the saddle, and relieved Martin of his bow.
