Some are old in heart at forty, some are young at eighty. Margaret Van Eyck's heart was an evergreen. She loved her young namesake with youthful ardour. Nor was this new sentiment a mere caprice; she was quick at reading character, and saw in Margaret Brandt that which in one of her own sex goes far with an intelligent woman; genuineness. But, besides her own sterling qualities, Margaret had from the first a potent ally in the old artist's bosom. Human nature. Strange as it may appear to the unobservant, our hearts warm more readily to those we have benefited than to our benefactors. Some of the Greek philosophers noticed this; but the British Homer has stamped it in immortal lines:-- “I heard, and thought how side by side We two had stemmed the battle's tide In many a well-debated field, Where Bertram's breast was Philip's shield.

dew. I thought on Quariana's cliff, Where, rescued from our foundering skiff, Through the white breakers' wrath I bore Exhausted Bertram to the shore: And when his side an arrow found, I sucked the Indian's venom'd wound. These thoughts like torrents rushed along To sweep away my purpose strong.” Observe! this assassin's hand is stayed by memory, not of benefits received, but benefits conferred. Now Margaret Van Eyck had been wonderfully kind to Margaret Brandt; had broken through her own habits to go and see her; had nursed her, and soothed her, and petted her, and cured her more than all the medicine in the world. So her heart opened to the recipient of her goodness, and she loved her now far more tenderly than she had ever loved Gerard, though, in truth, it was purely out of regard for Gerard she had visited her in the first instance.

looked imploringly at her friend for counsel. “You are come to the right place, and at the right time,” said the old lady. “Here was this Hans Memling with me to-day; he is going to Italy, girl, no later than next week, 'to improve his hand,' he says. Not before 'twas needed, I do assure you.” “But how is he to find my Gerard?” “Why, he knows your Gerard, child. They have supped here more than once, and were like hand and glove. Now, as his business is the same as Gerard's, he will visit the same places as Gerard, and soon or late he must fall in with him. Wherefore, get you a long letter written, and copy out this pardon into it, and I'll answer for the messenger. In six months at farthest Gerard shall get it; and when he shall get it, then will he kiss it, and put it in his bosom, and come flying home.

should entrust to him. The letter was duly written and left with Margaret Van Eyck; and the following week, sure enough, Hans Memling returned from Flanders, Margaret Van Eyck gave him the letter, and a piece of gold towards his travelling expenses. He seemed in a hurry to be off. “All the better,” said the old artist; “he will be the sooner in Italy.” But as there are horses who burn and rage to start, and after the first yard or two want the whip, so all this hurry cooled into inaction when Hans got as far as the principal hostelry of Tergou, and saw two of his boon companions sitting in the bay window. He went in for a parting glass with them; but when he offered to pay, they would not hear of it, No; he was going a long journey; they would treat him; everybody must treat him, the landlord and all.

and to impress his eulogy, slapped Sybrandt on the back so heartily, as to drive the breath out of his body. Sybrandt got round the table to avoid this muscular approval; but listened to every word, and learned for the first time that Gerard was gone to Italy. However, to make sure, he affected to doubt it. “My brother Gerard is never in Italy.” “Ye lie, ye cur,” roared Hans, taking instantly the irascible turn, and not being clear enough to see that he, who now sat opposite him, was the same he had praised, and hit, when beside him. “If he is ten times your brother, he is in Italy. What call ye this? There, read me that superscription!” and he flung down a letter on the table. Sybrandt took it up, and examined it gravely; but eventually laid it down, with the remark, that he could not read.

“She die? She would outlive the pest to vex us.” And Cornelis was wroth at her selfishness in not dying, to oblige. These two black sheep kept putting their heads together, and tainting each other worse and worse, till at last their corrupt hearts conceived a plan for keeping Gerard in Italy all his life, and so securing his share of their father's substance. But when they had planned it they were no nearer the execution: for that required talent: so iniquity came to a standstill. But presently, as if Satan had come between the two heads, and whispered into the right ear of one and the left of the other simultaneously, they both burst out-- “THE BURGOMASTER!” They went to Ghysbrecht Van Swieten, and he received them at once: for the man who is under the torture of suspense catches eagerly at knowledge.

“Who writ the letter?” “Margaret Van Eyck,” was the reply; for they naturally thought the contents were by the same hand as the superscription. “Are ye sure?” And he went to a drawer and drew out a paper written by Margaret Van Eyck while treating with the burgh for her house. “Was it writ like this?” “Yes. 'Tis the same writing,” said Sybrandt boldly. “Good. And now what would ye of me?” said Ghysbrecht, with beating heart, but a carelessness so well feigned that it staggered them. They fumbled with their bonnets, and stammered and spoke a word or two, then hesitated and beat about the bush, and let out by degrees that they wanted a letter written, to say something that might keep Gerard in Italy; and this letter they proposed to substitute in Hans Memling's wallet for the one he carried.

I'll go bail.” “Nay, burgomaster, nay! not for all the world!” cried Sybrandt; “Gerard would not believe it, or but half, and then he would come back to see. No; say that she is dead.” “Dead! what, at her age, will he credit that?” “Sooner than the other. Why she was nearly dead: so it is not to say a downright lie, after all.” “Humph! And you think that will keep him in Italy?” “We are sure of it, are we not, Cornelis?” “Ay,” said Cornelis, “our Gerard will never leave Italy now he is there. It was always his dream to get there. He would come back for his Margaret, but not for us. What cares he for us? He despises his own family; always did.” “This would be a bitter pill to him,” said the old hypocrite. “It will be for his good in the end,” replied the young one.

of Margaret Van Eyck's writing before him, and made some inquiries as to the size and shape of the letter, when an unlooked-for interruption occurred; Jorian Ketel burst hastily into the room, and looked vexed at not finding him alone. “Thou seest I have matter on hand, good fellow.” “Ay; but this is grave. I bring good news; but 'tis not for every ear.” The burgomaster rose, and drew Jorian aside into the embrasure of his deep window, and then the brothers heard them converse in low but eager tones. It ended by Ghysbrecht sending Jorian out to saddle his mule. He then addressed the black sheep with a sudden coldness that amazed them-- “I prize the peace of households; but this is not a thing to be done in a hurry: we will see about it, we will see.” “But, burgomaster, the man will be gone.

the spot where the parchments were buried. Martin was for taking them up, but I would not let him. He put them there; and I said none should move them but you, who had earned them so well of him and me.” “Give me a spade!” cried Jorian eagerly. “But stay! No; he is a suspicious man. You are sure they are there still?” “I will openly take the blame if human hand hath touched them.” “Then keep them but two hours more, I prithee, good Margaret,” said Jorian, and ran off to the Stadthouse of Tergou a joyful man. The burgomaster jogged along towards Sevenbergen, with Jorian striding beside him, giving him assurance that in an hour's time the missing parchments would be in his hand. “Ah, master!” said he, “lucky for us it wasn't a thief that took them.” “Not a thief? not a thief? what call you him, then?”.

Jorian, and ran off to the Stadthouse of Tergou a joyful man. The burgomaster jogged along towards Sevenbergen, with Jorian striding beside him, giving him assurance that in an hour's time the missing parchments would be in his hand. “Ah, master!” said he, “lucky for us it wasn't a thief that took them.” “Not a thief? not a thief? what call you him, then?” “Well, saving your presence, I call him a jackdaw. This is jackdaw's work, if ever there was; 'take the thing you are least in need of, and hide it'--that's a jackdaw. I should know,” added Jorian oracularly, “for I was brought up along with a chough. He and I were born the same year, but he cut his teeth long before me, and wow! but my life was a burden for years all along of him.

him than a thimble or an awl to Jack. He took 'em out of pure mischief and hid them, and you would never have found them but for me.” “I believe you are right,” said Ghysbrecht, “and I have vexed myself more than need.” When they came to Peter's gate he felt uneasy. “I wish it had been anywhere but here.” Jorian reassured him. “The girl is honest and friendly,” said he. “She had nothing to do with taking them, I'll be sworn;” and he led him into the garden. “There, master, if a face is to be believed, here they lie; and see, the mould is loose.” He ran for a spade which was stuck up in the ground at some distance, and soon went to work and uncovered a parchment. Ghysbrecht saw it, and thrust him aside and went down on his knees and tore it out of the hole.

oil upon the waves. “No, good man, it is not false, nor yet is it quite true: there was another parchment.” “There, there, there! Where is it?” “But,” continued Margaret calmly, “it was not a town record (so you have gained your hundred crowns, good man): it was but a private deed between the burgomaster here and my grandfather Flor--” “Hush, hush!” “--is Brandt.” “Where is it, girl? that is all we want to know.” “Have patience, and I shall tell you. Gerard read the title of it, and he said, 'This is as much yours as the burgomaster's,' and he put it apart, to read it with me at his leisure.” “It is in the house, then?” said the burgomaster, recovering his calmness. “No, sir,” said Margaret gravely, “it is not.” Then, in a voice that faltered suddenly, “You hunted--my poor Gerard--so hard--and so close-that you gave him--no time-to think of aught--but his life--and his grief.

on his bow, and sneering from ear to ear. At sight of the man and his grinning face, Ghysbrecht's worst passions awoke. “Ho! attach him, seize him, traitor and thief!” cried he. “Dog, thou shalt pay for all.” Martin, without a word, calmly thrust the duke's pardon under Ghysbrecht's nose. He looked, and had not a word to say. Martin followed up his advantage. “The duke and I are soldiers. He won't let you greasy burghers trample on an old comrade. He bade me carry you a message too.” “The duke send a message to me?” “Ay! I told him of your masterful doings, of your imprisoning Gerard for loving a girl; and says he, 'Tell him this is to be a king, not a burgomaster. I'll have no kings in Holland but one. Bid him be more humble, or I'll hang him at his own door,'” (Ghysbrecht trembled: he thought the duke capable of the deed) “'as I hanged the burgomaster of Thingembob.' The duke could not mind which of you he had hung, or in what part; such trifles stick not in a soldier's memory; but he was sure he had hanged one of you for grinding poor folk, 'and I'm the man to hang another,' quoth the good duke.” These repeated insults from so mean a man, coupled with his invulnerability, shielded as he was by the duke, drove the choleric old man into a fit of impotent fury: he shook his fist at the soldier, and tried to threaten him, but could not speak for the rage and mortification that choked him: then he gave a sort of screech,.

kick from his foot would send him to his last home; and he wants me to cheat the gallows. But I have slain too many men in fair fight to lift limb against anything less than a man; and this I count no man. What is it, in Heaven's name? an old goat's-skin bag full o' rotten bones.” “My mule! my mule!” screamed Ghysbrecht. Jorian helped the old man up trembling in every joint. Once in the saddle, he seemed to gather in a moment unnatural vigour; and the figure that went flying to Tergou was truly weird-like and terrible: so old and wizened the face; so white and reverend the streaming hair; so baleful the eye; so fierce the fury which shook the bent frame that went spurring like mad; while the quavering voice yelled, “I'll make their hearts ache.

lost,” cried Ghysbrecht angrily. “Dolts!” “Nay, but,” said Sybrandt, “I heard the words read, and I have not lost them. They were, 'To Gerard Eliassoen, these by the hand of the trusty Hans Memling, with all speed.'” “'Tis well. Now, how was the letter folded? how big was it?” “Longer than that one, and not so long as this.” “'Tis well. Where is he?” “At the hostelry.” “Come, then, take you this groat, and treat him. Then ask to see the letter, and put this in place of it. Come to me with the other letter.” The brothers assented, took the letter, and went to the hostelry. They had not been gone a minute, when Dierich Brower issued from the Stadthouse, and followed them. He had his orders not to let them out of his sight till the true letter was in his master's hands.

no! we don't hate our brother. We won't get ourselves hanged to spite him,” said Sybrandt; “that would be a fool's trick.” “Hanged!” cried Ghysbrecht. “Am I not the burgomaster? How can ye be hanged? I see how 'tis ye fear to tackle one man, being two: hearts of hare, that ye are! Oh! why cannot I be young again? I'd do it single-handed.” The old man now threw off all disguise, and showed them his heart was in this deed. He then flattered and besought, and jeered them alternately, but he found no eloquence could move them to an action, however dishonourable, which was attended with danger. At last he opened a drawer, and showed them a pile of silver coins. “Change but those letters for me,” he said, “and each of you shall thrust one hand into this drawer, and take away as many of them as you can hold.” The effect was magical.

man, and ye shall have my all.” “So be it then. Live! but empty thy wallet.” “There is nought in my wallet, good friend, but one letter.” “That we shall see,” said Sybrandt, who was the one in front. “Well, it is a letter.” “Take it not from me, I pray you. 'Tis worth nought, and the good dame would fret that writ it.” “There,” said Sybrandt, “take back thy letter; and now empty thy pouch. Come I tarry not!” But by this time Hans had recovered his confusion; and from a certain flutter in Sybrandt, and hard breathing of Cornelis, aided by an indescribable consciousness, felt sure the pair he had to deal with were no heroes. He pretended to fumble for his money: then suddenly thrust his staff fiercely into Sybrandt's face, and drove him staggering, and lent Cornelis a back-handed slash on the ear that sent him twirling like a weathercock in March; then whirled his weapon over his head and danced about the road like a figure on springs, shouting: “Come on, ye thieving loons!
