A change came over Margaret Brandt. She went about her household duties like one in a dream. If Peter did but speak a little quickly to her, she started and fixed two terrified eyes on him. She went less often to her friend Margaret Van Eyck, and was ill at her ease when there. Instead of meeting her warm old friend's caresses, she used to receive them passive and trembling, and sometimes almost shrink from them. But the most extraordinary thing was, she never would go outside her own house in daylight. When she went to Tergou it was after dusk, and she returned before daybreak. She would not even go to matins. At last Peter, unobservant as he was, noticed it, and asked her the reason. “Methinks the folk all look at me.” One day, Margaret Van Eyck asked her what was the matter.

“What, sweetheart, afraid to confide your sorrows to me?” “I have no sorrows, madam, but of my own making. I am kinder treated than I deserve; especially in this house.” “Then why not come oftener, my dear?” “I come oftener than I deserve;” and she sighed deeply. “There, Reicht is bawling for you,” said Margaret Van Eyck; “go, child!--what on earth can it be?” Turning possibilities over in her mind, she thought Margaret must be mortified at the contempt with which she was treated by Gerard's family. “I will take them to task for it, at least such of them as are women;” and the very next day she put on her hood and cloak and followed by Reicht, went to the hosier's house. Catherine received her with much respect, and thanked her with tears for her kindness to Gerard.

intended for the whole family, when suddenly a little delicate hand glided timidly into hers, and looking round she saw two dove-like eyes, with the water in them, that sought hers gratefully and at the same time imploringly. The old lady read this wonderful look, complex as it was, and down went her choler. She stopped and kissed Kate's brow. “I see,” said she. “Mind, then, I leave it to you.” Returned home, she said--“I have been to a house to-day, where I have seen a very common thing and a very uncommon thing; I have seen a stupid, obstinate woman, and I have seen an angel in the flesh, with a face-if I had it here I'd take down my brushes once more and try and paint it.” Little Kate did not belie the good opinion so hastily formed of her.

letter on the table by Catherine, and refusing all guerdon for bringing it, went off to Sevenbergen. The letter was unfolded and spread out; and curiously enough, though not one of them could read, they could all tell it was Gerard's handwriting. “And your father must be away,” cried Catherine. “Are ye not ashamed of yourselves? not one that can read your brother's letter.” But although the words were to them what hieroglyphics are to us, there was something in the letter they could read. There is an art can speak without words; unfettered by the penman's limits, it can steal through the eye into the heart and brain, alike of the learned and unlearned; and it can cross a frontier or a sea, yet lose nothing. It is at the mercy of no translator; for it writes an universal language.

will make my submission, and then she will tell me what my poor child says to me.” She was soon at Margaret Van Eyck's house. Reicht took her into a room, and said, “Bide a minute; she is at her orisons.” There was a young woman in the room seated pensively by the stove; but she rose and courteously made way for the visitor. “Thank you, young lady; the winter nights are cold, and your stove is a treat.” Catherine then, while warming her hands, inspected her companion furtively from head to foot, inclusive. The young person wore an ordinary wimple, but her gown was trimmed with fur, which was, in those days, almost a sign of superior rank or wealth. But what most struck Catherine was the candour and modesty of the face. She felt sure of sympathy from so good a countenance, and began to gossip.

holy keeping, and bless you by night and by day. Your one harsh deed is forgotten; your years of love remembered.'” Catherine laid her hand on her bosom, and sank back in her chair with one long sob. “Then comes this, madam. It doth speak for itself; 'a long farewell.'” “Ay, go on; bless you, girl you give me sorry comfort. Still 'tis comfort.” “'To my brothers Cornelis and Sybrandt--Be content; you will see me no more!'” “What does that mean? Ah!” “'To my sister Kate. Little angel of my father's house. Be kind to her--' Ah!” “That is Margaret Brandt, my dear--his sweetheart, poor soul. I've not been kind to her, my dear. Forgive me, Gerard!” “'--for poor Gerard's sake: since grief to her is death to me--Ah!” And nature, resenting the poor girl's struggle for unnatural composure, suddenly gave way, and she sank from her chair and lay insensible, with the letter in her hand and her head on Catherine's knees.
