About a week after this the two friends sat working together, but not in the same spirit. Pietro dashed fitfully at his, and did wonders in a few minutes, and then did nothing, except abuse it; then presently resumed it in a fury, to lay it down with a groan. Through all which kept calmly working, calmly smiling, the canny Dutchman. To be plain, Gerard, who never had a friend he did not master, had put his Onagra in harness. The friends were painting playing cards to boil the pot. When done, the indignant master took up his picture to make his daily tour in search of a customer. Gerard begged him to take the cards as well, and try and sell them. He looked all the rattle-snake, but eventually embraced Gerard in the Italian fashion, and took them, after first drying the last-finished ones in the sun, which was now powerful in that happy clime.

not that. And the little fair-haired boy, is he well is he none the worse for his voyage in that strange boat?” “He is well,” said the matron. “Why, what are you two talking about?” said the landlady, staring at them both in turn; “and why tremble you so, Teresa mia?” “He saved my child's life,” said Teresa, making an effort to compose herself. “What! my lodger? and he never told me a word of that. Art not ashamed to look me in the face?” “Alas! speak not harshly to him,” said the matron. She then turned to her friend and poured out a glowing description of Gerard's conduct, during which Gerard stood blushing like a girl, and scarce recognizing his own performance, gratitude painted it so fair. “And to think thou shouldst ask me to serve thy lodger, of whom I knew nought but that he had thy good word, oh, Fiammina; and that was enough for me.

felicitated Gerard. “Teresa has got something in her head,” said she. Teresa was scarce gone when Pietro returned with his picture, looking black as thunder. Gerard exchanged a glance with the landlady, and followed him upstairs to console him. “What, have they let thee bring home thy masterpiece?” “As heretofore.” “More fools they, then.” “That is not the worse.” “Why, what is the matter?” “They have bought the cards,” yelled Pietro, and hammered the air furiously right and left. “All the better,” said Gerard cheerfully. “They flew at me for them. They were enraptured with them. They tried to conceal their longing for them, but could not. I saw, I feigned, I pillaged; curse the boobies.” And he flung down a dozen small silver coins on the floor and jumped on them, and danced on them with basilisk eyes, and then kicked them assiduously, and sent them spinning and flying, and running all abroad.
