The Princess Claelia ordered a full-length portrait of herself. Gerard advised her to employ his friend Pietro Vanucci. But she declined. “'Twill be time to put a slight on the Gerardo, when his work discontents me.” Then Gerard, who knew he was an excellent draughtsman, but not so good a colourist, begged her to stand to him as a Roman statue. He showed her how closely he could mimic marble on paper. She consented at first; but demurred when this enthusiast explained to her that she must wear the tunic, toga, and sandals of the ancients. “Why, I had as lieve be presented in my smock,” said she, with mediaeval frankness. “Alack! signorina,” said Gerard, “you have surely never noted the ancient habit; so free, so ample, so simple, yet so noble; and most becoming your highness, to whom Heaven hath given the Roman features, and eke a shapely arm and hand, his in modern guise.” “What, can you flatter, like the rest, Gerardo?

and rooted to earth at a shop window. His quick eye had discerned in that window a copy of Lactantius lying open. “That is fairly writ, anyway,” thought he. He eyed it a moment more with all his eyes. It was not written at all. It was printed. Gerard groaned. “I am sped; mine enemy is at the door. The press is in Rome.” He went into the shop, and affecting nonchalance, inquired how long the printing-press had been in Rome. The man said he believed there was no such thing in the city. “Oh, the Lactantius; that was printed on the top of the Apennines.” “What, did the printing-press fall down there out o' the moon?” “Nay, messer,” said the trader, laughing; “it shot up there out of Germany. See the title-page!” Gerard took the Lactantius eagerly, and saw the following-- Opera et impensis Sweynheim et Pannartz Alumnorum Joannis Fust.

panthers, dressed with the hair, so that no footfall could be heard. The room was an ante-chamber to the princess's boudoir, for on one side there was no door, but an ample curtain of gorgeous tapestry. Here Gerard was left alone till he became quite uneasy, and doubted whether the maid had not shown him to the wrong place. These doubts were agreeably dissipated. A light step came swiftly behind the curtain; it parted in the middle, and there stood a figure the heathens might have worshipped. It was not quite Venus, nor quite Minerva; but between the two; nobler than Venus, more womanly than Jupiter's daughter. Toga, tunic, sandals; nothing was modern. And as for beauty, that is of all times. Gerard started up, and all the artist in him flushed with pleasure. “Oh!” he cried innocently, and gazed in rapture.

Signora.” “I thank thee,” said she; and sinking into a chair turned pale and sighed. Gerard was alarmed, and saw also he had been inconsiderate. He took water from the fountain and was about to throw it in her face; but she put up a white hand deprecatingly: “Nay, hold it to my brow with thine hand: prithee, do not fling it at me!” Gerard timidly and hesitating applied his wet hand to her brow. “Ah!” she sighed, “that is reviving. Again.” He applied it again. She thanked him, and asked him to ring a little hand-bell on the table. He did so, and a maid came, and was sent to Floretta with orders to bring a large fan. Floretta speedily came with the fan. She no sooner came near the princess, than that lady's highbred nostrils suddenly expanded like a bloodhorse's.

ill becomes me to school you; but methinks such as Heaven appoints to govern others should govern themselves.” “That is true, Gerardo. How wise you are, to be so young.” She then called the other maid, and gave her a little purse. “Take that to Floretta, and tell her 'the Gerardo' hath interceded for her; and so I must needs forgive her. There, Gerardo.” Gerard coloured all over at the compliment; but not knowing how to turn a phrase equal to the occasion, asked her if he should resume her picture. “Not yet; beating that hussy hath somewhat breathed me. I'll sit awhile, and you shall talk to me. I know you can talk, an it pleases you, as rarely as you draw.” “That were easily done. “Do it then, Gerardo.” Gerard was taken aback. “But, signora, I know not what to say.

to do with them.” “Ay, do I. To draw you, signora.” “Ah, yes; you can see my features with them; but you cannot see what any Roman gallant had seen long ago in your place. Yet sure you must have noted how welcome you are to me, Gerardo?” “I can see your highness is always passing kind to me; a poor stranger like me.” “No, I am not, Gerardo. I have often been cold to you; rude sometimes; and you are so simple you see not the cause. Alas! I feared for my own heart. I feared to be your slave. I who have hitherto made slaves. Ah! Gerardo, I am unhappy. Ever since you came here I have lived upon your visits. The day you are to come I am bright. The other days I am listless, and wish them fled.

absent Margaret's image. Yet it was regal beauty, and wooing with a grace and tenderness he had never even figured in imagination. How to check her without wounding her? He blushed and trembled. The siren saw, and encouraged him. “Poor Gerardo,” she murmured, “fear not; none shall ever harm thee under my wing. Wilt not speak to me, Gerar-do mio?” “Signora!” muttered Gerard deprecatingly. At this moment his eye, lowered in his confusion, fell on the shapely white arm and delicate hand that curled round his elbow like a tender vine, and it flashed across him how he had just seen that lovely limb employed on Floretta. He trembled and blushed. “Alas!” said the princess, “I scare him. Am I then so very terrible? Is it my Roman robe? I'll doff it, and habit me as when thou first camest to me.

speak to me, Gerar-do.” “Signora,” faltered Gerard, “what can I say, that were not better left unsaid? Oh, evil day that ever I came here.” “Ah! say not so. 'Twas the brightest day ever shone on me or indeed on thee. I'll make thee confess so much ere long, ungrateful one.” “Your highness,” began Gerard, in a low, pleading voice. “Call me Claelia, Gerar-do.” “Signora, I am too young and too little wise to know how I ought to speak to you, so as not to seem blind nor yet ungrateful. But this I know, I were both naught and ungrateful, and the worst foe e'er you had, did I take advantage of this mad fancy. Sure some ill spirit hath had leave to afflict you withal. For 'tis all unnatural that a princess adorned with every grace should abase her affections on a churl.” The princess withdrew her hand slowly from Gerard's wrist.

“Princess, she I love is not noble. She is as I am. Nor is she so fair as thou. Yet is she fair; and linked to my heart for ever by her virtues, and by all the dangers and griefs we have borne together, and for one another. Forgive me; but I would not wrong my Margaret for all the highest dames in Italy.” The slighted beauty started to her feet, and stood opposite him, as beautiful, but far more terrible than when she slapped Floretta, for then her cheeks were red, but now they were pale, and her eyes full of concentrated fury. “This to my face, unmannered wretch,” she cried. “Was I born to be insulted, as well as scorned, by such as thou? Beware! We nobles brook no rivals. Bethink thee whether is better, the love of a Cesarini, or her hate: for after all I have said and done to thee, it must be love or hate between us, and to the death.

patron, be yourself; you will live to see how much better a friend I was to you than I seemed.” “I see it now, Gerardo,” said the princess. “Friend is the word! the only word can ever pass between us twain. I was mad. Any other man had ta'en advantage of my folly. You must teach me to be your friend and nothing more.” Gerard hailed this proposition with joy; and told her out of Cicero how godlike a thing was friendship, and how much better and rarer and more lasting than love: to prove to her he was capable of it, he even told her about Denys and himself. She listened with her eyes half shut, watching his words to fathom his character, and learn his weak point. At last, she addressed him calmly thus: “Leave me now, Gerardo, and come as usual to-morrow.

against every one of them for their pains. The next day Gerard found her alone: cold and silent. After standing to him so some time, she said, “You treated my company with less respect than became you.” “Did I, Signora?” “Did you? you fired up at the comments they did you the honour to make on your work.” “Nay, I said nought,” observed Gerard. “Oh, high looks speak as plain as high words. Your cheeks were red as blood.” “I was nettled a moment at seeing so much ignorance and ill-nature together.” “Now it is me, their hostess, you affront.” “Forgive me, Signora, and acquit me of design. It would ill become me to affront the kindest patron and friend I have in Rome but one.” “How humble we are all of a sudden. In sooth, Ser Gerardo, you are a capital feigner.

to be your friend; but no, I see that may not be between one so high as you, and one so low as I.” “Ay! but it shall, Gerardo,” said the princess eagerly. “I will not be so curst. Tell me now where abides thy Margaret; and I will give thee a present for her; and on that you and I will be friends.” “She is a daughter of a physician called Peter, and they bide at Sevenbergen; ah me, shall I e'er see it again?” “'Tis well. Now go.” And she dismissed him somewhat abruptly. Poor Gerard. He began to wade in deep waters when he encountered this Italian princess; callida et calida selis filia. He resolved to go no more when once he had finished her likeness. Indeed he now regretted having undertaken so long and laborious a task.

things? 'Tis love, Gerar-do. Love made me draw because thou draweth, Gerar-do. Love prints thine image in my bosom. My fingers touch the pen, and love supplies the want of art, and lo thy beloved features lie upon the paper.” Gerard opened his eyes with astonishment at this return to an interdicted topic. “Oh, Signora, you promised me to be friends and nothing more.” She laughed in his face. “How simple you are: who believes a woman promising nonsense, impossibilities? Friendship, foolish boy, who ever built that temple on red ashes? Nay Gerardo,” she added gloomily, “between thee and me it must be love or hate.” “Which you will, signora,” said Gerard firmly. “But for me I will neither love nor hate you; but with your permission I will leave you.” And he rose abruptly. She rose too, pale as death, and said, “Ere thou leavest me so, know thy fate; outside that door are armed men who wait to slay thee at a word from me.” “But you will not speak that word, signora.” “That word I will speak.

it abroad it was for proffering brutal love to me thou wert slain; and I will send a special messenger to Sevenbergen: a cunning messenger, well taught his lesson. Thy Margaret shall know thee dead, and think thee faithless; now, go to thy grave; a dog's. For a man thou art not.” Gerard turned pale, and stood dumb-stricken. “God have mercy on us both.” “Nay, have thou mercy on her, and on thyself. She will never know in Holland what thou dost in Rome; unless I be driven to tell her my tale. Come, yield thee, Gerar-do mio: what will it cost thee to say thou lovest me? I ask thee but to feign it handsomely. Thou art young: die not for the poor pleasure of denying a lady what-the shadow of a heart. Who will shed a tear for thee?

come of so deep a love betrayed, and so false a love feigned, with mutual hatred lurking at the bottom. In such moments none ever resisted Gerard. The princess, after in vain trying to get away from him, for she felt his power over her, began to waver, and sigh, and her bosom to rise and fall tumultuously, and her fiery eyes to fill. “You conquer me,” she sobbed. “You, or my better angel. Leave Rome!” “I will, I will.” “If you breathe a word of my folly, it will be your last.” “Think not so poorly of me. You are my benefactress once more. Is it for me to slander you?” “Go! I will send you the means. I know myself; if you cross my path again, I shall kill you. Addio; my heart is broken.” She touched her bell.

and no princess to draw, so he set himself resolutely to read that deed of Floris Brandt, from which he had hitherto been driven by the abominably bad writing. He mastered it, and saw at once that the loan on this land must have been paid over and over again by the rents, and that Ghysbrecht was keeping Peter Brandt out of his own. “Fool! not to have read this before,” he cried. He hired a horse and rode down to the nearest port. A vessel was to sail for Amsterdam in four days. He took a passage; and paid a small sum to secure it. “The land is too full of cut-throats for me,” said he; “and 'tis lovely fair weather for the sea. Our Dutch skippers are not shipwrecked like these bungling Italians.” When he returned home there sat his old landlady with her eyes sparkling.

outlandish name; Anselmin, I trow.” “Hans Memling! a friend of mine. God bless him!” “Ay, that is it: Anselmin. He could scarce speak a word, but a had the wit to name thee; and a puts the letter down, and a nods and smiles, and I nods and smiles, and gives him a pint o' wine, and it went down him like a spoonful.” “That is Hans, honest Hans. Oh, dame, I am in luck to-day; but I deserve it. For, I care not if I tell you, I have just overcome a great temptation for dear Margaret's sake.” “Who is she?” “Nay, I'd have my tongue cut out sooner than betray her, but oh, it was a temptation. Gratitude pushing me wrong, Beauty almost divine pulling me wrong: curses, reproaches, and hardest of all to resist, gentle tears from eyes used to command.

pocket. Gerard threw his arm round her neck and hugged her. “My best friend,” said he, “my second mother, I'll read it to you. “Ay, do, do.” “Alas! it is not from Margaret. This is not her hand.” And he turned it about. “Alack; but maybe her bill is within. The lasses are aye for gliding in their bills under cover of another hand.” “True. Whose hand is this? sure I have seen it. I trow 'tis my dear friend the demoiselle Van Eyck. Oh, then Margaret's bill will be inside.” He tore it open. “Nay, 'tis all in one writing. 'Gerard, my well beloved son' (she never called me that before that I mind), 'this letter brings thee heavy news from one would liever send thee joyful tidings. Know that Margaret Brandt died in these arms on Thursday sennight last.' (What does the doting old woman mean by that?) 'The last word on her lips was “Gerard:” she said, “Tell him I prayed for him at my last hour; and bid him pray for me.” She died very comfortable, and I saw her laid in the earth, for her father was useless, as you shall know.

So no more at present from her that is with sorrowing heart thy loving friend and servant, “MARGARET VAN EYCK.'” “Ay, that is her signature sure enough. Now what d'ye think of that, dame?” cried Gerard, with a grating laugh. “There is a pretty letter to send to a poor fellow so far from home. But it is Reicht Heynes I blame for humouring the old woman and letting her do it; as for the old woman herself, she dotes, she has lost her head, she is fourscore. Oh, my heart, I'm choking. For all that she ought to be locked up, or her hands tied.

is master of the world. My pretty Margaret; my sweet, my loving Margaret. The best daughter! the truest lover! the pride of Holland! the darling of the world! It is a lie. Where is this caitiff Hans? I'll hunt him round the town. I'll cram his murdering falsehood down his throat.” And he seized his hat and ran furiously about the streets for hours. Towards sunset he came back white as a ghost. He had not found Memling; but his poor mind had had time to realise the woman's simple words, that Death spares none. He crept into the house bent, and feeble as an old man, and refused all food. Nor would he speak, but sat, white, with great staring eyes, muttering at intervals, “There is no God.” Alarmed both on his account and on her own (for he looked a desperate maniac), his landlady ran for her aunt.
