In an apartment richly furnished, the floor covered with striped and spotted skins of animals, a lady sat with her arms extended before her, and her hands half clenched. The agitation of her face corresponded with this attitude; she was pale and red by turns; and her foot restless. Presently the curtain was drawn by a domestic. The lady's brow flushed. The maid said, in an awe-struck whisper: “Altezza, the man is here.” The lady bade her admit him, and snatched up a little black mask and put it on; and in a moment her colour was gone, and the contrast between her black mask and her marble cheeks was strange and fearful. A man entered bowing and scraping. It was such a figure as crowds seem made of; short hair, roundish head, plain, but decent clothes; features neither comely not forbidding.

body only. We watch our man come out of a church; or take him in an innocent hour; and so deal with him. In the greater vendetta we watch him, and catch him hot from some unrepented sin, and so slay his soul as well as his body. But this vendetta is not so run upon now as it was a few years ago.” “Man, silence me his tongue, and let his treasonable heart beat no more. But his soul I have no feud with.” “So be it, signora. He who spoke to me knew not the man, nor his name, nor his abode. From whom shall I learn these?” “From myself.” At this the man, with the first symptoms of anxiety he had shown, entreated her to be cautious, and particular, in this part of the business. “Fear me not,” said she.

will avail him.” “Are ye so sure of your hand? What are your weapons?” The bravo showed her a steel gauntlet. “We strike with such force we need must guard our hand. This is our mallet.” He then undid his doublet, and gave her a glimpse of a coat of mail beneath, and finally laid his glittering stiletto on the table with a flourish. The lady shuddered at first, but presently took it up in her white hand and tried its point against her finger. “Beware, madam,” said the bravo. “What, is it poisoned?” “Saints forbid! We steal no lives. We take them with steel point, not drugs. But 'tis newly ground, and I feared for the Signora's white skin.” “His skin is as white as mine,” said she, with a sudden gleam of pity. It lasted but a moment.

me again, signora.” And he retired bowing and scraping. The princess, burning with jealousy, mortified pride, and dread of exposure (for till she knew Gerard no public stain had fallen on her), sat where he left her, masked, with her arms straight out before her, and the nails of her clenched hand nipping the table. So sat the fabled sphynx: so sits a tigress. Yet there crept a chill upon her now that the assassin was gone. And moody misgivings heaved within her, precursors of vain remorse. Gerard and Margaret were before their age. This was your true mediaeval. Proud, amorous, vindictive, generous, foolish, cunning, impulsive, unprincipled: and ignorant as dirt. Power is the curse of such a creature. Forced to do her own crimes, the weakness of her nerves would have balanced the violence of her passions, and her bark been worse than her bite.
