Two nights after this Pietro Vanucci and Andrea sat waiting supper for Gerard. The former grew peevish. It was past nine o'clock. At last he sent Andrea to Gerard's room on the desperate chance of his having come in unobserved. Andrea shrugged his shoulders and went. He returned without Gerard, but with a slip of paper. Andrea could not read, as scholars in his day and charity boys in ours understand the art; but he had a quick eye, and had learned how the words Pietro Vanucci looked on paper. “That is for you, I trow,” said he, proud of his intelligence. Pietro snatched it, and read it to Andrea, with his satirical comments. “'Dear Pietro, dear Andrea, life is too great a burden.' “So 'tis, my lad,' but that is no reason for being abroad at supper-time. Supper is not a burden.” “'Wear my habits!' “Said the poplar to the juniper bush.” “'And thou, Andrea, mine amethyst ring; and me in both your hearts a month or two.' “Why, Andrea?” “'For my body, ere this ye read, it will lie in Tiber.

belied his words. Andrea filled the house with his cries. “O, miserable day! O, calamity of calamities! Gerard, my friend, my sweet patron! Help! help! He is killing himself! Oh, good people, help me save him!” And after alarming all the house he ran into the street, bareheaded, imploring all good Christians to help him save his friend. A number of persons soon collected. But poor Andrea could not animate their sluggishness. Go down to the river? No. It was not their business. What part of the river? It was a wild goose chase. It was not lucky to go down to the river after sunset. Too many ghosts walked those banks all night. A lackey, however, who had been standing some time opposite the house, said he would go with Andrea; and this turned three or four of the younger ones.

and main, Andrea leading, and the princess's lackey next. Andrea gained on him; but in a moment he twisted up a narrow alley. Andrea shot by, unable to check himself; and the pursuers soon found themselves in a labyrinth in which it was vain to pursue a quickfooted fugitive who knew every inch of it, and could now only be followed by the ear. They returned to their companions, and found them standing on the spot where the man had stood, and utterly confounded. For Pietro had assured them that the fugitive had neither the features nor the stature of Gerard. “Are ye verily sure?” said they. “He had been in the river. Why, in the saints' names, fled he at our approach?” Then said Vanucci, “Friends, methinks this has nought to do with him we seek. What shall we do, Andrea?” Here the lackey put in his word.

But presently Andrea gave a shout. “Here be the drops again,” cried he. “And this road leadeth to the river.” They resumed the chase; and soon it became clear the drops were now leading them home. The track became wetter and wetter, and took them to the Tiber's edge. And there on the bank a bucketful appeared to have been discharged from the stream. At first they shouted, and thought they had made a discovery: but reflection showed them it amounted to nothing. Certainly a man had been in the water, and had got out of it in safety; but that man was not Gerard. One said he knew a fisherman hard by that had nets and drags. They found the fisherman and paid him liberally to sink nets in the river below the place, and to drag it above and below; and promised him gold should he find the body.
