THE HEARTH “Eli,” said Catherine, “answer me one question like a man, and I'll ask no more to-day. What is wormwood?” Eli looked a little helpless at this sudden demand upon his faculties; but soon recovered enough to say it was something that tasted main bitter. “That is a fair answer, my man, but not the one I look for.” “Then answer it yourself.” “And shall. Wormwood is--to have two in the house a-doing nought, but waiting for thy shoes and mine,” Eli groaned. The shaft struck home. “Methinks waiting for their best friend's coffin, that and nothing to do, are enow to make them worse than Nature meant. Why not set them up somewhere, to give 'em a chance?” Eli said he was willing, but afraid they would drink and gamble their very shelves away. “Nay,” said Catherine, “Dost take me for a simpleton?

for that, and instantly set about brushing it up, fitting proper shelves for the business, and making the dwelling-house habitable. Luke Peterson was always asking Margaret what he could do for her. The answer used to be in a sad tone, “Nothing, Luke, nothing.” “What, you that are so clever, can you think of nothing for me to do for you?” “Nothing, Luke, nothing.” But at last she varied the reply thus: “If you could make something to help my sweet sister Kate about.” The slave of love consented joyfully, and soon made Kate a little cart, and cushioned it, and yoked himself into it, and at eventide drew her out of the town, and along the pleasant boulevard, with Margaret and Catherine walking beside. It looked a happier party than it was. Kate, for one, enjoyed it keenly, for little Gerard was put in her lap, and she doted on him; and it was like a cherub carried by a little angel, or a rosebud lying in the cup of a lily.

well laid out, to draw the weak. And her prayers will be your guerdon; she is not long for this world; she smileth in pain.” These were the words of Joan. Single-minded Luke answered that he did not want the poor lass's prayers he did it to please his mistress, Margaret. After that Luke often pressed Margaret to give him something to do--without success. But one day, as if tired with his importuning, she turned on him, and said with a look and accent I should in vain try to convey: “Find me my boy's father.”.
