“Mistress, they all say he is dead.” “Not so. They feed me still with hopes.” “Ay, to your face, but behind your back they all say he is dead.” At this revelation Margaret's tears began to flow'. Luke whimpered for company. He had the body of a man but the heart of a girl. “Prithee, weep not so, sweet mistress,” said he. “I'd bring him back to life an I could, rather than see thee weed so sore.” Margaret said she thought she was weeping because they were so double-tongued with her. She recovered herself, and laying her hand on his shoulder, said solemnly, “Luke, he is not dead. Dying men are known to have a strange sight. And listen, Luke! My poor father, when he was a-dying, and I, simple fool, was so happy, thinking he was going to get well altogether, he said to mother and me--he was sitting in that very chair where you are now, and mother was as might be here, and I was yonder making a sleeve--said he, 'I see him!' I see him!

mad to think it. But oh, if any one really cared for me, they would; that is all I know.” Luke reflected in silence for some time. “The old folk all say dying men can see more than living wights. Let me think: for my mind cannot gallop like thine. On a great river Well, the Maas is a great river.” He pondered on. “Coming this way? Then if it 'twas the Maas, he would have been here by this time, so 'tis not the Maas. The Rhine is a great river, greater than the Maas; and very long. I think it will be the Rhine.” “And so do I, Luke; for Denys bade him come down the Rhine. But even if it is, he may turn off before he comes anigh his birthplace. He does not pine for me as I for him; that is clear.

with us being strangers, mayhap a won't believe a word I say.” “Good, kind, thoughtful Luke, I will (how I have undervalued thee!). But give me till supper-time to get it writ.” At supper she put a letter into his hand with a blush; it was a long letter, tied round with silk after the fashion of the day, and sealed over the knot. Luke weighed it in his hand, with a shade of discontent, and said to her very gravely, “Say your father was not dreaming, and say I have the luck to fall in with this man, and say he should turn out a better bit of stuff than I think him, and come home to you then and there--what is to become o' me?” Margaret coloured to her very brow. “Oh, Luke, Heaven will reward thee. And I shall fall on my knees and bless thee; and I shall love thee all my days, sweet Luke, as a mother does her son.

good sense, and the plain question which followed it. But at last she faltered out, “If, which our Lady be merciful to me, and forbid--Oh!” “Well, mistress?” “If he should read my letter, and hear thy words--and, sweet Luke, be just and tell him what a lovely babe he hath, fatherless, fatherless. Oh, Luke, can he be so cruel?” “I trow not but if?” “Then he will give thee up my marriage lines, and I shall be an honest woman, and a wretched one, and my boy will not be a bastard; and of course, then we could both go into any honest man's house that would be troubled with us; and even for thy goodness this day, I will--I will--ne'er be so ungrateful as go past thy door to another man's.” “Ay, but will you come in at mine?

took out Catherine's gold angel, which had escaped so often, and gave it to Luke; and he set out on his mad errand. It did not, however, seem so mad to him as to us. It was a superstitious age; and Luke acted on the dying man's dream, or vision, or illusion, or whatever it was, much as we should act on respectable information. But Catherine was downright angry when she heard of it, “To send the poor lad on such a wild-goose chase! But you are like a many more girls; and mark my words; by the time you have worn that Luke fairly out, and made him as sick of you as a dog, you will turn as fond on him as a cow on a calf, and 'Too late' will be the cry.” THE CLOISTER The two friars reached Holland from the south just twelve hours after Luke started up the Rhine.

what she is, poor wretch, But you are a Dominican, and I am a Franciscan nun.” “It matters little, my sister, if we are both Christians, and if I can aid thee in aught.” The nun looked in his face, and said, “These are strange words, but methinks they are good; and thy lips are oh, most eloquent, I will tell thee our grief.” She then let him know that a young nun, the darling of the convent, and her bosom friend, had been lured away from her vows, and after various gradations of sin, was actually living in a small inn as chambermaid, in reality as a decoy, and was known to be selling her favours to the wealthier customers, She added, “Anywhere else we might, by kindly violence, force her away from perdition, But this innkeeper was the servant of the fierce baron on the height there, and hath his ear still, and he would burn our convent to the ground, were we to take her by force.” “Moreover, souls will not be saved by brute force,” said Clement.

near the auberge, where was the apostate nun, Mary. The friar thus disguised was at that moment truly wretched. These ardent natures undertake wonders; but are dashed when they come hand to hand with the sickening difficulties. But then, as their hearts are steel, though their nerves are anything but iron, they turn not back, but panting and dispirited, struggle on to the last. Clement hesitated long at the door, prayed for help and wisdom, and at last entered the inn and sat down faint at heart, and with his body in a cold perspiration, But inside he was another man. He called lustily for a cup of wine: it was brought him by the landlord, He paid for it with money the convent had supplied him; and made a show of drinking it. “Landlord,” said he, “I hear there is a fair chambermaid in thine house.” “Ay, stranger, the buxomest in Holland.

as pay for the privilege.” Clement looked round the room, and prayed silently for wisdom. Then he went softly, and closed the window-shutters carefully. “What on earth is that for?” said Janet, in some uneasiness. “Sweetheart,” whispered the visitor, with a mysterious air, “it is that God may not see us. “Madman,” said Janet; “think you a wooden shutter can keep out His eye?” “Nay, I know not. Perchance He has too much on hand to notice us, But I would not the saints and angels should see us. Would you?” “My poor soul, hope not to escape their sight! The only way is not to think of them; for if you do, it poisons your cup. For two pins I'd run and leave thee. Art pleasant company in sooth.” “After all, girl, so that men see us not, what signify God and the saints seeing us?

Dominican friar, calm and majestic as a statue, and held his crucifix towering over her with a loving, sad, and solemn look, that somehow relieved her of the physical part of fear, but crushed her with religious terror and remorse. She crouched and cowered against the wall. “Mary,” said he gently; “one word! Are you happy?” “As happy as I shall be in hell.” “And they are not happy at the convent; they weep for you.” “For me?” “Day and night; above all, the Sister Ursula.” “Poor Ursula!” And the strayed nun began to weep herself at the thought of her friend. “The angels weep still more. Wilt not dry all their tears in earth and heaven and save thyself?” “Ay! would I could; but it is too late.” “Satan avaunt,” cried the monk sternly. “'Tis thy favourite temptation; and thou, Mary, listen not to the enemy of man, belying God, and whispering despair.

soul from this den of wolves, and bring thee back to thy vows.” The nun gazed at him with tears in her eyes. “And thou, a Dominican, hast done this for a daughter of St. Francis! Why, the Franciscans and Dominicans hate one another.” “Ay, my daughter; but Francis and Dominic love one another.” The recreant nun seemed struck and affected by this answer Clement now reminded her how shocked she had been that the Virgin should be robbed of her chain. “But see now,” said he, “the convent, and the Virgin too, think ten times more of their poor nun than of golden chains; for they freely trusted their chain to me a stranger, that peradventure the sight of it might touch their lost Mary and remind her of their love,” Finally he showed her with such terrible simplicity the end of her present course, and on the other hand so revived her dormant memories and better feelings, that she kneeled sobbing at his feet, and owned she had never known happiness nor peace since she betrayed her vows; and said she would go back if he would go with her; but alone she dared not, could not: even if she reached the gate she could never enter.

“What are these for?” inquired Clement. “To present to the convent, father.” “Their source is too impure.” “But,” objected the penitent, “it would be a sin to leave them here. They can be sold to feed the poor.” “Mary, fix thine eye on this crucifix, and trample those devilish baubles beneath thy feet.” She hesitated; but soon threw them down and trampled on them. “Now open the window and fling them out on that dunghill. 'Tis well done. So pass the wages of sin from thy hands, its glittering yoke from thy neck, its pollution from thy soul. Away, daughter of St. Francis, we tarry in this vile place too long.” She followed him. But they were not clear yet. At first the landlord was so astounded at seeing a black friar and a grey nun pass through his kitchen from the inside, that he gaped, and muttered, “Why, what mummery is this?” But he soon comprehended the matter, and whipped in between the fugitives and the door.

foremost on to the stone floor; then tore the door open and carried the screaming nun out into the road. “Hush! poor trembler,” he gasped; “they dare not molest thee on the highroad. Away!” The landlord lay terrified, half stunned, and bleeding; and Mary, though she often looked back apprehensively, saw no more of him. On the road he bade her observe his impetuosity. “Hitherto,” said he, “we have spoken of thy faults: now for mine. My choler is ungovernable; furious. It is by the grace of God I am not a murderer, I repent the next moment; but a moment too late is all too late. Mary, had the churls laid finger on thee, I should have scattered their brains with my crucifix, Oh, I know myself; go to; and tremble at myself. There lurketh a wild beast beneath this black gown of mine.” “Alas, father,” said Mary, “were you other than you are I had been lost.

his views as to her actual reception. To give time for their little preparations Clement went slowly back, and seating himself by Mary soothed her; and heard her confession. “The abbess has granted me that you shall propose your own penance.” “It shall be none the lighter,” said she. “I trow not,” said he; “but that is future: to-day is given to joy alone.” He then led her round the building to the abbess's postern. As they went they heard musical instruments and singing. “'Tis a feastday,” said Mary; “and I come to mar it.” “Hardly,” said Clement, smiling; “seeing that you are the queen of the fete.” “I, father? what mean you?” “What, Mary, have you never heard that there is more joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, than over ninety-nine just persons which need no repentance?

only her sex can write to those who have used them cruelly, and they love them. She began by telling him of the birth of the little boy, and the comfort he had been to her in all the distress of mind his long and strange silence had caused her. She described the little Gerard minutely, not forgetting the mole on his little finger. “Know you any one that hath the like on his? If you only saw him you could not choose but be proud of him; all the mothers in the street do envy me; but I the wives; for thou comest not to us. My own Gerard, some say thou art dead. But if thou wert dead, how could I be alive? Others say that thou, whom I love so truly, art false. But this will I believe from no lips but thine.

of this letter she made soft Luke the bearer. So she was not an angel after all. Luke mingled with the passengers of two boats, and could hear nothing of Gerard Eliassoen. Nor did this surprise him. He was more surprised when, at the third attempt, a black friar said to him, somewhat severely, “And what would you with him you call Gerard Eliassoen?” “Why, father, if he is alive I have got a letter for him.” “Humph!” said Jerome. “I am sorry for it, However, the flesh is weak. Well, my son, he you seek will be here by the next boat, or the next boat after. And if he chooses to answer to that name--After all, I am not the keeper of his conscience.” “Good father, one plain word, for Heaven's sake, This Gerard Eliassoen of Tergou--is he alive?” “Humph!
