THE HEARTH Waiting an earnest letter seldom leaves the mind in statu quo. Margaret, in hers, vented her energy and her faith in her dying father's vision, or illusion; and when this was done, and Luke gone, she wondered at her credulity, and her conscience pricked her about Luke; and Catherine came and scolded her, and she paid the price of false hopes, and elevation of spirits, by falling into deeper despondency. She was found in this state by a staunch friend she had lately made, Joan Ketel. This good woman came in radiant with an idea. “Margaret, I know the cure for thine ill: the hermit of Gouda a wondrous holy man, Why, he can tell what is coming, when he is in the mood.” “Ay, I have heard of him,” said Margaret hopelessly. Joan with some difficulty persuaded her to walk out as far as Gouda, and consult the hermit.

They took some butter and eggs in a basket, and went to his cave. What had made the pair such fast friends? Jorian some six weeks ago fell ill of a bowel disease; it began with raging pain; and when this went off, leaving him weak, an awkward symptom succeeded; nothing, either liquid or solid, would stay in his stomach a minute. The doctor said: “He must die if this goes on many hours; therefore boil thou now a chicken with a golden angel in the water, and let him sup that!” Alas!

“Let me see him,” said Margaret. She came in and felt his pulse. “Ah!” said she, “I doubt they have not gone to the root. Open the window! Art stifling him; now change all his linen. “Alack, woman, what for? Why foul more linen for a dying man?” objected the mediaeval wife. “Do as thou art bid,” said Margaret dully, and left the room. Joan somehow found herself doing as she was bid. Margaret returned with her apron full of a flowering herb. She made a decoction, and took it to the bedside; and before giving it to the patient, took a spoonful herself, and smacked her lips hypocritically. “That is fair,” said he, with a feeble attempt at humour. “Why, 'tis sweet, and now 'tis bitter.” She engaged him in conversation as soon as he had taken it. This bitter-sweet stayed by him.

and mother of the sweetest babe, come to pray thee tell me whether he is quick or dead, true to his vows or false.” A faint voice issued from the cave: “Trouble me not with the things of earth, but send me a holy friar, I am dying.” “Alas!” cried Margaret. “Is it e'en so, poor soul? Then let us in to help thee.” “Saints forbid! Thine is a woman's voice. Send me a holy friar.” They went back as they came. Joan could not help saying, “Are women imps o' darkness then, that they must not come anigh a dying bed?” But Margaret was too deeply dejected to say anything. Joan applied rough consolation. But she was not listened to till she said: “And Jorian will speak out ere long; he is just on the boil, He is very grateful to thee, believe it.” “Seeing is believing,” replied Margaret, with quiet bitterness.

back, and it will set them all by the ears. I wish I had more headpiece,' said he; 'I am sore perplexed. But least said is soonest mended.' Yon is his favourite word; he comes back to't from a mile off.” Margaret shook her head. “Ay, we are wading in deep waters, my poor babe and me.” It was Saturday night and no Luke. “Poor Luke!” said Margaret. “It was very good of him to go on such an errand.” “He is one out of a hundred,” replied Catherine warmly. “Mother, do you think he would be kind to little Gerard?” “I am sure he would. So do you be kinder to him when he comes back! Will ye now?” “Ay.” THE CLOISTER Brother Clement, directed by the nuns, avoided a bend in the river, and striding lustily forward, reached a station some miles nearer the coast than that where Luke lay in wait for Gerard Eliassoen.

ship was about to sail for England, and he was loth to lose time. He (Clement) might follow if he pleased, but he would do much better to stay behind, and preach to his own country folk. “Give the glory to God, brother; you have a wonderful power over Dutch hearts; but you are no match for those haughty islanders: you are too tender. “Know thou that on the way I met one, who asked me for thee under the name thou didst bear in the world. Be on thy guard! Let not the world catch thee again by any silken net, And remember, Solitude, Fasting, and Prayer are the sword, spear, and shield of the soul. Farewell.” Clement was deeply shocked and mortified at this contemptuous desertion, and this cold-blooded missive. He promised the good monks to sleep at the convent, and to preach wherever the prior should appoint for Jerome had raised him to the skies as a preacher, and then withdrew abruptly, for he was cut to the quick, and wanted to be alone.

were playing about the door, and the house had been repaired, and a new outhouse added. He turned his head hastily away, not to disturb a picture his memory treasured; and went to the churchyard. He sought among the tombstones for Margaret's. He could not find it. He could not believe they had grudged her a tombstone, so searched the churchyard all over again. “Oh poverty! stern poverty! Poor soul, thou wert like me no one was left that loved thee, when Gerard was gone.” He went into the church, and after kissing the steps, prayed long and earnestly for the soul of her whose resting-place he could not find. Coming out of the church he saw a very old man looking over the little churchyard gate. He went towards him, and asked him did he live in the place.
