Chapter II. Knocking the Town Endways In the only comfortably furnished room in the offices of the Record, the telephone on Sir James Molloy’s table buzzed. Sir James made a motion with his pen, and Mr. Silver, his secretary, left his work and came over to the instrument. “Who is that?” he said. “Who?... I can’t hear you.... Oh, it’s Mr. Bunner, is it?... Yes, but... I know, but he’s fearfully busy this afternoon. Can’t you... Oh, really? Well, in that case—just hold on, will you?” He placed the receiver before Sir James. “It’s Calvin Bunner, Sigsbee Manderson’s right-hand man,” he said concisely. “He insists on speaking to you personally. Says it is the gravest piece of news. He is talking from the house down by Bishopsbridge, so it will be necessary to speak clearly.” Sir James looked at the telephone, not affectionately, and took up the receiver.

look of amazement and horror. “Good God!” murmured Sir James. Clutching the instrument, he slowly rose to his feet, still bending ear intently. At intervals he repeated “Yes.” Presently, as he listened, he glanced at the clock, and spoke quickly to Mr. Silver over the top of the transmitter. “Go and hunt up Figgis and young Williams. Hurry.” Mr. Silver darted from the room. The great journalist was a tall, strong, clever Irishman of fifty, swart and black-moustached, a man of untiring business energy, well known in the world, which he understood very thoroughly, and played upon with the half-cynical competence of his race. Yet was he without a touch of the charlatan: he made no mysteries, and no pretences of knowledge, and he saw instantly through these in others. In his handsome, well-bred, well-dressed appearance there was something a little sinister when anger or intense occupation put its imprint about his eyes and brow; but when his generous nature was under no restraint he was the most cordial of men.

but the servants? Surely it’s all over the place down there by now.... Well, we’ll have a try.... Look here, Bunner, I’m infinitely obliged to you about this. I owe you a good turn. You know I mean what I say. Come and see me the first day you get to town.... All right, that’s understood. Now I must act on your news. Goodbye.” Sir James hung up the receiver, and seized a railway timetable from the rack before him. After a rapid consultation of this oracle, he flung it down with a forcible word as Mr. Silver hurried into the room, followed by a hard-featured man with spectacles, and a youth with an alert eye. “I want you to jot down some facts, Figgis,” said Sir James, banishing all signs of agitation and speaking with a rapid calmness. “When you have them, put them into shape just as quick as you can for a special edition of the Sun .” The hard-featured man nodded and glanced at the clock, which pointed to a few minutes past three; he pulled out a notebook and drew a chair up to the big writing-table.

the facts, and that he had better let him write up the story in his private room. As you go, ask Miss Morgan to see me here at once, and tell the telephone people to see if they can get Mr. Trent on the wire for me. After seeing Mr. Anthony, return here and stand by.” The alert-eyed young man vanished like a spirit. Sir James turned instantly to Mr. Figgis, whose pencil was poised over the paper. “Sigsbee Manderson has been murdered,” he began quickly and clearly, pacing the floor with his hands behind him. Mr. Figgis scratched down a line of shorthand with as much emotion as if he had been told that the day was fine—the pose of his craft. “He and his wife and two secretaries have been for the past fortnight at the house called White Gables, at Marlstone, near Bishopsbridge.

expecting you. Now I must telephone him and arrange things.” Mr. Figgis looked up. “One of the ablest detectives at Scotland Yard,” he suggested, “has been put in charge of the case. It’s a safe statement.” “If you like,” said Sir James. “And Mrs. Manderson? Was she there?” “Yes. What about her?” “Prostrated by the shock,” hinted the reporter, “and sees nobody. Human interest.” “I wouldn’t put that in, Mr. Figgis,” said a quiet voice. It belonged to Miss Morgan, a pale, graceful woman, who had silently made her appearance while the dictation was going on. “I have seen Mrs. Manderson,” she proceeded, turning to Sir James. “She looks quite healthy and intelligent. Has her husband been murdered? I don’t think the shock would prostrate her. She is more likely to be doing all she can to help the police.” “Something in your own style, then, Miss Morgan,” he said with a momentary smile.

Her imperturbable efficiency was an office proverb. “Cut it out, Figgis. Off you go! Now, madam, I expect you know what I want.” “Our Manderson biography happens to be well up to date,” replied Miss Morgan, drooping her dark eyelashes as she considered the position. “I was looking over it only a few months ago. It is practically ready for tomorrow’s paper. I should think the Sun had better use the sketch of his life they had about two years ago, when he went to Berlin and settled the potash difficulty. I remember it was a very good sketch, and they won’t be able to carry much more than that.

with an air of patience. “Is there anything else?” she asked, as the telephone bell rang. “Yes, one thing,” replied Sir James, as he took up the receiver. “I want you to make a bad mistake some time, Miss Morgan—an everlasting bloomer—just to put us in countenance.” She permitted herself the fraction of what would have been a charming smile as she went out. “Anthony?” asked Sir James, and was at once deep in consultation with the editor on the other side of the road. He seldom entered the Sun building in person; the atmosphere of an evening paper, he would say, was all very well if you liked that kind of thing. Mr. Anthony, the Murat of Fleet Street, who delighted in riding the whirlwind and fighting a tumultuous battle against time, would say the same of a morning paper.

done it. They found the body this morning. It happened at his place near Bishopsbridge.” Sir James proceeded to tell his hearer, briefly and clearly, the facts that he had communicated to Mr. Figgis. “What do you think of it?” he ended. A considering grunt was the only answer. “Come now,” urged Sir James. “Tempter!” “You will go down?” There was a brief pause. “Are you there?” said Sir James. “Look here, Molloy,” the voice broke out querulously, “the thing may be a case for me, or it may not. We can’t possibly tell. It may be a mystery; it may be as simple as bread and cheese. The body not being robbed looks interesting, but he may have been outed by some wretched tramp whom he found sleeping in the grounds and tried to kick out. It’s the sort of thing he would do.

the worst of it. I’ve got to depend on our local correspondent for tonight. The only good train of the day went half an hour ago. The next is a slow one, leaving Paddington at midnight. You could have the Buster, if you like”—Sir James referred to a very fast motor car of his—“but you wouldn’t get down in time to do anything tonight.” “And I’d miss my sleep. No, thanks. The train for me. I am quite fond of railway travelling, you know; I have a gift for it. I am the stoker and the stoked. I am the song the porter sings.” “What’s that you say?” “It doesn’t matter,” said the voice sadly. “I say,” it continued, “will your people look out a hotel near the scene of action, and telegraph for a room?” “At once,” said Sir James.
