Chapter XIV. Writing a Letter “If you insist,” Trent said, “I suppose you will have your way. But I had much rather write it when I am not with you. However, if I must, bring me a tablet whiter than a star, or hand of hymning angel; I mean a sheet of note-paper not stamped with your address. Don’t underestimate the sacrifice I am making. I never felt less like correspondence in my life.” She rewarded him. “What shall I say?” he enquired, his pen hovering over the paper. “Shall I compare him to a summer’s day? What shall I say?” “Say what you want to say,” she suggested helpfully. He shook his head. “What I want to say—what I have been wanting for the past twenty-four hours to say to every man, woman, and child I met—is ‘Mabel and I are betrothed, and all is gas and gaiters.’ But that wouldn’t be a very good opening for a letter of strictly formal, not to say sinister, character.

“I don’t see why,” she answered. “I know it is usual, but why is it? I have had a great many letters from lawyers and business people, and they always begin, ‘with reference to our communication’, or some such mouthful, and go on like that all the way through. Yet when I see them they don’t talk like that. It seems ridiculous to me.” “It is not at all ridiculous to them.” Trent laid aside the pen with an appearance of relief and rose to his feet. “Let me explain. A people like our own, not very fond of using its mind, gets on in the ordinary way with a very small and simple vocabulary. Long words are abnormal, and like everything else that is abnormal, they are either very funny or tremendously solemn. Take the phrase ‘intelligent anticipation’, for instance.

result is that every shopkeeper or peasant has a vocabulary in daily use that is simply Greek to the vast majority of Britons. I remember some time ago I was dining with a friend of mine who is a Paris cabman. We had dinner at a dirty little restaurant opposite the central post office, a place where all the clients were cabmen or porters. Conversation was general, and it struck me that a London cabman would have felt a little out of his depth. Words like ‘functionary’ and ‘unforgettable’ and ‘exterminate’ and ‘independence’ hurtled across the table every instant. And these were just ordinary, vulgar, jolly, red-faced cabmen. Mind you,” he went on hurriedly, as the lady crossed the room and took up his pen, “I merely mention this to illustrate my point. I’m not saying that cab-men ought to be intellectuals.

me, men who don’t talk are even worse to live with than men who do. O have a care of natures that are mute. I confess I’m shirking writing this thing. It is almost an indecency. It’s mixing two moods to write the sort of letter I mean to write, and at the same time to be sitting in the same room with you.” She led him to his abandoned chair before the escritoire and pushed him gently into it. “Well, but please try. I want to see what you write, and I want it to go to him at once. You see, I would be contented enough to leave things as they are; but you say you must get at the truth, and if you must, I want it to be as soon as possible. Do it now—you know you can if you will—and I’ll send it off the moment it’s ready.

he will say nothing?” Mrs. Manderson looked over her shoulder. “Of course he dare not take that line. He will speak to prevent you from denouncing him.” “But I’m not going to do that anyhow. You wouldn’t allow it—you said so; besides, I won’t if you would. The thing’s too doubtful now.” “But,” she laughed, “poor Mr. Marlowe doesn’t know you won’t, does he?” Trent sighed. “What extraordinary things codes of honour are!” he remarked abstractedly. “I know that there are things I should do, and never think twice about, which would make you feel disgraced if you did them—such as giving any one who grossly insulted me a black eye, or swearing violently when I barked my shin in a dark room. And now you are calmly recommending me to bluff Marlowe by means of a tacit threat which I don’t mean; a thing which hell’s most abandoned fiend did never, in the drunkenness of guilt—well, anyhow, I won’t do it.” He resumed his writing, and the lady, with an indulgent smile, returned to playing very softly.

were. For reasons which it is not necessary to state I decided at the last moment not to make them public, or to communicate them to you, and they are known to only two persons beside myself. At this point Mrs. Manderson raised her eyes quickly from the letter. Her dark brows were drawn together. “Two persons?” she said with a note of enquiry. “Your uncle is the other. I sought him out last night and told him the whole story. Have you anything against it? I always felt uneasy at keeping it from him as I did, because I had led him to expect I should tell him all I discovered, and my silence looked like mystery-making. Now it is to be cleared up finally, and there is no question of shielding you, I wanted him to know everything.

another light, I can imagine no reason why you should withhold it. I expect, then, to hear from you when and where I may call upon you; unless you prefer the interview to take place at my hotel. In either case I desire that Mr. Cupples whom you will remember, and who has read the enclosed document, should be present also.—Faithfully yours, Philip Trent. “What a very stiff letter!” she said. “Now I am sure you couldn’t have made it any stiffer in your own rooms.” Trent slipped the letter and enclosure into a long envelope. “Yes,” he said, “I think it will make him sit up suddenly. Now this thing mustn’t run any risk of going wrong. It would be best to send a special messenger with orders to deliver it into his own hands. If he’s away it oughtn’t to be left.” She nodded.

leaned back at length in the deep chair. “What a world!” he said. “Mabel, will you play something on the piano that expresses mere joy, the genuine article, nothing feverish or like thorns under a pot, but joy that has decided in favour of the universe? It’s a mood that can’t last altogether, so we had better get all we can out of it.” She went to the instrument and struck a few chords while she thought. Then she began to work with all her soul at the theme in the last movement of the Ninth Symphony which is like the sound of the opening of the gates of Paradise.
