The manuscript lay before me, a modest stack of paper that had somehow survived the scrutiny of a select circle of acquaintances. A couple of friends, peering over my shoulder with the casual confidence of those who believe they possess superior taste, had declared the drafts "not half bad." Meanwhile, several distant relatives had made promises so binding they amounted to a contract: they pledged to purchase the volume the moment it saw print. Confronted with this peculiar convergence of amateur approval and familial financial commitment, I felt compelled to abandon further procrastination. Without this manufactured "public demand," I doubt I would have dared to serve these mere "idle thoughts" as mental sustenance to the vast, hungry populace of the English-speaking world.

Yet, one must acknowledge the shifting tides of contemporary expectation. Modern readers approach a book with the solemnity of a religious convert, demanding that it improve their moral fiber, instruct them in wisdom, and elevate their souls to higher planes of existence. If judged by these rigorous standards, this collection fails spectacularly. It possesses neither the power to elevate a cow nor the utility to justify its existence in a library of serious works. I cannot, in good conscience, recommend it for any purpose save the alleviation of boredom. My sole suggestion is this: when you find yourself weary of consuming "the best hundred books"—those polished monuments of literary achievement—you may pick this up for a fleeting half-hour. It offers nothing but a distinct change of pace, a deliberate step away from the sublime into the realm of the trivial.

*   Idle Thoughts of an Idle Fellow
*   On Being Idle
*   On Being in Love
*   On Being in the Blues
*   On Being Hard Up
*   On Vanity and Vanities
*   On Getting On in the World
*   On the Weather
*   On Cats and Dogs
*   On Being Shy
*   On Babies
*   On Eating and Drinking
*   On Furnished Apartments
*   On Dress and Deportment
*   On Memory

ON BEING IDLE. Now, this is a subject on which I flatter myself I really am *au fait*. The gentleman who, when I was young, bathed me at wisdom's font for nine guineas a term—no extras—used to say he never knew a boy who could do less work in more time; and I remember my poor grandmother once incidentally observing, in the course of an instruction upon the use of the Prayer-book, that it was highly improbable that I should ever do much that I ought not to do, but that she felt convinced beyond a doubt that I should leave undone pretty well everything that I ought to do. I am afraid I have somewhat belied half the dear old lady's prophecy. Heaven help me! I have done a good many things that I ought not to have done, in spite of my laziness. But I have fully confirmed the accuracy of her judgment so far as neglecting much that I ought not to have neglected is concerned. Idling always has been my strong point. I take no credit to myself in the matter—it is a gift. Few possess it. There are plenty of lazy people and plenty of slow-coaches, but a genuine idler is a rarity. He is not a man who slouches about with his hands in his pockets. On the contrary, his most startling characteristic is that he is always intensely busy. It is impossible to enjoy idling thoroughly unless one has plenty of work to do. There is no fun in doing nothing when you have nothing to do. Wasting time is merely an occupation then, and a most exhausting one. Idleness, like kisses, to be sweet must be stolen.

Many years ago, when I was a young man, I was taken very ill—I never could see myself that much was the matter with me, except that I had a beastly cold. But I suppose it was something very serious, for the doctor said that I ought to have come to him a month before, and that if it (whatever it was) had gone on for another week he would not have answered for the consequences. It is an extraordinary thing, but I never knew a doctor called into any case yet but what it transpired that another day's delay would have rendered cure hopeless. Our medical guide, philosopher, and friend is like the hero in a melodrama—he always comes upon the scene just, and only just, in the nick of time. It is Providence, that is what it is.

Well, as I was saying, I was very ill and was ordered to Buxton for a month, with strict injunctions to do nothing whatever all the while that I was there. "Rest is what you require," said the doctor, "perfect rest." It seemed a delightful prospect. "This man evidently understands my complaint," said I, and I pictured to myself a glorious time—a four weeks' *dolce far niente* with a dash of illness in it. Not too much illness, but just illness enough—just sufficient to give it the flavor of suffering and make it poetical. I should get up late, sip chocolate, and have my breakfast in slippers and a dressing-gown. I should lie out in the garden in a hammock and read sentimental novels with a melancholy ending, until the books should fall from my listless hand, and I should recline there, dreamily gazing into the deep blue of the firmament, watching the fleecy clouds floating like white-sailed ships across its depths, and listening to the joyous song of the birds and the low rustling of the trees. Or, on becoming too weak to go out of doors, I should sit propped up with pillows at the open window of the ground-floor front, and look wasted and interesting, so that all the pretty girls would sigh as they passed by. And twice a day I should go down in a Bath chair to the Colonnade to drink the waters. Oh, those waters! I knew nothing about them then, and was rather taken with the idea. "Drinking the waters" sounded fashionable and Queen Anne-fied, and I thought I should like them. But, ugh! after the first three or four mornings! Sam Weller's description of them as "having a taste of warm flat-irons" conveys only a faint idea of their hideous nauseousness. If anything could make a sick man get well quickly, it would be the knowledge that he must drink a glassful of them every day until he was recovered. I drank them neat for six consecutive days, and they nearly killed me; but after then I adopted the plan of taking a stiff glass of brandy-and-water immediately on the top of them, and found much relief thereby. I have been informed since, by various eminent medical gentlemen, that the alcohol must have entirely counteracted the effects of the chalybeate properties contained in the water. I am glad I was lucky enough to hit upon the right thing.

But "drinking the waters" was only a small portion of the torture I experienced during that memorable month—a month which was, without exception, the most miserable I have ever spent. During the best part of it I religiously followed the doctor's mandate and did nothing whatever, except moon about the house and garden and go out for two hours a day in a Bath chair. That did break the monotony to a certain extent. There is more excitement about Bath-chairing—especially if you are not used to the exhilarating exercise—than might appear to the casual observer. A sense of danger, such as a mere outsider might not understand, is ever present to the mind of the occupant. He feels convinced every minute that the whole concern is going over, a conviction which becomes especially lively whenever a ditch or a stretch of newly macadamized road comes in sight. Every vehicle that passes he expects is going to run into him; and he never finds himself ascending or descending a hill without immediately beginning to speculate upon his chances, supposing—as seems extremely probable—that the weak-kneed controller of his destiny should let go.

But even this diversion failed to enliven after awhile, and the *ennui* became perfectly unbearable. I felt my mind giving way under it. It is not a strong mind, and I thought it would be unwise to tax it too far. So somewhere about the twentieth morning I got up early, had a good breakfast, and walked straight off to Hayfield, at the foot of the Kinder Scout—a pleasant, busy little town, reached through a lovely valley, and with two sweetly pretty women in it. At least they were sweetly pretty then; one passed me on the bridge and, I think, smiled; and the other was standing at an open door, making an unremunerative investment of kisses upon a red-faced baby. But it is years ago, and I dare say they have both grown stout and snappish since that time.

Coming back, I saw an old man breaking stones, and it roused such strong longing in me to use my arms that I offered him a drink to let me take his place. He was a kindly old man and he humored me. I went for those stones with the accumulated energy of three weeks, and did more work in half an hour than he had done all day. But it did not make him jealous. Having taken the plunge, I went further and further into dissipation, going out for a long walk every morning and listening to the band in the pavilion every evening. But the days still passed slowly notwithstanding, and I was heartily glad when the last one came and I was being whirled away from gouty, consumptive Buxton to London with its stern work and life.

I looked out of the carriage as we rushed through Hendon in the evening. The lurid glare overhanging the mighty city seemed to warm my heart, and when, later on, my cab rattled out of St. Pancras' station, the old familiar roar that came swelling up around me sounded the sweetest music I had heard for many a long day. I certainly did not enjoy that month's idling. I like idling when I ought not to be idling; not when it is the only thing I have to do. That is my pig-headed nature. The time when I like best to stand with my back to the fire, calculating how much I owe, is when my desk is heaped highest with letters that must be answered by the next post. When I like to dawdle longest over my dinner is when I have a heavy evening's work before me. And if, for some urgent reason, I ought to be up particularly early in the morning, it is then, more than at any other time, that I love to lie an extra half-hour in bed. Ah! how delicious it is to turn over and go to sleep again: "just for five minutes."

Is there any human being, I wonder, besides the hero of a Sunday-school "tale for boys," who ever gets up willingly? There are some men to whom getting up at the proper time is an utter impossibility. If eight o'clock happens to be the time that they should turn out, then they lie till half-past. If circumstances change and half-past eight becomes early enough for them, then it is nine before they can rise. They are like the statesman of whom it was said that he was always punctually half an hour late. They try all manner of schemes. They buy alarm-clocks (artful contrivances that go off at the wrong time and alarm the wrong people). They tell Sarah Jane to knock at the door and call them, and Sarah Jane does knock at the door and does call them, and they grunt back "awri" and then go comfortably to sleep again. I knew one man who would actually get out and have a cold bath; and even that was of no use, for

ON BEING IN LOVE. You have undoubtedly been in love, or fate has already queued you for the inevitable. Love is akin to the measles; it is a universal rite of passage that demands we contract it precisely once. Those who have survived the initial infection possess a peculiar immunity, granting them the audacity to navigate the most treacherous social landscapes with reckless abandon. They may picnicate in shadowed woodlands, wander through verdant alleys, or linger on moss-draped benches watching the sun dip below the horizon, fearing the quiet confinement of a country house no more than they dread their own private clubs. They can descend the Rhine amidst a family gathering or, driven by curiosity, step directly into the gaping maws of matrimony itself. They can endure the dizzying spin of a ravishing waltz and retreat to a dark conservatory, emerging with nothing worse than a mild chill. They can brave moonlit walks along perfumed lanes or twilight expeditions through somber reeds, cross stile gates without peril, scramble through brambled hedges unseen, and traverse slippery slopes without slipping. They can gaze into radiant eyes without being blinded and listen to siren calls while steering their ship with unwavering resolve. They may clasp pale hands in theirs, yet feel no electric, Lulu-esque tether binding them to that delicate pressure. No, we do not succumb to love twice. Cupid fires but one arrow per heart. Love's attendants—respect, admiration, and affection—are our lifelong companions, always welcome at our door, but their grand celestial sovereign, in his royal procession, visits only once before departing. We like, we cherish, we are exceedingly fond of—but we never love again. A man's heart is a firework destined to flash heavenward a single time. Like a meteor, it blazes briefly, illuminating the entire world below with its brilliance, before the night of our mundane existence descends. The burnt-out casing falls back to earth, useless and ignored, slowly smoldering into ash. Once, breaking free from our prison walls, we dare, as the ancient Titan Prometheus did, to climb Olympus and seize the divine fire from Phoebus's chariot. Blessed are those who, hastening downward before the flame expires, can kindle their domestic altars with its spark. Love is too pure a radiance to sustain itself long among the noxious gases we breathe, yet before it is extinguished, we may wield it as a torch to ignite the cozy hearth of affection. Ultimately, that warming glow suits our cramped, chilly parlors far better than the burning spirit of love itself. Love belongs in the Vestal temples of some vast, dim sanctuary where the organ music is the rolling of the spheres. Affection burns cheerfully once the white flame of love flickers out. It is a fire that can be tended daily, piling higher as winter approaches. Elderly couples can sit by it with thin, clasped hands; small children can nestle before it; neighbors find their welcoming corner beside it; and even shaggy dogs and sleek cats can toast their noses against the bars. Let us heap the coals of kindness upon that fire. Cast in your pleasant words, your gentle handshakes, your thoughtful and selfless actions. Fan it with humor, patience, and forbearance. Then, let the wind blow and the rain fall unnoticed, for your hearth will remain warm and bright, casting sunshine upon the faces gathered around it despite the storm outside.

I fear, dear Edwin and Angelina, that you harbor unrealistic expectations of love. You suppose your youthful hearts contain sufficient fuel to sustain this fierce, devouring passion throughout your entire lives. Ah, young fools! Do not place your trust in that unstable flicker. It will dwindle and fade as the months pass, with no means of replenishment. You will watch it expire in anger and disillusionment. To each, it will appear that the other is growing colder. Edwin observes with bitterness that Angelina no longer dashes to the gate to greet him, flushed and smiling; and when he now suffers a cough, she offers only a suggestion of a lozenge, delivered in a tone suggesting she wishes primarily to escape the noise. Poor Angelina, in turn, sheds silent tears because Edwin has ceased carrying her old handkerchief in the inner pocket of his waistcoat. Both are stunned by the decline in the other, yet neither recognizes their own transformation. If they did, they would not suffer as they do. They would seek the cause in the proper direction—in the pettiness of human nature—and join hands over this shared failing to rebuild their home upon a more terrestrial and enduring foundation. Yet, we are so blind to our own flaws while hyper-vigilant regarding those of others. Every misfortune is invariably someone else's fault. Angelina would have loved Edwin eternally had he not become so strange and altered. Edwin would have adored Angelina forever had she remained identical to the girl he first worshipped. It is a bleak hour for you both when the lamp of love has gone out and the fire of affection remains unkindled, forcing you to grope in the cold, raw dawn of life to restart it. May God grant it catches light before the day is fully spent. Many sit shivering by dead coals until nightfall. But why preach? Who, feeling the surge of young love coursing through their veins, believes it will ever flow sluggishly? To a twenty-year-old, it seems impossible that he will not love as wildly at sixty as he does now. He cannot recall any middle-aged or elderly gentleman exhibiting signs of frantic attachment, yet this fails to deter his conviction. His love will never falter, regardless of anyone else's. Nobody has ever loved as he does, so naturally, the rest of the world's experience serves as no guide. Alas! Alas! Ere thirty, he joins the ranks of the cynics. It is not his fault. Our passions, both virtuous and vicious, cease with our blushes. We do not hate, grieve, rejoice, or despair in our thirties as we did in our teens. Disappointment no longer suggests suicide, and we consume success without intoxication. As we age, we conduct all affairs in a minor key. Life's opera lacks majestic passages in its later acts. Ambition sets lower sights; honor becomes reasonable and conveniently adapts to circumstance. And love—it dies. "Irreverence for the dreams of youth" soon creeps like a killing frost upon our hearts. Tender shoots and blooming flowers are nipped and withered, leaving behind only a sapless stump of a vine that once yearned to wrap its tendrils around the globe.

My fair friends will surely deem this rank heresy. Far from believing a man ceases to love after boyhood, it is not until gray hairs abound that they consider his protestations worthy of attention. Young ladies derive their notions of our sex from novels penned by their own, and compared to the monstrosities masquerading as men in that nightmare literature, Pythagoras's plucked bird and Frankenstein's demon were merely average specimens of humanity. In these so-called books, the chief lover—or Greek god, as they admiringly refer to him (though they rarely specify which deity, it might be hunchbacked Vulcan, two-faced Janus, or drooling Silenus, the god of obscure mysteries)—resembles the entire family in being a blackguard. This is likely the intended meaning. However, even the scant masculinity possessed by his classical prototypes, he claims none whatsoever, being a listless, effeminate noodle past the age of forty. Yet, oh! the depth and intensity of this elderly suitor's emotion for some bread-and-butter schoolgirl! Hide your heads, ye young Roméos and Léanders! This *blasé* old beau loves with a hysterical fervor requiring four adjectives for every noun to adequately describe. It is well, dear ladies, that you study only books. Had you read mankind, you would know that a boy's shy stammering tells a truer tale than our bold eloquence. A boy's love springs from a full heart; a man's is more often the result of a full stomach. Indeed, a man's sluggish current cannot be called love compared to the rushing fountain that wells up when a boy's heart is struck by the heavenly rod. If you wish to taste love, drink from the pure stream youth pours at your feet. Do not wait until it becomes a muddy river before stooping to catch its waves. Or is it that you prefer its bitter flavor—that the clear, limpid water is insipid to your palate, and only the pollution of its downstream journey gives it a relish? Must we believe those who tell us that a hand fouled by the filth of a shameful life is the only one a young girl desires to be caressed by? That is the doctrine bawled out day and night from between those yellow covers. Do they ever pause to reflect, I wonder, those devilish lady-helps, what mischief they are causing as they crawl through God's garden, telling childish Evés and silly Adams that sin is sweet and decency is ridiculous and vulgar? How many innocent girls do they not degrade into wicked women? To how many weak lads do they not point out the dirty by-path as the shortcut to a maiden's heart? It is not as if they depict life as it truly is. Speak truth, and righteousness will take care of itself. But their pictures are coarse daubs painted from the sickly fancies of their own diseased imaginations. We wish to envision women—not as their own sex presents them, as Loreleys luring us to destruction, but as good angels beckoning us upward. They possess greater power for good or evil than they realize. It is precisely

ON BEING IN THE BLUES. I possess a peculiar capacity to derive genuine satisfaction from the sensation of melancholy; there is a distinct, almost luxurious fulfillment in being thoroughly miserable. Yet, paradoxically, no one truly enjoys a fit of the blues. Despite this universal aversion, everyone succumbs to them, and despite their ubiquity, no one can articulate their origin. They remain an inexplicable phenomenon, defying all rational accounting. One is equally prone to falling victim to them immediately upon inheriting a vast fortune as one is upon losing a brand-new silk umbrella on a train platform. Their physiological impact mimics a simultaneous assault of toothache, indigestion, and a severe cold: the mind becomes clouded, the nerves frayed, and the temper volatile. One grows rude to strangers and dangerously erratic toward friends; clumsy, maudlin, and perpetually quarrelsome, serving as a nuisance to oneself and the entire household.

While the condition persists, one is paralyzed by a contradictory imperative: unable to act or think clearly, yet acutely aware of the binding necessity to do both. Restlessness compels one to don a hat and stride out onto the pavement, only to find that within moments of reaching the street corner, the impulse reverses, and one turns back, wishing fervently for the safety of the interior. An attempt to read yields immediate failure; Shakespeare appears trite, Dickens prosaic, Thackeray tedious, and Carlyle overly sentimental. The book is discarded, the author cursed, and the domestic animal—usually a cherished companion—is shooed from the room and kicked out the door.

A resolve forms to compose correspondence, yet the effort collapses under the weight of inertia. Staring at the opening line—"Dearest Auntie: I find I have five minutes to spare..."—one remains stuck for fifteen minutes, incapable of generating a single subsequent thought. The paper is shoved into the desk drawer, the inkwell overturned onto the tablecloth, and a fresh determination arises to visit the Thompsons. However, the act of pulling on gloves triggers a cascade of disillusionment: the Thompsons are revealed as fools, their supper habits nonexistent, and the likelihood of being forced to jump a crying infant becomes overwhelming. The Thompsons are cursed, the plan abandoned, and a crushing defeatism sets in. One buries the face in hands, contemplating suicide and the serene embrace of heaven. In this fantasy, friends and relatives gather weeping around a sickbed; one blesses them all, particularly the young and the pretty, convinced that their future regard will far exceed their current indifference. This fleeting reflection offers a momentary lift, only to be instantly shattered by the realization of one's own foolishness: imagining that anyone would mourn one's demise is absurd. Who cares two straws—however infinitesimal that quantity may be—if one is blown up, hanged, married, or drowned? No one cares. One has never been properly appreciated, never received due recompense in any specific instance. A review of one's life reveals a painful history of mistreatment from infancy onward.

Half an hour spent indulging in these grim speculations inflames the soul into a savage fury directed at everyone and everything, most notably oneself, whom anatomical constraints alone forbid from physically striking. Finally, bedtime arrives as a merciful respite from rash actions. One springs upstairs, discards clothing in a chaotic scatter across the floor, extinguishes the candle, and dives into bed with the frantic energy of someone racing against time to complete a high-stakes wager. For hours, one tosses and tumbles, breaking the monotony by repeatedly stripping off and donning garments. Eventually, an uneasy, fragmented sleep claims consciousness, populated by nightmares, leading to a belated awakening the following morning. Thus concludes the routine for the unfortunate single man. Married men, conversely, bully their spouses, grumble over dinner, and demand the children retire early. This domestic uproar, while disruptive, serves as a welcome distraction for the man in the blues, providing the only form of amusement available to his tormented state.

The clinical symptoms of this infirmity remain consistent across cases, though the afflicted apply varied labels to their suffering. The poet describes "a feeling of sadness coming o'er him"; 'Arry confesses to Jimee that he has "got the blooming hump"; the sister admits to feeling "out of sorts" with vague apprehension; the ordinary young man exclaims, "So awful glad to meet you, old fellow, for I feel so jolly miserable this evening." My own confession usually follows the pattern: "I have a strange, unsettled feeling tonight" followed by the intention to leave. Note, however, that this malady rarely manifests during daylight hours. In the sun-time, when the world bounds forward brimming with vitality, we lack the stamina to sigh and sulk. The roaring machinery of the working day drowns out the whispering *miserere* sung by the elfin sprites haunting our inner ears. During the day, we may be angry, disappointed, or indignant, but we are never "in the blues," never truly melancholic. If a misfortune strikes at ten in the morning, we swear and batter the furniture; if it strikes at ten at night, we retreat to poetry or sit in darkness pondering the hollowness of existence.

Yet, fundamentally, it is not trouble that breeds melancholy. Reality is too harsh a substance for sentimentality to digest. We linger to weep over a painting, but before the original, we swiftly avert our gaze. There is no pathos in genuine misery; no luxury in authentic grief. We do not toy with sharpened blades nor embrace a gnawing fox for comfort. When a man or woman chooses to brood over sorrow, carefully keeping it vibrant in memory, it ceases to be pain. Though initially agonizing, the recollection transforms into a perverse pleasure. Consider the elderly ladies who daily inspect tiny shoes in lavender-scented drawers, weeping for the tiny feet whose journey has ended, or the sweet-faced youths who place locks of hair beneath their pillows, mourning heads once kissed by salt waves until death claimed them. They would label me a nasty, cynical brute for suggesting otherwise, yet if asked truthfully whether dwelling on such sorrows feels unpleasant, they would be compelled to answer "No." Tears are as sweet as laughter to certain natures. As the chronicler Froissart noted, the proverbial Englishman takes his pleasures sadly, while the Englishwoman advances a step further, deriving pleasure directly from sadness itself.

I offer no sneer. I would not mock anything that preserves the tenderness of hearts in this hard, unyielding world. We men are sufficiently cold and pragmatic; we would not wish women to be identical. Ladies, please remain sentimental and soft-hearted; be the soothing butter to our coarse, dry bread. Sentiment is to women what fun is to us. They do not appreciate our humor, and it would indeed be unjust to deny them their grief. Who can claim their mode of enjoyment lacks intelligence? Why assume that a contorted, purple face screaming in agony indicates a higher state of bliss than a pensive visage resting on a white hand, eyes dimmed by gentle tears gazing backward through Time's dark corridor at a fading past?

I rejoice when I witness Regret walking alongside us as a friend, for I know the salinity has been washed from the tears and the sting plucked from Sorrow's beautiful face before we dare press her pale lips to ours. Time has applied his healing balm; we can now recall the pain that once made us faint without bitterness or despair rising in our hearts. The burden feels light when our past troubles are viewed through the same sweet mixture of pleasure and pity felt when Colonel Newcome answers "*adsum*" to the great roll-call, or when Tom and Maggie Tulliver, clasping hands through the mists separating them, descend locked in each other's arms beneath the swollen waters of the Floss.

Mentioning Tom and Maggie brings to mind a passage by George Eliot regarding the "sadness of a summer's evening." How profoundly true—and characteristic of that magnificent pen—that observation is! Who has not felt the sorrowful enchantment of those lingering sunsets? The world belongs to Melancholy then, a thoughtful, deep-eyed maiden who rejects the glare of day. Only when "light thickens and the crow wings to the rocky wood" does she emerge from her groves. Her palace resides in twilight land; it is there she awaits us. At her shadowy gate, she takes our hand and leads us through her mystic realm. We see no form, yet hear the rustling of her wings. Even in the toiling, mundane city, her spirit descends. A somber presence haunts each long, dull street; the dark river creeps ghostlike under black arches, carrying hidden secrets beneath its muddy waves. In the silent countryside, when trees and hedges loom dim against the encroaching night, and a bat's wing brushes our face while the land-rail cries drearily across the fields, the spell penetrates deeper into our souls. In that hour, we stand beside an unseen deathbed, hearing the sigh of the dying day in the swaying elms. A solemn sadness reigns, accompanied by a great peace. In this light, the cares of the working day shrink to insignificance; bread and cheese—even kisses—cease to be the sole objects of striving. Unspoken thoughts flood in, and standing in the stillness under Earth's darkening dome, we realize we are greater than our petty lives. Surrounded by those dusky curtains, the world transforms from a dingy workshop into a stately temple where man may worship, and where, in the dimness, his groping hands finally touch God's.

It is a peculiar irony of fate that I sat down with the solemn resolve to compose something witty and unprecedented, yet my mind, deprived of its usual fuel, offers nothing but the stark, unvarnished reality of being hard up. I suspect the culprit is my posture; I invariably keep my hands buried in my trouser pockets, a habit I maintain with religious fervor unless I find myself in the presence of my sisters, cousins, or aunts. These kinfolk, possessing a vocal agility that borders on the theatrical, launch into a chorus of indignant exhortations regarding the impropriety of such behavior. They argue, with the eloquence of saints, that it lacks gentility. I confess, I cannot fathom the logic. While I readily concede that placing one's hands in *another* person's pocket is a breach of social decorum, I fail to see how occupying one's *own* pockets diminishes a man's inherent nobility. Perhaps the critics possess a vision I lack. Indeed, upon reflection, I recall hearing elderly gentlemen mutter with savage disdain whenever caught in this state. Yet, we young men, seemingly ill-equipped for the rigors of polite society without our pockets filled, remain awkward and shifty creatures, much like a music-hall comedian stripped of his signature top hat.

Let us assume, however, that we stuff our pockets with a modest coinage and a cluster of keys, and proceed to confront a female post-office clerk. Even then, the task of managing one's limbs remains a trial, especially when the pockets are empty save for the void. In days gone by, when my entire fortune might dwindle to the sum the townsfolk derisively termed "a bob," I would recklessly squander a single penny solely to secure the joy of receiving change in copper coins, eager to hear them jingle. There is a distinct psychological weight to currency; one does not feel truly destitute holding eleven pence, whereas a solitary shilling induces a palpable sense of scarcity. Had I been that caricature of the "la-di-da" impecunious youth, mocked by the upper classes, I would have diligently exchanged my penny for two half-pennies. My authority on this subject stems from a life spent as a provincial actor and later as a journalist connected to the press. I have subsisted on fifteen shillings a week, survived a single week on ten while owing the balance, and endured a fortnight living literally on the back of a greatcoat. This experience grants a profound, albeit painful, insight into domestic economics. If one wishes to ascertain the true value of a pound, one need only attempt to survive on fifteen shillings weekly, calculating exactly how much can be saved for attire and amusement. One discovers that waiting for a farthing's change is a worthy endeavor, walking a mile to save a penny is a noble sacrifice, that a glass of beer is a luxury reserved for rare occasions, and that a stiff collar can endure four days of service. I urge any prospective husband to test this regimen prior to tying the knot; it serves as excellent preparation. Similarly, a father should subject his heir to this austerity before dispatching him to university; he will cease to grumble at a hundred pounds a year thereafter.

There are specific types of souls for whom such trials would be transformative. Consider the delicate flower who cannot tolerate claret below ninety-four degrees and would rather dine on cat meat than plain roast mutton. Though such creatures appear occasionally, to the credit of humanity, they are largely confined to the fantastical societies invented by lady novelists. Whenever I encounter someone obsessively debating a menu card, a fierce impulse takes hold to drag them to a common East End pub and force a sixpenny meal down their throat—beefsteak pudding for fourpence, potatoes for a penny, and half a pint of porter for another. The lingering memory of that savory combination, mixed with the intoxicating aromas of beer, tobacco, and roasted pork, might eventually cause them to lower their noses slightly when presented with food. Then there is the generous soul, the cadger's paradise, who dispenses small change freely but forgets to settle debts. Such a lesson in common sense might benefit even him. "One simply cannot give the waiter less than a shilling," explained a young government clerk recently during a lunch in Regent Street. I concurred with his assessment of the impossibility of offering eleven shillings and sixpence, yet I resolved to lure him one day to a haunt near Covent Garden where the waiter, clad in shirt-sleeves that are notoriously filthy by month's end, performs his duties with bare arms. I know this man intimately; if the clerk offers more than a penny, the waiter will immediately demand a handshake as a token of supreme esteem.

Much has been written humorously about the plight of the hard-up, but the reality holds no comedy. Bargaining over pennies is not amusing. Being labeled mean or stingy is not funny. Being shabby and ashamed of one's address is certainly not a source of laughter. Poverty, to the impoverished, is devoid of humor; it is a hellish existence for a sensitive spirit. Countless brave gentlemen, capable of facing the labors of Hercules, have had their hearts shattered by its petty agonies. The physical discomforts are trivial; who would mind roughing it if that were the extent of the hardship? Did Robinson Crusoe care for patches on his trousers, or whether he wore them at all? Did it matter if his toes protruded from his boots or if his umbrella was made of cotton, provided it kept the rain away? His shabbiness troubled him not, for no friends stood nearby to sneer. The sting of poverty lies not in the deprivation itself, but in the exposure. It is not the cold that drives a coatless man to hasten his pace, nor is it the shame of lying—which he knows will be disbelieved—that turns his face crimson when he claims greatcoats are unhealthy and umbrellas are unnecessary principles. Poverty is not a crime, for if it were, men would not feel ashamed of it. It is a blunder, punished accordingly. A poor man is despised universally, equally by Christians and lords, demagogues and footmen. No number of schoolboy maxims can earn him respect. Appearance dictates human judgment; a man will stride down Piccadilly arm-in-arm with the city's most notorious rogue, provided the rogue is impeccably dressed, only to slink into a back alley to whisper to a seedy gentleman. The seedy gentleman, acutely aware of this dynamic, will detour a mile to avoid recognition. Those who knew him in his prosperity need not bother looking the other way; he is a thousand times more anxious to evade them than they are to assist him. All he desires is oblivion, a wish he is often fortunate enough to achieve.

One grows accustomed to being hard up, as one adapts to any circumstance, aided by that venerable homeopathic physician, Time. The distinction between the veteran and the novice is immediate. The hardened individual, seasoned by years of shifting and struggling, approaches the pawnbroker with the same composure he would show a tailor, perhaps even greater civility. The assistant treats him with efficiency, to the chagrin of the lady in the adjacent stall, who ironically remarks she doesn't mind the delay if it involves a regular customer. The transaction resembles a brisk purchase of government bonds. Conversely, a man's first visit to the pawnshop is a spectacle of panic. Like a boy asking his first question, he is brimming with confidence. He loiters outside, drawing the attention of every loafer and arousing the suspicion of the beat constable. Finally, after scrutinizing the window displays to convince onlookers he intends to buy a diamond bracelet, he enters with a feigned careless swagger, attempting to project the aura of the swell mob. Inside, he whispers so softly he is inaudible, repeating himself frantically. When his rambling tale of a "friend" inevitably reaches the word "lend," he is swiftly directed to the court on the right, up the stairs, to the first door around the corner. He exits with a face bright enough to ignite a cigarette, convinced the entire district watches his every move. Upon finally arriving at the correct location, he has forgotten his name and address, reduced to a state of hopeless confusion. When asked sternly how he acquired the item, he stammers and contradicts himself, risking a confession of theft on that very day. He is then informed that they have no dealings with his type and urged to leave immediately. He departs, retaining no memory of the event until he finds himself three miles away, utterly unaware of his journey.

By the way, relying on public houses and churches for timekeeping presents its own dilemmas. Public houses are generally too fast, churches too slow. Furthermore, peering through the swing doors of a pub draws contemptuous glares from the barmaid, categorizing one instantly with area sneak-thieves and cadgers, while agitating the married patrons. The clock is hidden behind the door, and attempts to withdraw quietly often result in jamming one's head. Jumping up and down outside the window is another option, though unless accompanied by a banjo and a song, the gathering youths will be disappointed. There exists a mysterious law of nature ensuring that before one has left a watch "to be repaired" for half an hour, someone stops in the street to ask the time. Curiosity vanishes the moment the watch is on one's wrist.

To the dear old ladies and gentlemen ignorant of financial straits—who may they never, blessed be their gray heads, view the pawnshop as the final stage of degradation—I say nothing. But those who understand the trade, and my readers surely recognize this, are often astonished, like a child

All is vanity, and everyone is vain. Women are terribly vain; men are equally so, perhaps even more so if such a comparison is possible; and children, particularly children, embody the trait with terrifying intensity. At this very moment, one of them is hammering upon my legs, demanding to know my verdict on her new footwear. Candidly, I hold little regard for them. They lack symmetry and curve, possessing an indescribable lumpiness—I suspect, moreover, that they have been placed upon the wrong feet. Yet, I offer no critique. What she desires is not honesty, but flattery, and so I gush over them with a degrading effusiveness that feels entirely inappropriate. Nothing less would satisfy this self-opinionated cherub.

On one occasion, I attempted the strategy of the conscientious friend. She had solicited my judgment on her general conduct, specifically asking, "Wot oo tink of me? Oo peased wi' me?" Seizing the opportunity for a salutary correction regarding her recent moral trajectory, I replied bluntly: "No, I am not pleased with you." I recounted the events of that very morning: how she had roused the entire house at five AM, overturned a water-jug at seven, attempted to place the cat in the bath at eight, and sat upon her father's hat at nine-thirty-five. What was her response? Was she grateful for my candor? Did she reflect upon my words and resolve to lead a better, nobler life from that hour forward? Not a bit of it. She immediately erupted into a howl of rage, declaring me a "naughty, bad unkie" and a "bad man," before rushing to inform her mother. Since that incident, whenever my opinion is sought, I have concealed my true sentiments behind a veil of unbounded admiration for her actions, regardless of their merit. She nods approvingly and trots off to broadcast my praise to the household, employing it as a testimonial for mercenary gain; shortly thereafter, I hear distant cries of, "Unkie says me dood dirl--me dot to have two bikkies." There she goes now, gazing rapturously at her own toes and murmuring "pittie"—a towering monument of conceit and vanity, alongside countless other wickednesses.

They are all alike. I recall sitting in a garden one sunny afternoon in the suburbs of London when a shrill treble voice suddenly rang out from a top-story window, addressing some unseen entity in a neighboring garden: "Gamma, me dood boy, me wery good boy, gamma; me dot on Bob's knickiebockies." Indeed, even animals are vain. I witnessed a magnificent Newfoundland dog recently sitting before a mirror at the entrance to a shop in Regent's Circus, examining himself with a smug satisfaction unparalleled anywhere save perhaps within a vestry meeting. I was once at a farmhouse during a high holiday, likely a May Day or Quarter Day, when they draped a garland of flowers around the head of one of the cows. That absurd quadruped wandered about all day as perky as a schoolgirl in a new frock; when they removed the wreath, she became instantly sulky, refusing to stand still until it was replaced. This is not a fable told by Percy; it is plain, sober truth. As for cats, they rival humans in their vanity. I have known a cat rise and walk out of a room upon a derogatory remark concerning her species, while a neatly turned compliment will set her purring for an hour. I do like cats; they are unconsciously amusing, possessing a comic dignity, a distinct "How dare you!" air. Dogs, conversely, are "Hail, fellow, well met" to every Tom, Dick, and Harry. When I meet a familiar dog, I slap his head, hurl opprobrious epithets, and roll him onto his back; he lies there gaping, utterly unmindful. Imagine attempting such familiarity with a cat! She would never speak to you again. To win a cat's approval, one must proceed with caution. Begin by saying, "Poor pussy," adding "did 'ums" in a tone of soothing sympathy. You may not know what you mean, nor the cat either, but the sentiment implies a proper spirit, touching her feelings sufficiently that, provided you are of good manners and passable appearance, she will stick her tail up and rub her nose against you. Once matters reach this stage, you may venture to chuck her under the chin and tickle the side of her head; the intelligent creature will then dig her claws into your legs, and all is friendship and affection, as beautifully expressed in the lines: "I love little pussy, her coat is so warm, / And if I don't tease her she'll do me no harm; / So I'll stroke her, and pat her, and feed her with food, / And pussy will love me because I am good." The final two lines reveal a remarkably accurate insight into a cat's notion of human goodness. In her estimation, virtue consists solely of stroking, patting, and feeding.

I fear this narrow-minded view of merit is not confined to felines. We are all inclined to adopt a similar standard in judging others: a good man is one who is good to us, and a bad man is one who fails to do what we want. The truth is, each of us harbors an inborn conviction that the entire world, with every person and thing in it, was created as a necessary appendage to ourselves. Our fellow men and women were fashioned to admire us and minister to our various requirements. You and I, dear reader, are each the center of the universe in our respective opinions. You, as I understand it, were brought into existence by a considerate Providence solely to read and pay for what I write; while I, in your opinion, am an article dispatched into the world to produce something for you to consume. The stars—those myriad other worlds rushing down beside us through the eternal silence—were placed in the heavens merely to make the night sky interesting for us; and the moon, with its dark mysteries and ever-hidden face, exists as an arrangement for us to flirt beneath. I fear we are mostly like Mrs. Poyser's bantam cock, who fancied the sun rose every morning solely to hear him crow. "'Tis vanity that makes the world go round."

I do not believe any man ever existed without vanity; if he did, he would be an extremely uncomfortable companion. He would, of course, be a very good man, worthy of our deepest respect. He would be an admirable specimen, a man to be placed under a glass case for display, mounted on a pedestal to be copied like a school exercise, revered but not loved—not a human brother whose hand we would care to grip. Angels may be excellent in their own way, but we, poor mortals in our current state, would likely find them tedious company. Even mere good people are rather depressing. It is in our faults and failings, not our virtues, that we touch one another and find sympathy. We differ widely in our nobler qualities, but we unite in our follies. Some are pious, some generous; a few are honest, and fewer still are truly truthful. But in vanity and kindred weaknesses, we can all join hands. Vanity is one of those touches of nature that make the whole world kin. From the Indian hunter, proud of his belt of scalps, to the European general swelling beneath his row of stars and medals; from the Chinese, gleeful at the length of his pigtail, to the "professional beauty" enduring tortures to reduce her waist to the size of a peg-top; from draggle-tailed little Polly Stiggins strutting through Seven Dials with a tattered parasol, to the princess sweeping through a drawing-room with a train four yards long; from 'Arry, winning vulgar laughter with his chaff, to the statesman whose ears are tickled by cheers for his high-sounding periods; from the dark-skinned African bartering rare oils and ivory for glass beads, to the Christian maiden selling her white body for a score of tiny stones and an empty title—all march, fight, bleed, and die beneath its tawdry flag. Yes, vanity is truly the motive power that drives humanity, and flattery is the grease that keeps the wheels turning.

If you wish to win affection and respect in this world, you must flatter people. Flatter the high and low, the rich and poor, the silly and the wise. You will fare famously. Praise this man's virtues and that man's vices. Compliment everyone upon everything, and especially upon what they lack. Admire men for their beauty, fools for their wit, and boors for their breeding. Your discernment and intelligence will be extolled to the skies. Everyone can be overcome by flattery. The "belted earl"—a phrase I believe to be correct, though I cannot define it unless it refers to an earl wearing a belt instead of braces—is certainly get-overable by flattery, just as every other human being is, from a duchess to a cat's-meat man, from a plow boy to a poet—and the poet is far easier to manage than the plowboy, for butter sinks better into wheaten bread than into oaten cakes. As for love, flattery is its very lifeblood. Fill a person with love for themselves, and what runs over will be your share, according to a certain witty and truthful Frenchman whose name escapes me at this moment. (Confounded! I can never remember names when I need them.) Tell a girl she is an angel, only more angelic than an angel; a goddess, only more graceful, queenly,

The rain lashed against the leaded glass of the library windows, a rhythmic drumming that felt, to Lady Violet Lebas, like the frantic, indifferent heartbeat of London itself. She sat at her mahogany desk, the heavy scent of beeswax and damp wool filling the room, her gaze fixed upon the thick sheaf of letters that had arrived by the morning post. They were from Mr. Arthur Schopenhauer, his sprawling, confident script detailing his latest theories on the folly of ambition.

Violet sighed, tracing the edge of the parchment with a silver letter-opener. Schopenhauer was a man of undeniable erudition, yet his letters were suffocated by the very pessimistic complacency she so deeply despised. He wrote to her of the "whirling throng" on the great high-road of life, describing it as a "motley procession" where the strong push aside the weak and the cunning creep past the foolish. He painted a nostalgic picture of a "feverish race," entirely blind to the fact that this merry England was built upon the bruised backs of women and the indentured silence of the poor. He dismissed the systemic inequalities that left women like Sophia Western with no recourse but to forgive the betrayals of their husbands, reducing the entire human condition to a "killing pace" on a "stony track."

"The stony track," she murmured aloud, the words tasting like ash. What he meant, of course, was the established canon—the texts elevated by centuries of wealthy, privileged men who saw their own reflections in the exploits of conquerors and the musings of comfortable philosophers. He spoke of the "giants and dragons" of the nineteenth century guarding a golden casket, implying that the pursuit of success was merely a futile struggle against inevitable defeat. He cited Rousseau as a cautionary tale, a man whose modest desires for an orchard and an amiable woman were thwarted because he failed to demand a large country estate and a houseful of angels.

She turned to his pages on the nature of ambition. Schopenhauer argued that ambitious people were merely "busybodies" who rendered it impossible for the rest of the house to remain in bed, labeling them "wrong" for using the talents entrusted to them. He suggested that contented people formed a "neat, useful background" for the active spirits of the age, comparing them to "deadheads" and "drones in the great hive." He claimed that the only genuine sport in life was the "rapture of pursuing," a prize reserved for the vanquished, while the victors gained nothing but exhaustion.

"The rapture of pursuing," she scoffed, shaking her head. What he failed to understand was that the pursuit *was* the victory. He viewed the world through a lens of fatalism, seeing the "stream in struggling onward" as something that merely turned a mill-wheel, rather than recognizing that each blow struck in one's own behalf helped to mold the universe. He missed the profound, joyful struggle inherent in the creative process, the resilience of marginalized identities, and the socio-economic impacts of human desire.

She stood up, smoothing her skirts, and walked to the window. Outside, the rain continued to fall, washing the streets clean, but inside, the illusion of the "idle fellow" observing the chaos remained intact. Schopenhauer believed that Fortune was like a woman who only smiles once you have snapped your fingers in her face, a cruel irony that justified giving up. But Violet knew better. She knew that the "petty details" of existence—the struggles, failures, hopes, and disappointments—were where the real life lay, not in the grand, summarized results of becoming a "merchant prince" or a "great artist."

She picked up her pen, the nib scratching against the paper with a sound of defiance. If Schopenhauer wanted to write about the "game," he should have understood that the rules were rigged not to favor the lazy, but to reward the bold. The "contented mind" was indeed happy anywhere, but so was a Jerusalem pony, and the consequence was that both were put anywhere and treated anyhow. In a world obsessed with meritocracy and the illusions of success, the only honest path was to embrace the fight, to demand ten times more than one was ready to accept, and to realize that the "wooing of Fortune" was just as fascinating as the wooing of any flesh-and-blood maiden.

With a final flourish, she capped her inkwell. The narrative of the idle observer was over; the story of the fighter had just begun.

The universe conspires against my attempts at originality with a malicious, systematic precision. I had resolved to craft an article on a subject so utterly novel, so remote from the beaten paths of discourse, that it would leave humanity gasping in stunned silence—a topic no mortal tongue had ever touched, allowing me sole proprietorship of the concept. For days, I wandered the corridors of my own mind, scouring the archives of the imagination, yet the blank page remained stubbornly empty.

Then came Mrs. Cutting, our charwoman, yesterday. I shall name her freely, for I am certain she will never encounter this volume; she regards anything less than the Bible and *Lloyd's Weekly News* as a sin against literacy.

"Lor', sir," she observed, eyeing my brow, "you do look worried."

"I am attempting to conceive a subject," I explained, "whose mere discussion shall shock the world into a new era—a topic upon which no human soul has previously spoken, possessing such startling novelty that it invigorates the weary spirit."

She chuckled, deeming me a peculiar gentleman. This is my perpetual misfortune: when I strive for gravity, the audience finds me comic; when I seek humor, they remain deaf. Last week, I constructed a masterpiece of wit regarding Shakespeare's stance on the Reformation. I delivered it with artistic flair at a dinner party, segueing smoothly into a tale from Whitechapel. "Ah," I announced, my voice rising in anticipation, "that reminds me; a truly hilarious incident occurred recently in Whitechapel." "Oh?" they queried. "Oh, it's awfully funny," I replied, already giggling, "it'll bring the house down!"

A deathly silence followed my conclusion—it was, after all, a lengthy jest—and finally, someone asked, "And that was the joke?"

I insisted it was, receiving polite nods of assent from everyone except an elderly gentleman at the far end of the table. He demanded clarification: what was the punchline? Did he say something to her, or vice versa? We engaged in a spirited debate, proving that some minds are simply wired for the opposite frequency. I recall a acquaintance whose reflexive laughter was so potent that serious conversation required a pre-warning label. Without explicit instruction that the matter was grave, he would erupt into hysterics over the most mundane utterance. Once, asked for the time, he halted mid-stride, slapped his thigh, and roared with mirth. With such a man, genuine comedy is fatal; a single good joke would kill him instantly.

Returning to my current predicament, I firmly rejected the charge of frivolity and pressed Mrs. Cutting for substance. After a prolonged period of contemplation, balancing a tea-tray with practiced ease, she ventured the word "samplers"—a fashion she noted had faded since her youth. I politely declined, urging further thought. Finally, she suggested the weather, noting its recent trials.

Thus began my torment. Since that foolish proposal, the weather has haunted my thoughts, displacing all other concerns. Indeed, it is wretched. At the very moment of this writing, it is dismal, and if it remains so when you read this, the sentiment will hold true. To us, the weather is invariably wrong, mirroring the incompetence of government. In summer, it stifles; in winter, it kills; in spring and autumn, it fails to commit to either state, frustrating our desire for decisiveness. If the sun shines, we lament the lack of rain; if it rains, we beg for sunshine. Should December pass without snow, we feel cheated, as if robbed of a purchased commodity, only to descend into linguistic disgrace when the snow actually arrives. We shall never find peace unless every individual generates their own private climate.

Ideally, we would prefer to dispense with it entirely. Yet, I suspect this aversion is unique to urban dwellers. In the countryside, Nature is sublime in every guise. Consider the snow: descending in mysterious, silent softness, it adorns fields and trees in white finery, akin to a fairy nuptial. How delightful a walk becomes when the frozen earth resonates beneath our steps, when the blood sings in the crisp air, and the distant yelp of sheepdogs and children's laughter echoes like Alpine bells across the hills. Then there is skating—gliding on wings of steel across swaying ice, creating a whirring symphony. And spring! Nature at her sweetest eighteen.

As tender buds peek forth, fresh and green like youthful souls tentatively entering the bustle of existence; as blossom trees, pink and white like village maidens in Sunday best, cloak cottages in clouds of fragile beauty; as the cuckoo's cry drifts through the woods! Summer follows with its deep verdant hues and drowsy hum, where raindrops whisper secrets to attentive leaves and twilight lingers in the lanes. And autumn! Ah, how tragically beautiful, glowing gold with the dying grandeur of tinted forests, blood-red sunsets, and ghostly mists, accompanied by the murmur of harvesters, laden orchards, and the calls of gleaners during festivals of praise.

Even rain, sleet, and hail serve as useful attendants in the rural sphere, and the East Wind is merely a boisterous companion between hedgerows. But in the city, where painted stucco blistered under a smoky sun and soot-laden rain creates slurry and mire, where snow piles in filthy heaps and chilling blasts whistle through dingy alleys, Nature offers no charm. Urban weather resembles a skylark trapped in a counting-house—utterly misplaced and obstructive. Cities should be sealed within, heated by piping, and illuminated by electric light. The weather is a rustic maiden who looks best in the hayfields; she loses her allure in Pall Mall. We may have enjoyed flirting with her in the dairy, but meeting her in the metropolis proves exceedingly trying. Her frank, hearty laugh clashes with the artificiality of town life; her presence becomes overwhelming.

Recently, she has favored us with nearly continuous rain for three weeks, rendering me, as Mr. Mantalini phrased it, a "damned damp, moist, unpleasant body." Our neighbor emerges into his backyard periodically to declare that the weather benefits the country—not his own excursion, but the precipitation itself. Having installed a cucumber frame last summer, he views himself as an agriculturist, speaking absurdly to impress the terrace residents with his persona as a retired farmer. I can only hope he is correct this time, that the weather genuinely aids something, for it is inflicting significant damage upon me. It ruins my attire and my disposition. While I possess ample temperament to spare, seeing my beloved hats and trousers succumb prematurely to the cold world's blasts and snows cuts me to the quick.

Consider my new spring suit. A magnificent garment it was, now hanging there, splattered with mud beyond recognition. Blame rests squarely on Jim. I was testing it on when he entered, throwing up his arms in a wild yell upon sighting it: "Got 'em again!"

"Does it fit properly in the back?" I asked.

"Spiffin, old man," he replied, then inquired if I intended to go out.

"No," I answered initially, but he overruled me. "A man with a suit like that has no right to stay indoors," he declared. "Every citizen owes a duty to the public. Contribute to general happiness as far as possible. Go out and treat the girls."

Jim speaks in slang I cannot trace; surely not from me.

"Do you think they'll enjoy it?" I asked.

"It'll be like a day in the country for them," he assured me.

Decided, I stepped out into a lovely evening. Upon returning home, I undressed, rubbed myself with whisky, soaked my feet in hot water, applied a mustard plaster to my chest, consumed gruel and hot brandy-and-water, tallow my nose, and retired to bed. These vigorous measures, bolstered by a robust constitution, preserved my life. As for the suit? It is no longer a suit; it is a splashboard.

I fancied that suit greatly. Yet, this is my fate: I rarely grow attached to anything before disaster strikes. As a boy, I cherished a tame rat with the devotion only a child feels for an old water-rat. One day, it fell into a cooling dish of gooseberry fool in the kitchen. No one noticed its disappearance until the second serving appeared.

I detest wet weather in town. Specifically, it is not the moisture itself but the mud that repulses me. I seem to possess an irresistible gravitational pull toward filth. Merely appearing on a muddy street results in me being half-smothered by it. An old lady once remarked, upon being struck by lightning, that it stemmed from being too attractive. Others traverse dirty days for hours unstained; if I cross the road, I return a disgrace, as my poor mother often warned in my boyhood. Were there but a single patch of mud in all of London, I am convinced I would claim it from every competitor.

I wish to reciprocate this affection, yet I fear I never shall. I harbor a terror of the "London particular." I feel miserable and muggy throughout a dirty day, finding relief only in stripping away my clothes and retreating to bed, escaping the grime. Everything falters in wet weather. Somehow, there appear to be more people, dogs, prams, cabs, and carts, all obstructing my path with greater intensity. Everyone is disagreeable—except myself—which drives me wild. Furthermore, I invariably carry more burdens in wet weather; when managing a bag, three parcels, and a newspaper,

The morning had commenced with a catastrophe of epic proportions, orchestrated by Gustavus Adolphus. Downstairs, the household abbreviated him to "Gusty," a title that belied the sheer scale of the disaster he wrought whenever he deemed the interior of the house suitable for his presence. While a creature of magnificent utility in the boundless expanse of a common or a wide-open field, Gustavus Adolphus was fundamentally ill-suited to domestic confinement. His intentions were benign, yet his physical dimensions exceeded the architectural limits of this residence. With a single, expansive stretch, he toppled two chairs and a precarious what-not, transforming the room into the aftermath of a military invasion. His wagging tail swept debris across the floorboards, and his mere respiration extinguished the fire, rendering the atmosphere stifling and chaotic.

By dinner time, the routine of destruction resumed. He would creep beneath the table, lie motionless for a brief interlude, and then erupt into sudden activity. Our only forewarning of his movements was the table itself, which appeared possessed by a frantic desire to execute a series of somersaults. We clutched the legs desperately, striving to maintain a horizontal plane, only to find his struggles intensify under the delusion that a malevolent conspiracy was unfolding against him. The inevitable result was invariably a shattered table and a ruined meal, trapped between the sprawled limbs of infuriated men and women.

This morning, however, Gustavus Adolphus entered with the ferocity of an American cyclone. His initial act was to sweep my coffee-cup from the table with his tail, sending the liquid contents directly onto the center of my waistcoat. Rising hastily, I muttered a curse and advanced upon him at a rapid pace. He anticipated my movement, retreating swiftly toward the door. There, he intercepted Eliza, who was entering with a tray of eggs. Upon observing the commotion, she emitted a sharp "Ugh!" and collapsed onto the floor. The eggs scattered, assuming various positions across the carpet before settling into a chaotic array, while Gustavus Adolphus retreated from the scene. I shouted after him, sternly advising him to descend immediately and forbidding any sight of him for the ensuing hour. Seeming to accept this decree, he dodged the coal-scoop and vanished, allowing me to dry myself and resume my breakfast. I verified his departure into the yard, yet ten minutes later, peering into the passage, I discovered him perched at the top of the stairs. Ordering him down yielded nothing but barks and jumps, compelling me to investigate the cause of his obstruction.

The culprit was Tittums. She sat upon the step below, refusing to yield passage. Tittums is our kitten, currently the size of a penny roll. Her back arched, and she was vocalizing with the intensity of a medical student reciting anatomy. Indeed, she possesses a formidable capacity for swearing. I admit to a similar tendency occasionally, though I remain a mere amateur compared to her proficiency. Between ourselves—and I implore you to keep this strictly confidential, lest your wife discover I voiced such sentiments—the fairer sex simply cannot comprehend these mechanisms. Yet, privately, I believe swearing benefits a man significantly. It serves as a safety valve, releasing the volatile temper that, if contained, would inflict severe internal damage upon the mental apparatus. Consider the relief derived from unleashing a torrent of invective regarding a clumsy footstep: *"Bless you, my dear, sweet sir! What did the sun, moon, and stars possess to render you so careless as to permit your light and delicate foot to descend upon my corn with such force? Are you physically incapable of comprehending your trajectory? You nice, clever young man—you!"* Such eruptions provide a cathartic release, functioning much like smashing furniture or slamming doors, albeit with considerably greater economy. Swearing clears a man's spirit as effectively as a pound of gunpowder clears a chimney. Occasional explosions are essential; I harbor deep suspicion for any man who never swears, nor savagely kicks a footstool, nor pokes the fire with unnecessary violence. Without such outlets, the accumulated annoyances of daily life fester, transforming petty irritations into profound sorrows. These grievances are brooded over in the hotbed of rumination until they mature into hatred and revenge.

I expounded this theory to my aunt once, but she rejected it outright, declaring I had no business harboring such feelings. This was precisely the advice I offered Tittums. I admonished her for shamelessness, noting that despite her upbringing in a Christian household, she displayed inappropriate behavior. While I tolerate the swearing of an elderly cat, witnessing a mere kitten succumb to such vulgarity is heartbreaking.

I placed Tittums in my pocket and returned to my desk, momentarily forgetting her existence. Upon checking, I found she had wriggled free onto the table, attempting to swallow a pen. Next, she dipped her leg into the inkpot, overturning it, followed by licking her leg, and finally, swearing again—this time directed squarely at me. I deposited her on the floor, where Tim immediately engaged in a skirmish with her. I earnestly wish Tim would attend to his own affairs; it was none of his business what Tittums had done. Furthermore, he is hardly a saint himself. As a two-year-old fox-terrier, he meddles with everything, adopting the airs of a seasoned, gray-headed Scotch collie.

Fortunately, Tittums' mother arrived, resulting in Tim receiving a scratch on his nose—a development I regard with considerable satisfaction. I have banished all three to the passage, where they are currently engaged in combat. My desk is a mess of spilled ink, and my temper is thunderous. Should any further canine or feline folly approach me this morning, it would be prudent for them to bring their own funeral contractors.

Despite this chaos, I hold cats and dogs in high esteem. They are jovial companions, vastly superior to humans in their suitability for friendship. They refrain from quarreling or arguing. They never monopolize conversation with self-centered chatter; instead, they listen attentively while we speak of ourselves, maintaining a convincing facade of interest. They avoid stupid remarks. They never comment to Miss Brown across a dinner table that they have always suspected she was infatuated with Mr. Jones—who has recently married Miss Robinson. They never mistake your wife's cousin for her husband, nor assume you are the father-in-law. Nor do they interrogate a young author burdened with fourteen tragedies, sixteen comedies, seven farces, and two burlesques regarding his lack of productivity.

They offer no unkind words. They never critique our faults "merely for our own good." They do not gently remind us of past follies at inconvenient moments, nor do they deliver sarcastic observations such as, "Oh, yes, a lot of use you are if you are ever really wanted." Unlike our *inamoratas*, they never inform us that we are no longer as charming as we once were. To them, we remain constant.

They greet us with joy, mirroring our moods perfectly. When we are cheerful, they are merry; when we are solemn, they are sober; when we are sorrowful, they share our sadness.

"Halloo! Happy and wanting a lark? Right you are; I'm your man. Here I am, frisking round you, leaping, barking, pirouetting, ready for any amount of fun and mischief. Look at my eyes if you doubt me. What shall it be? A romp in the drawing-room, disregarding the furniture, or a scamper in the fresh, cool air, a scud across the fields and down the hill, and won't we let old Gaffer Goggles' geese know what time o' day it is, neither! Whoop! Come along."

Conversely, if you seek solitude and reflection, Pussy can settle on the arm of the chair and purr, while Montmorency curls upon the rug, blinking at the fire yet keeping one watchful eye on you, anticipating any sudden urge to hunt rats.

When we bury our faces in our hands, wishing we had never been born, they do not sit upright to lecture us on self-inflicted misery. They do not even hope for a lesson learned. Instead, they approach softly, shoving their heads against us. If it is a cat, she stands upon your shoulder, ruffles your hair, and communicates plainly, "Lor', I am sorry for you, old man"; if it is a dog, he gazes up with his large, truthful eyes, conveying, "Well, you've always got me, you know. We'll go through the world together and always stand by each other, won't we?"

A dog is inherently imprudent. He never questions whether you are in the right or wrong, nor does he concern himself with your ascent or descent on life's ladder. He ignores whether you are rich or poor, silly or wise, sinner or saint. You are his pal—that is sufficient. Whether luck or misfortune, good repute or bad, honor or shame, he remains steadfast, comforting, guarding, and willing to sacrifice his life if necessary—a foolish, brainless, soulless dog!

Ah, old staunch friend, with your deep, clear eyes and bright, quick glances that capture everything before you have time to speak it, do you realize you are merely an animal devoid of intellect? Do you know that the dull-eyed, gin-soaked lout leaning against the post outside is immeasurably your intellectual superior? Do you know that every petty, selfish scoundrel who survives by cheating and tricking, who performs no gentle deeds, speaks no kind words, harbors

It is a universal truth that all great literary men are shy; I am myself, though I am told my condition is hardly noticeable. I am relieved it is not. At one time, it was glaringly obvious, a source of profound misery for myself and considerable discomfort for everyone around me—my lady friends, in particular, complained of it with bitter vehemence.

The lot of the shy man is hardly a happy one. Men dislike him, women despise him, and he, in turn, despises and dislikes himself. Experience offers no relief, and there is no cure save time; although I once stumbled upon a delightful recipe for overcoming this misfortune. It appeared in the "Answers to Correspondents" section of a small weekly journal and reads thus—I have never forgotten it: "Adopt an easy and pleasing manner, especially toward ladies."

Poor wretch! I can easily imagine the grimace with which he must have devoured that counsel. "Adopt an easy and pleasing manner, especially toward ladies," forsooth! Do not attempt to don any other disposition, my dear young shy friend. Your effort to simulate a different nature will inevitably result in your becoming ridiculously effusive and offensively familiar. Be your own natural self, and then you will merely be considered surly and stupid.

The shy man does possess a certain, albeit slight, revenge upon society for the torture it inflicts. He is capable, to a degree, of communicating his misery. He frightens others as much as they frighten him. He acts as a dampener upon the entire room, causing even the most jovial spirits to become depressed and nervous in his presence.

Much of this stems from misunderstanding. Many mistake the shy man's timidity for overbearing arrogance, feeling awed and insulted by it. His awkwardness is resented as insolent carelessness. When, terrified at the first word addressed to him, the blood rushes to his head and the power of speech completely abandons him, he is regarded as a dreadful example of the evils of yielding to passion.

Indeed, to be misunderstood is the shy man's fate on every occasion; whatever impression he endeavors to create, he invariably conveys its opposite. When he attempts a joke, it is viewed as a pretended relation of fact, and his lack of veracity is severely condemned. His sarcasm is accepted as his literal opinion, earning him the reputation of being an ass, whereas if, wishing to ingratiate himself, he ventures a little flattery, it is taken for satire, and he is hated thereafter.

These and the myriad other troubles of a shy man are always exceedingly amusing to others, providing endless material for comic writing since time immemorial. Yet, if we look a little deeper, we discover a pathetic, one might almost say tragic, dimension to the picture. A shy man is a lonely man—a man severed from all companionship, all sociability. He moves about the world but does not mix with it. Between him and his fellow-men runs an ever-present, impassable barrier—a strong, invisible wall that, in vain attempting to scale, he only bruises himself against. He sees the pleasant faces and hears the pleasant voices on the other side, but he cannot stretch his hand across to grasp another. He stands watching the merry groups, longing to speak and claim kinship with them. But they pass him by, chatting gayly amongst themselves, and he cannot stem their flow. He tries to reach them, but his prison walls move with him, hemming him in on every side. In the busy street, in the crowded room, in the grind of work, in the whirl of pleasure, amid the many or amid the few—wherever men congregate, wherever the music of human speech is heard and human thought flashes from human eyes, there, shunned and solitary, the shy man, like a leper, stands apart. His soul is full of love and longing, but the world knows it not. The iron mask of shyness is riveted before his face, and the man beneath is never seen. Genial words and hearty greetings rise constantly to his lips, only to die away in unheard whispers behind steel clamps. His heart aches for the weary brother, but his sympathy remains dumb. Contempt and indignation against wrong choke his throat; finding no safety valve from which they might burst forth in passionate utterance, they turn inward and harm him. All the hate, scorn, and love of a deep nature, such as the shy man is ever cursed with, fester and corrupt within, instead of spending themselves abroad, souring him into a misanthrope and cynic.

Yes, shy men, like ugly women, have a hard time in this world; to endure it with any comfort requires the hide of a rhinoceros. Thick skin is, indeed, our moral clothing, and without it, we are unfit to be seen in civilized society. A poor, gasping, blushing creature, with trembling knees and twitching hands, is a painful sight to everyone, and if it cannot cure itself, the sooner it goes and hangs itself the better.

The disease can be cured. For the comfort of the shy, I can assure them of this from personal experience. I do not usually like speaking about myself, as may have been noted, but in the cause of humanity, I shall do so this occasion and confess that at one time I was, as the young man in the *Bab Ballad* says, "the shyest of the shy," and "whenever I was introduced to any pretty maid, my knees they knocked together just as if I was afraid." Now, I would—nay, I have—on this very day before yesterday performed the deed. Alone and entirely by myself (as the schoolboy said in translating the *Bellum Gallicum*) did I beard a railway refreshment-room young lady in her own lair. I rebuked her in terms of mingled bitterness and sorrow for her callousness and want of condescension. I insisted, courteously but firmly, on being accorded that deference and attention that was the right of the traveling Briton, and at the end, I looked her full in the face. Need I say more?

True, immediately after doing so, I left the room with what may possibly have appeared to be precipitation and without waiting for any refreshment. But that was because I had changed my mind, not because I was frightened, you understand.

One consolation that shy folk can take unto themselves is that shyness is certainly no sign of stupidity. It is easy enough for bull-headed clowns to sneer at nerves, but the highest natures are not necessarily those containing the greatest amount of moral brass. The horse is not an inferior animal to the cock-sparrow, nor the deer of the forest to the pig. Shyness simply means extreme sensibility, and has nothing whatever to do with self-consciousness or conceit, though its relationship to both is continually insisted upon by the poll-parrot school of philosophy.

Conceit, indeed, is the quickest cure for it. When it once dawns upon you that you are a good deal cleverer than anyone else in this world, bashfulness becomes shocked and departs. When you can look around a roomful of people and think that each one is a mere child in intellect compared with yourself, you feel no more shy of them than you would of a select company of magpies or orang-outangs.

Conceit is the finest armor a man can wear. Upon its smooth, impenetrable surface, the puny dagger-thrusts of spite and envy glance harmlessly aside. Without that breastplate, the sword of talent cannot force its way through the battle of life, for blows have to be borne as well as dealt. I do not, of course, speak of the conceit that displays itself in an elevated nose and a falsetto voice. That is not real conceit—that is only playing at being conceited; like children playing at being kings and queens, going strutting about with feathers and long trains. Genuine conceit does not make a man objectionable. On the contrary, it tends to make him genial, kind-hearted, and simple. He has no need of affectation—he is far too well satisfied with his own character; and his pride is too deep-seated to appear at all on the outside. Careless alike of praise or blame, he can afford to be truthful. Too far, in fancy, above the rest of mankind to trouble about their petty distinctions, he is equally at home with duke or costermonger. And valuing no one's standard but his own, he is never tempted to practice that miserable pretense that less self-reliant people offer up as an hourly sacrifice to the god of their neighbor's opinion.

The shy man, on the other hand, is humble—modest of his own judgment and over-anxious concerning that of others. But this, in the case of a young man, is surely right enough. His character is unformed. It is slowly evolving itself out of a chaos of doubt and disbelief. Before the growing insight and experience, the diffidence recedes. A man rarely carries his shyness past the hobbledehoy period. Even if his own inward strength does not throw it off, the rubbings of the world generally smooth it down. You scarcely ever meet a really shy man—except in novels or on the stage, where, by the bye, he is much admired, especially by the women.

There, in that supernatural land, he appears as a fair-haired and saintlike young man—fair hair and goodness always go together on the stage. No respectable audience would believe in one without the other. I knew an actor who mislaid his wig once and had to rush on

ON BABIES. Oh, yes, I do—I know a lot about 'em. I was one myself once, though not long—not so long as my clothes. They were very long, I recollect, and always in my way when I wanted to kick. Why do babies have such yards of unnecessary clothing? It is not a riddle. I really want to know. I never could understand it. Is it that the parents are ashamed of the size of the child and wish to make believe that it is longer than it actually is? I asked a nurse once why it was. She said: "Lor', sir, they always have long clothes, bless their little hearts." And when I explained that her answer, although doing credit to her feelings, hardly disposed of my difficulty, she replied: "Lor', sir, you wouldn't have 'em in short clothes, poor little dears?" And she said it in a tone that seemed to imply I had suggested some unmanly outrage. Since than I have felt shy at making inquiries on the subject, and the reason—if reason there be—is still a mystery to me. But indeed, putting them in any clothes at all seems absurd to my mind. Goodness knows there is enough of dressing and undressing to be gone through in life without beginning it before we need; and one would think that people who live in bed might at all events be spared the torture. Why wake the poor little wretches up in the morning to take one lot of clothes off, fix another lot on, and put them to bed again, and then at night haul them out once more, merely to change everything back? And when all is done, what difference is there, I should like to know, between a baby's night-shirt and the thing it wears in the day-time? Very likely, however, I am only making myself ridiculous—I often do, so I am informed—and I will therefore say no more upon this matter of clothes, except only that it would be of great convenience if some fashion were adopted enabling you to tell a boy from a girl. At present it is most awkward. Neither hair, dress, nor conversation affords the slightest clew, and you are left to guess. By some mysterious law of nature you invariably guess wrong, and are thereupon regarded by all the relatives and friends as a mixture of fool and knave, the enormity of alluding to a male babe as "she" being only equaled by the atrocity of referring to a female infant as "he". Whichever sex the particular child in question happens not to belong to is considered as beneath contempt, and any mention of it is taken as a personal insult to the family. And as you value your fair name do not attempt to get out of the difficulty by talking of "it." There are various methods by which you may achieve ignominy and shame. By murdering a large and respected family in cold blood and afterward depositing their bodies in the water companies' reservoir, you will gain much unpopularity in the neighborhood of your crime, and even robbing a church will get you cordially disliked, especially by the vicar. But if you desire to drain to the dregs the fullest cup of scorn and hatred that a fellow human creature can pour out for you, let a young mother hear you call dear baby "it." Your best plan is to address the article as "little angel." The noun "angel" being of common gender suits the case admirably, and the epithet is sure of being favorably received. "Pet" or "beauty" are useful for variety's sake, but "angel" is the term that brings you the greatest credit for sense and good-feeling. The word should be preceded by a short giggle and accompanied by as much smile as possible. And whatever you do, don't forget to say that the child has got its father's nose. This "fetches" the parents (if I may be allowed a vulgarism) more than anything. They will pretend to laugh at the idea at first and will say, "Oh, nonsense!" You must then get excited and insist that it is a fact. You need have no conscientious scruples on the subject, because the thing's nose really does resemble its father's—at all events quite as much as it does anything else in nature—being, as it is, a mere smudge. Do not despise these hints, my friends. There may come a time when, with mamma on one side and grand mamma on the other, a group of admiring young ladies (not admiring you, though) behind, and a bald-headed dab of humanity in front, you will be extremely thankful for some idea of what to say. A man—an unmarried man, that is—is never seen to such disadvantage as when undergoing the ordeal of "seeing baby." A cold shudder runs down his back at the bare proposal, and the sickly smile with which he says how delighted he shall be ought surely to move even a mother's heart, unless, as I am inclined to believe, the whole proceeding is a mere device adopted by wives to discourage the visits of bachelor friends. It is a cruel trick, though, whatever its excuse may be. The bell is rung and somebody sent to tell nurse to bring baby down. This is the signal for all the females present to commence talking "baby," during which time you are left to your own sad thoughts and the speculations upon the practicability of suddenly recollecting an important engagement, and the likelihood of your being believed if you do. Just when you have concocted an absurdly implausible tale about a man outside, the door opens, and a tall, severe-looking woman enters, carrying what at first sight appears to be a particularly skinny bolster, with the feathers all at one end. Instinct, however, tells you that this is the baby, and you rise with a miserable attempt at appearing eager. When the first gush of feminine enthusiasm with which the object in question is received has died out, and the number of ladies talking at once has been reduced to the ordinary four or five, the circle of fluttering petticoats divides, and room is made for you to step forward. This you do with much the same air that you would walk into the dock at Bow Street, and then, feeling unutterably miserable, you stand solemnly staring at the child. There is dead silence, and you know that every one is waiting for you to speak. You try to think of something to say, but find, to your horror, that your reasoning faculties have left you. It is a moment of despair, and your evil genius, seizing the opportunity, suggests to you some of the most idiotic remarks that it is possible for a human being to perpetrate. Glancing round with an imbecile smile, you sniggeringly observe that "it hasn't got much hair has it?" Nobody answers you for a minute, but at last the stately nurse says with much gravity: "It is not customary for children five weeks old to have long hair." Another silence follows this, and you feel you are being given a second chance, which you avail yourself of by inquiring if it can walk yet, or what they feed it on. By this time you have got to be regarded as not quite right in your head, and pity is the only thing felt for you. The nurse, however, is determined that, insane or not, there shall be no shirking and that you shall go through your task to the end. In the tones of a high priestess directing some religious mystery she says, holding the bundle toward you: "Take her in your arms, sir." You are too crushed to offer any resistance and so meekly accept the burden. "Put your arm more down her middle, sir," says the high-priestess, and then all step back and watch you intently as though you were going to do a trick with it. What to do you know no more than you did what to say. It is certain something must be done, and the only thing that occurs to you is to heave the unhappy infant up and down to the accompaniment of "oopsee-daisy," or some remark of equal intelligence. "I wouldn't jig her, sir, if I were you," says the nurse; "a very little upsets her." You promptly decide not to jig her and sincerely hope that you have not gone too far already. At this point the child itself, who has hitherto been regarding you with an expression of mingled horror and disgust, puts an end to the nonsense by beginning to yell at the top of its voice, at which the priestess rushes forward and snatches it from you with "There! there! there! What did ums do to ums?" "How very extraordinary!" you say pleasantly. "Whatever made it go off like that?" "Oh, why, you must have done something to her!" says the mother indignantly; "the child wouldn't scream like that for nothing." It is evident they think you have been running pins into it. The brat is calmed at last, and would no doubt remain quiet enough, only some mischievous busybody points you out again with "Who's this, baby?" and the intelligent child, recognizing you, howls louder than ever. Whereupon some fat old lady remarks that "it's strange how children take a dislike to any one." "Oh, they know," replies another mysteriously. "It's a wonderful thing," adds a third; and then everybody looks sideways at you, convinced you are a scoundrel of the blackest dye; and they glory in the beautiful idea that your true character, unguessed by your fellow-men, has been discovered by the untaught instinct of a little child. Babies, though, with all their crimes and errors, are not without their use—not without use, surely, when they fill an empty heart; not

The aroma of roasted meat and steaming vegetables hung heavy in the air, a tangible promise of sustenance that seemed to vibrate against the very bones of the diner. I have always possessed a profound affection for the acts of eating and drinking, a predilection that was particularly acute during my childhood. In those early years, I was blessed with both a voracious appetite and a robust digestion. I recall vividly the arrival of a gentleman at our household, a figure distinguished by dull eyes and a complexion the color of a bruised plum. For approximately five minutes, he observed me consuming my meal with a fascination bordering on the hypnotic. Finally, turning his gaze to my father, he asked, "Does your boy ever suffer from dyspepsia?"

"My son has never complained of such ailments," my father replied calmly. "Do you find yourself plagued by dyspepsia, Colly-wobbles?" (Though 'Colly-wobbles' was my nickname, it bore no resemblance to my actual name).

"No, sir," I answered promptly. Immediately following this declaration, curiosity compelled me to ask, "What precisely is dyspepsia, sir?"

The pallid gentleman regarded me with an expression of mingled astonishment and envy. Then, in a tone dripping with infinite pity, he delivered his verdict slowly: "You will know... some day."

My beloved mother, in her wisdom, often remarked that she derived genuine pleasure from watching me eat. It remains a source of enduring satisfaction to me that I must have provided her with considerable gratification in this regard. Indeed, a growing, healthy youth, engaged in ample physical activity and exercising restraint regarding excessive study, can generally satisfy even the most demanding expectations concerning his capacity for nourishment.

It is genuinely amusing to observe boys consume food when one need not pay for the privilege. Their conception of a proper, square meal involves a staggering array of provisions: a pound and a half of roast beef accompanied by five or six substantial potatoes (those coated in soap residue being preferred for their density), a generous portion of greens, four thick slices of Yorkshire pudding, followed by a pair of currant dumplings, several green apples, a pennyworth of nuts, half a dozen jumbles, and a bottle of ginger-beer. Upon completion of this gastronomic marathon, they proceed immediately to playing at horses.

One cannot help but wonder how they must disdain us men, who are required to remain sedentary for a couple of hours after dining on mere spoonfuls of clear soup and the wing of a chicken! Yet, the boys possess disadvantages as well. A boy never enjoys the luxury of total satiety; he never truly feels full. He can never stretch out his limbs, rest his hands behind his head, and close his eyes to sink into the ethereal bliss that envelops the well-dined adult. Food makes no significant difference to a boy. To a man, however, a satisfying dinner acts as a good fairy's potion, rendering the world thereafter brighter and more benevolent. A man who has eaten well develops a yearning love for all his fellow creatures. He strokes a cat with gentle tenderness, cooing "poor pussy" in tones of deepest emotion. He sympathizes with the musicians of a passing German band, wondering if they are chilled, and for a fleeting moment, he ceases to harbor hatred for his wife's relatives.

A good dinner reveals the softer dimensions of male character. Under its genial influence, the gloomy and morose transform into jovial conversationalists. Individuals who, throughout the day, move about with the sour demeanor of those subsisting solely on vinegar and Epsom salts, break into wreathed smiles after dinner, exhibiting a sudden urge to pat small children on the head and speak vaguely to them about sixpences. Serious men thaw into mild cheerfulness, while snobbish youths with heavy mustaches momentarily forget how to render themselves objectionable.

I invariably feel sentimental after dinner. It is the sole occasion when I can properly appreciate love stories. When the hero embraces his beloved in a final, wild clutch and stifles a sob, I feel as devastated as if I had played a disastrous hand at whist, revealing only a deuce. When the heroine meets her end, I weep openly. Were I to read the same narrative early in the morning, I would likely sneer at it. Digestion—or rather, indigestion—exerts a marvelous influence upon the heart. Should I wish to compose something profoundly pathetic, I consume a large plate of hot buttered muffins roughly an hour prior to commencing my work. By the time I sit down to write, an unutterable melancholy has descended upon me. I envision heartbroken lovers parting forever at lonely wayside stiles, surrounded by a deepening sad twilight, broken only by the tinkling of a distant sheep-bell. I imagine old men gazing at withered flowers until their sight blurs with tears; dainty maidens waiting at open casements, watching as "he cometh not," while the heavy years roll by and their golden hair turns white and thin. The infants they once dandled have become grown adults burdened by their own corporeal torments, and the playmates they once laughed with lie silent beneath the waving grass. Yet, they continue to wait and watch until the dark shadows of the unknown night encroach, gathering around them as the world, with its childish troubles, fades from their aching eyes.

In my imagination, I see pale corpses cast upon white-foamed waves, deathbeds stained with bitter tears, and graves scattered across trackless deserts. I hear the wild wailing of women, the low moaning of children, and the dry sobbing of strong men. It is all attributable to the muffins. I could not conjure a single melancholic fantasy upon a mutton chop and a glass of champagne.

A full stomach serves as a great aid to poetry, and indeed, no sentiment of any kind can endure upon an empty one. We lack neither the time nor the inclination to indulge in fanciful troubles until we have dispelled our real misfortunes. We do not sigh over deceased dicky-birds while a bailiff stands in the house, nor do we worry whether our mistress's smiles are cold, hot, lukewarm, or otherwise, when we are unsure of where to procure our next shilling.

When I refer to "foolish people" in this contemptuous manner, I mean those who entertain opinions differing from my own. If there is one individual I despise more than another, it is the man who does not think exactly as I do on all topics. Foolish people, therefore, are those who, having experienced little of either hunger or abundance, will assert that mental distress is far more agonizing than bodily pain. This is a romantic and touching theory, so comforting to the love-sick young sapling who looks down patronizingly upon a poor devil with a starved, white face, thinking, "Ah, how happy you are compared with me!" So soothing, too, for fat old gentlemen who cackle about the superiority of poverty over riches. But it is all nonsense—all cant. An aching head soon causes one to forget an aching heart. A broken finger drives away all recollections of an empty chair. And when a man feels truly hungry, he feels nothing else.

We sleek, well-fed folk can hardly comprehend the sensation of hunger. We know what it is to lack appetite and disregard the dainties placed before us, but we fail to understand what it means to sicken for food—to die for bread while others waste it—to gaze with famished eyes upon coarse fare steaming behind dingy windows, longing for a pennyworth of pea pudding yet lacking the coin to purchase it—to feel that a crust would be delicious and a bone a banquet.

For us, hunger is a luxury, a piquant, flavor-enhancing sauce. It is well worth experiencing hunger and thirst merely to discover the extent of gratification obtainable from eating and drinking. If you wish to thoroughly enjoy your dinner, undertake a thirty-mile country walk after breakfast and refrain from consuming anything until your return. Your eyes will glisten at the sight of the white tablecloth and steaming dishes! With what a sigh of contentment you will lower the empty beer tankard and raise your knife and fork! And how comfortably you will feel afterward as you push back your chair, light a cigar, and beam upon everyone present.

However, ensure that when adopting this regimen, the promised good dinner is actually available at the conclusion, lest the resulting disappointment prove trying. I recall once a friend and I—dear old Joe, it was. Alas! How we lose one another in life's mist. It must have been eight years since I last saw Joseph Taboys. How pleasant it would be to encounter his jovial visage again, to clasp his strong hand, and to hear his cheery laughter once more! He also owes me fourteen shillings. Well, we were on holiday together, and one morning we broke fast early and embarked on a tremendous long walk. We had ordered a duck for dinner the previous evening. We instructed the cook, "Get a big one, because we shall come home awfully hungry." As we departed, our landlady approached in high spirits. "I have secured you gentlemen a duck, if you please," she announced. "If you manage to finish that, you will do well." She held aloft a bird approximately the size of a door-mat. We chuckled at the spectacle and declared we would attempt it, speaking with a self-conscious pride characteristic of men aware of their own power. Then we set forth.

Of course, we lost our way. I invariably do so in the countryside, and it renders me frantic, for it is futile

"Oh, you have some rooms to let."

"Mother!"

"Well, what is it?"

"'Ere's a gentleman about the rooms."

"Ask 'im in. I'll be up in a minute."

"Will yer step inside, sir? Mother'll be up in a minute."

So you step inside, and after a minute "mother" ascends the kitchen stairs with a slowness that suggests the very act of rising requires a negotiation with gravity. She unties her apron as she climbs, her movements fluid yet weary, while simultaneously issuing commands to someone below regarding the potatoes, her voice carrying effortlessly down the stairwell despite the distance.

"Good-morning, sir," says "mother," offering a smile that has been washed clean of all warmth by the elements of daily labor. "Will you step this way, please?"

"Oh, it's hardly worth while my coming up," you say, attempting to project an air of dignified efficiency. "What sort of rooms are they, and how much?"

"Well," says the landlady, her tone shifting instantly from maternal solicitude to businesslike pragmatism, "if you'll step upstairs I'll show them to you."

With a protesting murmur—one designed to imply that any subsequent waste of time must not be attributed to your initial hesitation—you follow "mother" upward.

At the first landing, you collide with a pail and a broom. Whereupon "mother" launches into a diatribe concerning the unreliability of servant-girls, her voice booming off the banisters as she summons Sarah to remove the impediments immediately. When you finally emerge outside the actual rooms, she pauses, her hand resting heavily upon the doorframe, to explain that the space is currently untidy because the previous lodger departed only yesterday. She adds, with the casual certainty of a woman who knows the rhythm of her trade better than anyone, that today is their cleaning-day—it always is. With this understanding secured, you enter, and both of you stand solemnly, feasting your eyes upon the scene before you.

The rooms cannot be said to appear inviting. Even "mother's" face betrays no admiration. Untenanted furnished apartments viewed in the morning sunlight do not inspire cheery sensations; instead, they exude a lifeless air, a vacuum waiting to be filled. It is a very different matter once you have settled down and are actually living in them. Then, with your old familiar household gods to greet your gaze whenever you glance up, and all your little knick-knacks spread around you—with the photos of all the girls that you have loved and lost ranged upon the mantel-piece, and half a dozen disreputable-looking pipes scattered about in painfully prominent positions—with one carpet slipper peeping from beneath the coal-box and the other perched on the top of the piano—with the well-known pictures to hide the dingy walls, and these dear old friends, your books, higgledy-piggledy all over the place—with the bits of old blue china that your mother prized, and the screen she worked in those far by-gone days, when the sweet old face was laughing and young, and the white soft hair tumbled in gold-brown curls from under the coal-scuttle bonnet—life blooms anew.

Ah, old screen, what a gorgeous personage you must have been in your young days, when the tulips and roses and lilies (all growing from one stem) were fresh in their glistening sheen! Many a summer and winter have come and gone since then, my friend, and you have played with the dancing firelight until you have grown sad and gray. Your brilliant colors are fast fading now, and the envious moths have gnawed your silken threads. You are withering away like the dead hands that wove you. Do you ever think of those dead hands? You seem so grave and thoughtful sometimes that I almost think you do. Come, you and I and the deep-glowing embers, let us talk together. Tell me in your silent language what you remember of those young days, when you lay on my little mother's lap and her girlish fingers played with your rainbow tresses. Was there never a lad near sometimes--never a lad who would seize one of those little hands to smother it with kisses, and who would persist in holding it, thereby sadly interfering with the progress of your making? Was not your frail existence often put in jeopardy by this same clumsy, headstrong lad, who would toss you disrespectfully aside that he—not satisfied with one—might hold both hands and gaze up into the loved eyes? I can see that lad now through the haze of the flickering twilight. He is an eager bright-eyed boy, with pinching, dandy shoes and tight-fitting smalls, snowy shirt frill and stock, and—oh! such curly hair. A wild, light-hearted boy! Can he be the great, grave gentleman upon whose stick I used to ride cross-legged, the care-worn man into whose thoughtful face I used to gaze with childish reverence and whom I used to call "father?" You say "yes," old screen; but are you quite sure? It is a serious charge you are bringing. Can it be possible? Did he have to kneel down in those wonderful smalls and pick you up and rearrange you before he was forgiven and his curly head smoothed by my mother's little hand? Ah! old screen, and did the lads and the lassies go making love fifty years ago just as they do now? Are men and women so unchanged? Did little maidens' hearts beat the same under pearl-embroidered bodices as they do under Mother Hubbard cloaks? Have steel casques and chimney-pot hats made no difference to the brains that work beneath them? Oh, Time! great Chronos! and is this your power? Have you dried up seas and leveled mountains and left the tiny human heart-strings to defy you? Ah, yes! they were spun by a Mightier than thou, and they stretch beyond your narrow ken, for their ends are made fast in eternity. Ay, you may mow down the leaves and the blossoms, but the roots of life lie too deep for your sickle to sever. You refashion Nature's garments, but you cannot vary by a jot the throbbings of her pulse. The world rolls round obedient to your laws, but the heart of man is not of your kingdom, for in its birthplace "a thousand years are but as yesterday."

I am getting away, though, I fear, from my "furnished apartments," and I hardly know how to get back. But I have some excuse for my meanderings this time. It is a piece of old furniture that has led me astray, and fancies gather, somehow, round old furniture, like moss around old stones. One's chairs and tables get to be almost part of one's life and to seem like quiet friends. What strange tales the wooden-headed old fellows could tell did they but choose to speak! At what unsuspected comedies and tragedies have they not assisted! What bitter tears have been sobbed into that old sofa cushion! What passionate whisperings the settee must have overheard!

New furniture has no charms for me compared with old. It is the old things that we love--the old faces, the old books, the old jokes. New furniture can make a palace, but it takes old furniture to make a home. Not merely old in itself--lodging-house furniture generally is that--but it must be old to us, old in associations and recollections. The furniture of furnished apartments, however ancient it may be in reality, is new to our eyes, and we feel as though we could never get on with it. As, too, in the case of all fresh acquaintances, whether wooden or human (and there is very little difference between the two species sometimes), everything impresses you with its worst aspect. The knobby wood-work and shiny horse-hair covering of the easy-chair suggest anything but ease. The mirror is smoky. The curtains want washing. The carpet is frayed. The table looks as if it would go over the instant anything was rested on it. The grate is cheerless, the wall-paper hideous. The ceiling appears to have had coffee spilt all over it, and the ornaments--well, they are worse than the wallpaper.

There must surely be some special and secret manufactory for the production of lodging-house ornaments. Precisely the same articles are to be found at every lodging-house all over the kingdom, and they are never seen anywhere else. There are the two--what do you call them? they stand one at each end of the mantel-piece, where they are never safe, and they are hung round with long triangular slips of glass that clank against one another and make you nervous. In the commoner class of rooms these works of art are supplemented by a couple of pieces of china which might each be meant to represent a cow sitting upon its hind legs, or a model of the temple of Diana at Ephesus, or a dog, or anything else you like to fancy. Somewhere about the room you come across a bilious-looking object, which at first you take to be a lump of dough left about by one of the children, but which on scrutiny seems to resemble an underdone cupid. This thing the landlady calls a statue. Then there is a "sampler" worked by some idiot related to the family, a picture of the "Huguenots," two or three Scripture texts, and a highly framed and glazed certificate to the effect that the father has been vaccinated, or is an Odd Fellow, or something of that sort.

You examine these various attractions and then dismally ask what the rent is.

"That's rather a

The cynics among us, those whose moral compass seems permanently misaligned with the sun, claim that the sheer consciousness of being impeccably attired infuses the human heart with a blissfulness that religion itself cannot bestow. I suspect they are occasionally, terrifyingly correct. Recall, if you will, the era of my youth—those many, many years ago, as the storybooks delight in recounting—when a crushing blow awaited me. Whether it was the washerwoman dismissing me with a cold shoulder, or my blank-verse poem returning for the tenth time bearing the editor's polite regret regarding lack of space, or worse, the beloved woman I adored with a fervor unknown to previous generations snubbing me—it mattered not which arrow struck my vanity. The remedy was identical: I would retreat to my chamber and don my finest attire.

In a glossy new hat and trousers featuring a carefully preserved front fold (kept safely tucked between the bed and the mattress, never on the floor, lest the sanctity of the garment be compromised), I transformed from a crushed soul into someone significant. Suddenly, other washerwomen existed; other girls existed, capable of appreciating a clever, handsome young fellow. My recklessness knew no bounds; I felt empowered to court other maidens, convinced that within the fabric of my best clothes lay the power to succeed. Clothes, it turns out, are half the battle in the art of courting.

Consider the young suitor today. He spends two agonizing hours preparing, paralyzed by the choice between a light suit with a cane and a drab billycock, or black tails paired with a chimney-pot hat and a new umbrella. Fate rarely smiles upon his indecision. Should he choose the light suit and the stick, the heavens inevitably conspire to unleash a deluge, leaving him arriving at the lady's door damp, muddy, and spending the evening hiding his boots. Conversely, if he opts for the top hat and umbrella—a combination so logical it borders on the divine, akin to sending a toddler forth without a nurse—he finds himself trapped in a furnace of heat. The perspiration strips the soap from his mustache and reduces his meticulously coiffed forelock to a limp, seaweed-like wisp. The Fates are cruel to the ill-dressed lover. Even if he miraculously arrives pristine, the lady has likely departed with her cousin, promising a reunion only in the twilight.

One cannot help but envy the picturesque gallants of seventy years past, immortalized on Christmas cards. With their curly hair, natty hats, well-shaped legs encased in smalls, dainty Hessian boots, ruffling frills, and dangling seals, they possessed a visual language of romance that modern baggy trousers and monkey-jackets simply cannot replicate. No wonder the maiden in the poke-bonnet and light-blue sash lowered her eyes, captivated. Men could win hearts in such regalia.

Our deportment is inextricably bound to our dress. Strip a man of his finery, reduce him to seedy rags, and watch him skulk with his head bowed, fetching his own supper. Deck him instead in gorgeous raiment and fine linen, and behold him strutting down the thoroughfare, cane swinging, eyes darting at the girls with the perky energy of a bantam cock. Clothes alter our very nature. A man dons a plume, a dagger, and puffy white sleeves, and becomes fierce and daring; clad in an ulster, he seeks refuge behind a lamp-post to summon the police.

Admittedly, sterling merit, honest worth, and deep affection reside equally beneath broadcloth and tweed as they do under silk and velvet. Yet, the spirit of that knightly chivalry that "rode a tilt for lady's love" requires the clatter of steel and the rustle of plumes to awaken it from its slumber amidst dusty tapestries and moldy chronicles. The world, I fear, is growing old. It dresses so soberly now. Having passed the infantile phase of running about in loose robes with bare feet, and the barbaric age of tattooing and unkempt hair, humanity matured into a foppish young man, decked in flowing curls and scarlet doublets, braggart and bold. But those merry, foolish days of youth are gone. Now, we are a grave, middle-aged gentleman in the nineteenth century, shocked to imagine ourselves adorned in finery. Thus, we don black coats, black trousers, black hats, and black boots. We are a very respectable gentleman indeed—to think we could ever have gadded about as troubadours or knights-errant in such fancy colors! Ah, well; we are more sensible now. Or at least, we convince ourselves of our sensibility.

Goodness, that quality which aligns so perfectly with blackness, flows freely in the wardrobe of the virtuous. Very good people dress entirely in black, extending the gloom to gloves and neckties, perhaps even shirts in the near future. Those of medium virtue indulge in light trousers on weekdays, occasionally sporting fancy waistcoats. Meanwhile, the utterly abandoned wander the streets in light suits, with some wretches so depraved as to wear a white hat. Though such individuals are never spoken of in genteel society, I mention them here for completeness.

Speaking of light suits, have you observed the stares directed at you the moment you emerge in a new ensemble? The populace grows accustomed by the third outing. I speak not from personal experience, for I, alas, do not wear such things. Only sinners do.

Yet, I wish it were otherwise. I wish one could be good, respectable, and sensible without becoming a caricature. Gazing into the mirror at my two long, cylindrical bags—picturesquely rugged about the knees—and my stand-up collar and billycock hat, I wonder what right I possess to render God's world hideous. Wild, wicked thoughts then stir in my heart. I crave no longer to be good and respectable. I yearn to don lavender tights, red velvet breeches, and a green doublet slashed with yellow; to wear a light-blue silk cloak, a black eagle's plume, a grand sword, a falcon, a lance, and a prancing horse, thereby gladdening the eyes of all mankind. Why must we all resemble ants crawling over a dust-heap? Why not dress a little gayly? Surely, happiness would follow. True, it is a trifling matter, but we are a little race, and what use is pretending otherwise and spoiling the fun? Let philosophers dress like old crows if they please. But let me be a butterfly.

Women, at least, ought to dress prettily. It is their duty. They are the flowers of the earth, designed to adorn it. We men abuse them, certainly, but goodness knows the old world would be dreadfully dull without their dresses and fair faces. How they brighten every space they enter! What a sunny commotion their relations create in our dingy bachelor chambers! What a delightful litter their ribbons, laces, gloves, hats, parasols, and kerchiefs make! It is as if a wandering rainbow has descended to pay us a visit.

Nothing compares to the charm of summer, specifically the emergence of our little maids in pretty colors. I delight in seeing the pink, blue, and white glancing between the trees, dotting the green fields, and flashing back the sunlight. These bright hues are visible for miles. Four white dresses currently climb a hill before my window; I discern them clearly despite the three-mile distance. At first, I mistook them for mile-stones placed out for a lark. It is so pleasant to spot the darlings from afar. Especially if they happen to be your wife and your mother-in-law.

This train of thought regarding fields brings me to a serious matter: the footwear of women in these islands. They universally wear boots too large for their feet. They can never secure a fitting pair. Bootmakers fail to maintain adequate small sizes. Time and again, I have witnessed women sitting atop the rail of a stile, declaring they could not proceed a single step because their boots caused agony. The complaint is invariably the same: they are too big.

It is high time this state of affairs changed. In the name of the husbands and fathers of England, I call upon bootmakers to reform. Our wives, daughters, and cousins are not to be lamed and tortured with impunity. Why cannot "narrow twos" be stocked more liberally? That is the size most women require.

The waistband presents another grievance. Dressmakers construct these items so loosely that the hooks and eyes fastening them burst off periodically with a report like thunder.

I cannot comprehend why women endure these wrongs, nor why they do not demand garments tailored precisely to their frames. Hardly are they disinclined to trouble themselves with mere dress, for it is the sole subject they truly engage with. It is the only topic that captures their full interest, discussed endlessly throughout the day. Observe two women conversing by a window; you might guess at sweet, helpful wisdom spilling from their sainted lips. Move closer, however, and you overhear:

"So I took in the waistband and let out a seam, and it fits beautifully now."

"Well," replies the other, "I shall wear my plum-colored bodice to the Jones's, with a yellow plastron; and they've got some lovely gloves at Puttick's, only one and eleven pence."

Once, I drove through Derbyshire with a couple of ladies. It was a magnificent countryside, and they reveled in it. Yet, they spoke exclusively of dressmaking the entire journey.

"Pretty view, that," I

"I remember, I remember, In the days of chill November, How the blackbird on the—"

The melody dissolves instantly into static. I forget the rest. It is the opening line of the first poem I ever memorized, a relic of a time when syllables held weight. By contrast, "Hey, diddle diddle, The cat and the fiddle" registers in my mind as mere noise, a frivolous incantation devoid of the structural integrity required for true poetry. Yet, that serious ballad earned me fourpence. I knew the value immediately because the peddler explained the arithmetic: keep the fourpence, earn two more, and you possess sixpence. The logic was irrefutable, yet it failed to move me. The coin vanished by dawn, squandered on some triviality, leaving the specific purchase a blank space in my ledger of recollections.

This is the fundamental flaw of Memory; she delivers nothing whole. She is a capricious child, her toybox littered with shattered dolls and broken wheels. I recall tumbling into a massive dust-pit as a toddler, but the sensation of extraction is absent. If I relied solely on my internal archives, I would be convinced I remain trapped beneath the grit, unable to rise.

Later, during a particularly dramatic romantic interlude, I assisted in a scene of palpable tension. My memory retains only the precise moment the door burst open, admitting a sepulchral voice that commanded, "Emily, you're wanted." The tone suggested the arrival of law enforcement rather than a lover. Every tender confession exchanged between us, every beautiful promise whispered in the dim light, has evaporated. Nothing remains but the interruption.

When we turn backward to survey the entirety of existence, life presents itself not as a tapestry, but as a crumbling ruin. Here stands a fractured column marking where a grand portal once dominated; there, a broken window-shaft hints at a lady's private sanctuary; and amidst a mound of blackened stone, the ghost of a roaring fire flickers. Over all, tinted lichen and tenacious ivy cling in verdant defiance.

Time acts as a softening agent, rendering everything pleasant through a haze of distortion. Even sorrow, once acute, tastes sweet in retrospect. Our boyish days appear jubilant now, filled with nuts, hoops, and gingerbread. The petty humiliations, the toothaches, and the agonizing conjugation of Latin verbs fade into insignificance—the latter especially. We construct a narrative of our youth as a period of pure bliss, wishing desperately to rekindle that capacity for love. We ignore the heartbreaks, the sleepless vigils, and the parched throats of rejection, assuming that because we desired more than sisterhood, we deserved it.

Indeed, it is the luminescence, not the gloom, that we perceive when looking back. The past exists without shadows. The road we have traveled stretches out behind us, immaculate and fair. We fail to notice the jagged stones; instead, we dwell exclusively on the roadside roses, mistaking the thorny briars that drew our blood for gentle tendrils dancing in the breeze. Thank goodness for this optical illusion—that the chain of memory consists only of pleasant links, allowing us to smile at today's bitterness from the vantage point of tomorrow.

It seems the brightest facet of any experience is invariably its highest and best. Consequently, as our brief lives sink back into the dark ocean of oblivion, the lightest, most joyous elements float to the surface, standing tall above the waterline long after the angry thoughts and smarting pains have been submerged beyond reach.

Perhaps this very glamour explains why elderly folks regale us with such preposterous tales of their youth. The world appeared to be a superior entity back then, functioning exactly as it ought. Boys were boys, girls were distinct entities, winters possessed actual winter, and summers were not the miserable compromises we endure today. The extraordinary deeds and improbable events attributed to those eras require three robust men to believe even half of them.

I enjoy hearing an elder recount these fictions to a group of skeptical youths who lack the authority to contradict him. It is inevitable that eventually, he swears the moon illuminated every single night of his childhood and that wrestling mad bulls in blankets was the premier sport at his academy.

History repeats this cycle with mechanical precision. The elders of our grandfathers' youth sang songs carrying identical burdens; the youth of today will drone out similar nonsense to torment the next generation. "Oh, restore to me the glorious days of fifty years past" has been the universal cry since Adam's fifty-first birthday. Examine the literature of 1835, and you will find poets and novelists demanding the same impossible restitution sought by the German Minnesingers and the Norse saga-writers centuries prior. Even the ancient prophets and Greek philosophers sighed for this same phantom era. According to all accounts, the universe has deteriorated continuously since its inception. One can only conclude that the world was a remarkably delightful spectacle upon its initial unveiling, provided one chooses to remain in the sunlight and accept the rain with good humor.

Nevertheless, it is undeniable that the world was sweeter in that dewy morning of creation, when it was young and unblemished. When the feet of trampling millions had not worn its grass to dust, and when the cacophony of countless cities had not driven silence permanently underground. Life must have been noble and solemn for those free-footed, loose-robed progenitors of humanity, walking hand-in-hand with God beneath the vast sky. They dwelt in sun-drenched tents among lowing herds, drawing their simple needs from Nature's generous hand. They labored, conversed, and contemplated while the great earth rotated in stillness, unburdened by trouble or injustice.

Those days are extinguished. The quiet childhood of Humanity, spent in remote forest glades and beside murmuring rivers, is gone forever. Human life now deepens into adulthood amidst tumult, doubt, and hope. The age of restful peace has passed; we have work to finish and must hasten onward. Though we do not comprehend the specifics of this task or our portion in the grand design, our unconscious hands continue to shape it. Like minute coral insects laboring deep underwater, we strive and struggle for our individual ends, unaware of the vast edifice we are constructing for the Divine.

Let us cease our vain regrets and longing for days that will never return. Our labor lies ahead, not behind us; "Forward!" is our only motto. We must not sit with folded hands, gazing at the past as if it were the completed building; it is merely the foundation. We must not squander our hearts and lives contemplating what might have been, neglecting the potential that awaits. Opportunities flutter away while we mourn lost chances, and the happiness arriving at our doorstep goes unnoticed because we are distracted by the happiness that departed.

Years ago, wandering from the hearth into the enchanted realm of fairy tales, I encountered a valiant knight and true. He had surmounted perils in numerous lands, renowned for his courage and immunity to fear, save perhaps for those rare moments when even a brave soul feels apprehension without shame. One day, as this knight trudged wearily along a arduous road, his spirit faltered, weighed down by the tribulation of the journey. Monstrous rocks hung precariously overhead, threatening to crush him, while chasms yawned on either side, guarded by dark caves inhabited by ferocious robbers and dragons dripping with blood. A darkness as heavy as night enveloped the path. Convinced that pressing forward was futile, the knight decided to seek a lesser-beaten route for his gentle steed. However, in his haste to retreat, he glanced backward and marvelled greatly. Of the entire distance he had ridden, there was nothing visible; yet at his horse's heels lay a mighty abyss, bottomless and unfathomable. Realizing that turning back was impossible, Sir Ghelent prayed to Saint Cuthbert, spurred his steed, and rode forward bravely and joyfully. Nothing harmed him.

There is no return on the road of life. The fragile bridge of time upon which we tread sinks back into eternity with every step taken. The past vanishes from us forever, gathered and stored, belonging to no one anymore. Not a single word can be unsaid; not a single step can be retraced. Thus, it becomes fitting for true knights to spur forward bravely, rather than idly weeping because we cannot recall.

A new life commences for us with every second. Let us advance joyously to meet it. We must press on regardless of our willingness, and we shall walk better with our eyes fixed ahead than with them cast behind.

A friend visited me recently, urging me with great eloquence to master a miraculous system ensuring I never forgot anything. I suspect his eagerness stemmed from my occasional habit of borrowing umbrellas and emerging mid-game of whist with a mild, "Lor! I've been thinking all along that clubs were trumps." Despite the attractive advantages he outlined, I declined his proposal. I harbor no desire to remember everything. Many aspects of most men's lives are better left in the fog. Consider that time, many years ago, when we acted neither honorably nor uprightly as we perhaps should have—that unfortunate deviation from the path of strict probity we committed, and in which, more unfortunately, we were discovered. That act of folly, meanness, and wrong. Well! We paid the penalty, endured the maddening hours of vain remorse, the searing agony of shame, and perhaps the scorn of those we loved. Let us forget. Oh, Father Time, lift with your kindly hands those bitter memories from our overbur
