The realization struck me with the cold clarity of a sudden dawn: the black pirate had held me captive not merely for sport, but because he sensed the approaching salvation. Had he not caught that single, fleeting glance from me, the battleship above would have been directly overhead in a heartbeat. The boarding party, surely already swinging from the keel, would have swarmed our deck, extinguishing my fragile hope of escape in an instant.

I was too seasoned a hand in aerial warfare to panic. Simultaneously, I reversed the engines and dropped the vessel a sheer hundred feet. Above, I watched the dangling figures of the boarding party as the battleship raced over us. Then, with a sharp angle of ascent and the throttle pushed to its final notch, I launched my craft like a bolt from a crossbow, driving my steel prow straight at the whirring propellers of the giant above. If I could but touch them, the massive hull would be crippled for hours, and my escape renewed.

At that precise moment, the sun crested the horizon, revealing a hundred grim, black faces peering over the stern of the pursuing vessel. A roar of rage erupted from a hundred throats. Orders were bellowed, but it was too late to save the propellers. With a deafening crash, we rammed them.

The shock of impact forced me to reverse my engines instantly, but my prow was wedged tight within the hole I had torn in the battleship's stern. I hung there for only a second before tearing away, but that brief interval was ample for the black devils to swarm my deck. There was no resistance; there was no room to fight. We were simply overwhelmed by numbers. Just as swords threatened me, a command from Xodar halted his men.

"Secure them," he ordered, "but do not injure them."

Several pirates had already released Xodar. He now personally attended to my disarming, ensuring I was properly bound. He believed his work secure, yet he underestimated me. Had I been a Martian, the binding would have held, but I smiled inwardly at the puny strands confining my wrists. They were mere cotton string; when the time came, I could snap them as easily as thread.

The girl was bound as well, and soon we were fastened together. Our craft was maneuvered alongside the disabled battleship, and we were transported to its deck. Fully a thousand black men manned the great engine of destruction. Their decks were crowded as they pressed forward, limited only by discipline, to gaze upon their captives.

The girl's beauty elicited brutal comments and vulgar jests. It was evident that these self-proclaimed supermen were far inferior to the red men of Barsoom in refinement and chivalry. My close-cropped black hair and thern complexion drew much attention. When Xodar recounted my fighting ability and strange origin to his fellow nobles, they crowded around me with eager questions. The fact that I wore the harness and metal of a thern killed by a member of my party convinced them I was an enemy of their hereditary foes, placing me on better footing in their estimation.

Without exception, the blacks were handsome and well-built. The officers stood out through the wondrous magnificence of their resplendent trappings. Many harnesses were encrusted with gold, platinum, silver, and precious stones, entirely hiding the leather beneath. The commanding officer's harness was a solid mass of diamonds, blazing against the ebony background of his skin with peculiarly accentuated effulgence. The scene was enchanting: the handsome men, the barbaric splendour of the accoutrements, the polished skeel wood of the deck, the gloriously grained sorapus of the cabins inlaid with priceless jewels, the burnished gold of the handrails, and the shining metal of the guns.

Phaidor and I were taken below decks, still fast bound, and thrown into a small compartment containing a single porthole. As our escort left, they barred the door behind them. We could hear the men working on the broken propellers, and through the porthole, we saw the vessel drifting lazily toward the south.

For some time, neither of us spoke, each lost in thought. I wondered of the fate of Tars Tarkas and Thuvia. Even if they eluded pursuit, they must eventually fall into the hands of either red men or greens, and as fugitives from the Valley Dor, they could expect little else than a swift and terrible death.

How I wished I had accompanied them. I felt certain I could impress the intelligent red men of Barsoom with the wicked deception that cruel superstition had foisted upon them. Tardos Mors would believe me; I was positive of that. He would have the courage of his convictions, assured by my knowledge of his character. Dejah Thoris would believe me; not a doubt entered my head. There were a thousand of my red and green warrior friends who would face eternal damnation gladly for my sake. Like Tars Tarkas, where I led, they would follow.

My only danger lay in escaping the black pirates only to fall into the hands of unfriendly red or green men, which would mean short shrift. Yet, the likelihood of my ever escaping the blacks seemed extremely remote.

Linked by a rope allowing movement of only three or four feet, we sat on a low bench of sorapus wood beneath the porthole. The floor, ceiling, and walls were of carborundum aluminum, a light, impenetrable composition used extensively in Martian fighting ships. As I meditated on the future, my eyes were riveted on the porthole. Suddenly, I looked toward Phaidor. She regarded me with a strange expression I had never seen before. She was very beautiful then.

Instantly, her white lids veiled her eyes, and I thought I detected a delicate flush tinging her cheek. Evidently, she was embarrassed at being caught staring at a "lesser creature," I presumed.

"Do you find the study of the lower orders interesting?" I asked, laughing.

She looked up again with a nervous but relieved little laugh.

"Oh, very," she said, "especially when they have such excellent profiles."

It was my turn to flush, but I did not. I felt she was poking fun at me, and I admired a brave heart that could seek humour on the road to death. So, I laughed with her.

"Do you know where we are going?" she asked.

"To solve the mystery of the eternal hereafter, I imagine," I replied.

"I am going to a worse fate than that," she said, with a little shudder.

"What do you mean?"

"I can only guess," she replied, "since no thern damsel of all the millions stolen by black pirates during the ages has ever returned to narrate her experiences among them. That they never take a man prisoner lends strength to the belief that the fate of the girls they steal is worse than death."

"Is it not a just retribution?" I could not help but ask.

"What do you mean?"

"Do not the therns themselves do likewise with the poor creatures who take the voluntary pilgrimage down the River of Mystery? Was not Thuvia for fifteen years a plaything and a slave? Is it less than just that you should suffer as you have caused others to suffer?"

"You do not understand," she replied. "We therns are a holy race. It is an honour to a lesser creature to be a slave among us. Did we not occasionally save a few of the lower orders that stupidly float down an unknown river to an unknown end, all would become the prey of the plant men and the apes."

"But do you not by every means encourage the superstition among those of the outside world?" I argued. "That is the wickedest of your deeds. Can you tell me why you foster the cruel deception?"

"All life on Barsoom," she said, "is created solely for the support of the race of therns. How else could we live did the outer world not furnish our labour and our food? Think you that a thern would demean himself by labour?"

"It is true then that you eat human flesh?" I asked in horror.

She looked at me in pitying commiseration for my ignorance.

"Truly we eat the flesh of the lower orders. Do not you also?"

"The flesh of beasts, yes," I replied, "but not the flesh of man."

"As man may eat of the flesh of beasts, so may gods eat of the flesh of man. The Holy Therns are the gods of Barsoom."

I was disgusted, and I imagine I showed it.

"You are an unbeliever now," she continued gently, "but should we be fortunate enough to escape the clutches of the black pirates and come again to the court of Matai Shang, I think we shall find an argument to convince you of the error of your ways. And—" she hesitated, "perhaps we shall find a way to keep you as—as—one of us."

Again, her eyes dropped to the floor, and a faint colour suffused her cheek. I could not understand her meaning, nor did I for a long time. Dejah Thoris was wont to say that in some things I was a veritable simpleton, and I guess she was right.

"I fear that I would ill requite your father's hospitality," I answered, "since the first thing that I should do were I a thern would be to set an armed guard at the mouth of the River Iss to escort the poor deluded voyagers back to the outer world. Also, should I devote my life to the extermination of the hideous plant men and their horrible companions, the great white apes."

She looked at me, truly horror-struck.

"No, no," she cried, "you must not say such terribly sacrilegious things—you must not even think them. Should they ever guess that you entertained such frightful thoughts, should we chance to regain the temples of the therns, they would mete out a frightful death to you. Not even my—my—" Again she flushed and started over. "Not even I could save you."

I said no more. Evidently, it was useless. She was even more steeped in superstition than the Martians of the outer world. They only worshipped a beautiful hope for a life of love, peace, and happiness in the hereafter. The therns worshipped the hideous plant men and the apes, or at least revered them as the abodes of the departed spirits of their own dead.

At this point, the door of our prison opened to admit Xodar. He smiled pleasantly at me, and when he smiled, his expression was kindly—anything but cruel or vindictive.

"Since you cannot escape under any circumstances," he said, "I cannot see the necessity for keeping you confined below. I will cut your bonds, and you may come on deck. You will witness something very interesting, and as you never shall return to the outer world, it will do no harm to permit you to see it. You will see what no other than the First Born and their slaves know the existence of—the subterranean entrance to the Holy Land, to the real heaven of Barsoom."

"It will be an excellent lesson for this daughter of the therns," he added, "for she shall see the Temple of Issus, and Issus, perchance, shall embrace her."

Phaidor's head went high.

"What blasphemy is this, dog of a pirate?" she cried. "Issus would wipe out your entire breed an' you ever came within sight of her temple."

"You have much to learn, thern," replied Xodar, with an ugly smile, "nor do I envy you the manner in which you will learn it."

As we came on deck, I saw to my surprise that the vessel was passing over a great field of snow and ice. As far as the eye could reach in any direction, naught else was visible. There could be but one solution to the mystery: we were above the south polar ice cap. Only at the poles of Mars is there ice or snow upon the planet. No sign of life appeared below us. Evidently, we were too far south even for the great fur-bearing animals which the Martians so delight in hunting.

Xodar was at my side as I stood looking out over the ship's rail.

"What course?" I asked him.

"A little west of south," he replied. "You will see the Otz Valley directly. We shall skirt it for a few hundred miles."

"The Otz Valley!" I exclaimed. "But, man, is not there where lie the domains of the therns from which I but just escaped?"

"Yes," answered Xodar. "You crossed this ice field last night in the long chase that you led us. The Otz Valley lies in a mighty depression at the south pole. It is sunk thousands of feet below the level of the surrounding country, like a great round bowl. A hundred miles from its northern boundary rise the Otz Mountains which circle the inner Valley of Dor, in the exact centre of which lies the Lost Sea of Korus. On the shore of this sea stands the Golden Temple of Issus in the Land of the First Born. It is there that we are bound."

As I looked, I commenced to realize why in all the ages only one had escaped from the Valley Dor. My only wonder was that even the one had been successful. To cross this frozen, wind-swept waste of bleak ice alone and on foot would be impossible.

"Only by air boat could the journey be made," I finished aloud.

"It was thus that one did escape the therns in bygone times; but none has ever escaped the First Born," said Xodar, with a touch of pride in his voice.

We had now reached the southernmost extremity of the great ice barrier. It ended abruptly in a sheer wall thousands of feet high, at the base of which stretched a level valley, broken here and there by low rolling hills and little clumps of forest, with tiny rivers formed by the melting of the ice barrier at its base. Once we passed far above what seemed to be a deep canyon-like rift stretching from the ice wall on the north across the valley as far as the eye could reach. "That is the bed of the River Iss," said Xodar. "It runs far beneath
