For a heartbeat, I stood frozen as the horde surged forward, but their initial momentum threw me back. My foot sought purchase on the stone but found only void; I had stumbled into the chasm that had swallowed Issus. Toppling onto the precipice, I lost my balance, clutching the boy tightly against my chest, and plummeted into the abyss.

We struck a polished chute, the aperture above sealing itself with supernatural speed, and we shot downward, unscathed, into a dim chamber deep beneath the arena.

As I rose, the first thing that greeted me was the malevolent visage of Issus, glaring through the heavy iron bars of a grated door.

"Rash mortal!" she shrieked. "You shall pay the terrible price for your blasphemy in this secret cell. Here you shall lie alone in darkness with the rotting corpse of your accomplice beside you, until madness and hunger drive you to feast on the maggots that were once a man."

With that, she vanished, and the faint light in the cell dissolved into absolute, Cimmerian blackness.

"Pleasant old lady," a voice murmured at my side.

"Who speaks?" I asked, my heart hammering.

"'Tis I, your companion," the boy replied. "I have the honor of having fought shoulder to shoulder today with the greatest warrior who ever donned metal upon Barsoom."

"I thank the Gods you live," I said, touching the gash on his head. "I feared that nasty cut was fatal."

"It but stunned me," he replied lightly. "A mere scratch."

"Perhaps it were better if it had been final," I muttered. "We seem trapped in a dire situation, likely to perish of thirst and starvation."

"Where are we?"

"Beneath the arena," I answered. "We fell down the shaft that devoured Issus just as she was about to claim us."

He let out a low chuckle of relief, then reached through the darkness to pull my ear close to his lips.

"Nothing could be better," he whispered. "There are secrets hidden within the secrets of Issus that she herself does not comprehend."

"What do you mean?"

"I labored with the other slaves a year ago remodeling these subterranean galleries," he explained. "At that time, we discovered below these chambers an ancient system of corridors sealed for ages. The overseers explored them, taking several of us along. I know the entire network perfectly."

"There are miles of tunnels honeycombing the ground beneath the gardens and the temple," he continued. "And there is one passage leading down to the lower regions that connect to the water shaft giving access to Omean."

"If we can reach the submarine undetected, we may yet make the sea, dotted with islands where the blacks never venture. There, we might survive for a time, and who knows what fate may aid our escape?"

He spoke in a hushed tone, fearing eavesdroppers even here, so I answered in kind.

"Lead back to Shador, my friend," I whispered. "Xodar, the boy, is there. We planned to escape together; I cannot desert him."

"No," the boy insisted. "One cannot desert a friend. It is better to be recaptured ourselves than to leave him behind."

He began to grope across the floor of the dark chamber, searching for the trapdoor leading to the corridors below. Finally, he signaled me with a low "S-s-t," and I crept toward the sound to find him kneeling at the edge of an opening.

"There is a drop of about ten feet," he whispered. "Hang by your hands; you will land safely on a level floor of soft sand."

Quietly, I lowered myself from the inky cell above into the inky pit below. The darkness was so profound we could not see our hands at arm's length. Never before had I known such a total absence of light as existed in the pits of Issus.

For an instant, I hung suspended in mid-air. There is a peculiar sensation attached to such a feat, difficult to describe. When the feet tread empty air and the distance below is shrouded in shadow, a panic grips the soul at the thought of releasing one's hold and plunging into unknown depths.

Though the boy assured me it was but ten feet to the floor, I felt the same thrill as if hanging over a bottomless pit. Then I released my grip and dropped—four feet onto a soft cushion of sand. The boy followed.

"Raise me to your shoulders," he said, "and I will replace the trap."

Once done, he took my hand, leading me very slowly, pausing frequently to ensure we did not stray into wrong passageways. Soon, we began descending a steep incline.

"It will not be long," he said, "before we see light. At the lower levels, we encounter the same stratum of phosphorescent rock that illuminates Omean."

I shall never forget that journey through the pits of Issus. Devoid of dramatic incidents, it was filled with a strange charm of excitement and adventure, hinging principally on the unguessable antiquity of these long-forgotten corridors. The things hidden in the Stygian darkness could not have been half so wonderful as the pictures my imagination conjured, reviving the ancient peoples of this dying world and setting them once more to their labors, intrigues, mysteries, and cruelties as they made their last stand against the swarming hordes of the dead sea bottoms that had driven them step by step to the world's highest pinnacle, where they now hid behind an impenetrable barrier of superstition.

In addition to the green men, there had been three principal races upon Barsoom: the blacks, the whites, and a race of yellow men. As the planet's waters dried and the seas receded, all other resources dwindled until life became a constant battle for survival. The various races had waged war for ages, and the three higher types had easily bested the green savages of the water places. But now, the receding seas forced them to abandon their fortified cities, adopting a nomadic life that separated them into smaller communities, making them vulnerable to the fierce hordes of green men. The result was a partial amalgamation of the blacks, whites, and yellows, producing the splendid race of red men seen today.

I had always believed all traces of the original races had vanished from Mars, yet within the past four days, I had found both whites and blacks in great multitudes. Could it be possible that in some far-off corner of the planet, a remnant of the ancient yellow race still existed?

My reverie was broken by the boy's low exclamation.

"At last, the lighted way!" he cried. Looking up, I beheld a dim radiance ahead.

As we advanced, the light grew until we emerged into well-lit passageways. Our progress became rapid until we suddenly reached the end of a corridor opening directly onto the ledge surrounding the submarine pool.

The craft lay at her moorings with the hatch uncovered. Raising a finger to his lips and tapping his sword significantly, the youth crept noiselessly toward the vessel. I followed close at his heels.

Silently, we dropped to the deserted deck and crawled on hands and knees toward the hatchway. A stealthy glance below revealed no guards, and with the quickness and soundlessness of cats, we dropped together into the main cabin. Even here, there was no sign of life. Quickly, we covered and secured the hatch.

Then the boy stepped into the pilot house, pressed a button, and the boat sank amid swirling waters toward the bottom of the shaft. Still, there was no scurrying of feet as we had expected. While the boy remained to direct the boat, I slid from cabin to cabin in a futile search for any crew member. The craft was entirely deserted. Such good fortune seemed almost unbelievable.

When I returned to the pilot house to report the discovery, the boy handed me a piece of paper.

"This may explain the absence of the crew," he said.

It was a radio-aerial message addressed to the submarine's commander:

"The slaves have risen. Come with what men you have and those you can gather on the way. Too late to get aid from Omean. They are massacring all within the amphitheatre. Issus is threatened. Haste.

"Zithad is Dator of the guards of Issus," the youth explained. "We gave them a bad scare—one they will not soon forget."

"Let us hope it is but the beginning of the end of Issus," I said.

"Only our first ancestor knows," he replied.

We reached the submarine pool in Omean without incident. Here, we debated the wisdom of sinking the craft before leaving, but finally decided it would add nothing to our chances for escape. There were plenty of blacks on Omean to thwart us if we were apprehended; however, many more coming from the temples and gardens of Issus would not decrease our odds.

Now we faced a quandary regarding how to pass the guards patrolling the island around the pool. Finally, I devised a plan.

"What is the name or title of the officer in charge of these guards?" I asked the boy.

"A fellow named Torith was on duty when we entered this morning," he replied.

"Good. And what is the name of the submarine's commander?"

"Yersted."

I found a dispatch blank in the cabin and wrote the following order:

"Dator Torith: Return these two slaves at once to Shador.

"That will be the simpler way to return," I said, smiling as I handed the forged order to the boy. "Come, we shall see now how well it works."

"But our swords!" he exclaimed. "What shall we say to explain them?"

"Since we cannot explain them, we shall have to leave them behind," I replied.

"Is it not the extreme of rashness to thus put ourselves again, unarmed, in the power of the First Born?"

"It is the only way," I answered. "You may trust me to find a way out of the prison of Shador, and I think, once out, that we shall find no great difficulty in arming ourselves once more in a country which abounds so plentifully in armed men."

"As you say," he replied with a smile and shrug. "I could not follow another leader who inspired greater confidence than you. Come, let us put your ruse to the test."

Boldly, we emerged from the hatchway, leaving our swords behind, and strode to the main exit leading to the sentry's post and the office of the Dator of the guard.

At sight of us, the guards sprang forward in surprise and halted us with leveled rifles. I held out the message to one of them. He took it, saw to whom it was addressed, and turned to hand it to Torith, who was emerging from his office to learn the cause of the commotion.

The black read the order, and for a moment eyed us with evident suspicion.

"Where is Dator Yersted?" he asked, and my heart sank as I cursed myself for a fool in not having sunk the submarine to cover the lie I now had to tell.

"His orders were to return immediately to the temple landing," I replied.

Torith took a half-step toward the entrance to the pool as though to corroborate my story. For that instant, everything hung in the balance; had he done so and found the empty submarine still lying at her wharf, the whole weak fabric of my concoction would have collapsed. But evidently, he decided the message must be genuine, nor indeed was there any good reason to doubt it, since it would scarcely have seemed credible to him that two slaves would voluntarily give themselves into custody in such a manner. It was the very boldness of the plan that rendered it successful.

"Were you connected with the rising of the slaves?" Torith asked. "We have just had meager reports of some such event."

"All were involved," I replied. "But it amounted to little. The guards quickly overcame and killed the majority of us."

He seemed satisfied with this reply. "Take them to Shador," he ordered, turning to a subordinate. We entered a small boat lying beside the island, and in a few minutes, we were disembarking upon Shador.

Here, we were returned to our respective cells; I with Xodar, the boy by himself. Behind locked doors, we were once again prisoners of the First Born.
