Once inside the palace walls, I led Sola to the great dining hall. After she offered the customary greetings to her father, adhering strictly to the formal rites of the Green Men, she began to recount the tale of Dejah Thoris's pilgrimage and her subsequent capture.

"Seven days past," Sola began, "after her private audience with Zat Arras, Princess Dejah Thoris attempted to slip from the palace in the dead of night. Though I had not witnessed the outcome of her interview with the traitor, I knew in my heart that some terrible event had transpired to inflict upon her the keenest mental agony. When I discovered her creeping toward the exit, I needed no further explanation of her destination.

"Hastily rousing a dozen of her most faithful guards, I laid my fears before them. Instantly, they rallied to my side, swearing to follow our beloved Princess wherever her wandering might lead, even to the Sacred Iss and the Valley Dor. We intercepted her but a short distance from the palace gates. With her was only Woola, the faithful hound. When we overtook her, she feigned anger, ordering us to return to the palace; but for once, we disobeyed her command. Realizing that she would not embark upon this final, long pilgrimage alone, she wept and embraced us, and together we marched out into the night, heading south.

"The following day, we encountered a herd of small thoats, and mounting them, we made excellent time. We traveled swiftly and far due south until the morning of the fifth day, when we sighted a great fleet of battleships sailing north. They spotted us before we could seek cover, and soon we were surrounded by a horde of black men. The Princess's guard fought nobly to the very end, but they were swiftly overcome and slain. Only Dejah Thoris and I were spared.

"When she realized she was in the clutches of the black pirates, she attempted to take her own life, but one of the blacks tore her dagger from her grasp. Then they bound us both, rendering our hands useless.

"The fleet pressed northward. It comprised about twenty large battleships, accompanied by numerous small, swift cruisers. That evening, one of the smaller cruisers, which had been far ahead of the main fleet, returned with a prisoner—a young red woman they claimed to have picked up in a range of hills, right under the noses of a fleet of three red Martian battleships.

"From fragments of conversation we overheard, it became evident that the black pirates were searching for a party of fugitives who had escaped them several days prior. Their intense interest in the young woman was clear from the long, earnest interview the fleet commander held with her upon her arrival. Later, she was bound and placed in the compartment with Dejah Thoris and myself.

"The new captive was a girl of striking beauty. She told Dejah Thoris that many years ago she had undertaken a voluntary pilgrimage from the court of her father, the Jeddak of Ptarth. Her name was Thuvia, Princess of Ptarth. Then, turning to Dejah Thoris, she asked who she might be. Upon hearing the answer, Thuvia fell to her knees and kissed the fettered hands of the Princess, confessing that that very morning she had been with John Carter, Prince of Helium, and Carthoris, his son.

"Dejah Thoris could hardly believe her at first, but finally, when the girl narrated all the strange adventures that had befallen her since meeting John Carter—and recounted the deeds of John Carter, Carthoris, and Xodar in the Land of the First Born—Dejah Thoris knew it could be none other than the Prince of Helium. 'For who,' she cried, 'upon all Barsoom other than John Carter could have done the deeds you tell of?' When Thuvia spoke of her love for John Carter and his unwavering loyalty to the Princess of her choice, Dejah Thoris broke down in weeping, cursing Zat Arras and the cruel fate that had driven her from Helium mere days before the return of her beloved lord.

"'I do not blame you for loving him, Thuvia,' Dejah Thoris said, her voice trembling. 'And that your affection for him is pure and sincere, I can well believe from the candor of your avowal to me.'

"The fleet continued north, nearly reaching Helium, but last night they evidently realized that John Carter had indeed escaped them. Turning south once more, shortly thereafter a guard entered our compartment and dragged me to the deck.

'There is no place in the Land of the First Born for a green one,' he sneered, giving me a terrific shove that sent me toppling from the deck of the battleship. Evidently, this seemed to him the easiest method of ridding the vessel of my presence and ending my life simultaneously.

"But a kind fate intervened. By a miracle, I escaped with but slight bruises. The ship was moving slowly at the time, and as I lunged overboard into the darkness beneath, I shuddered at the awful plunge I thought awaited me, for all day the fleet had sailed thousands of feet above the ground. To my utter surprise, however, I struck upon a soft mass of vegetation merely twenty feet from the deck. In fact, the keel of the vessel must have been grazing the surface of the ground at that precise moment.

"I lay all night where I had fallen. The next morning brought an explanation of this fortunate coincidence. As the sun rose, I saw a vast panorama of sea bottom and distant hills lying far below me. I was upon the highest peak of a lofty range. The fleet, in the darkness of the preceding night, had barely grazed the crest of the hills. In the brief span that they hovered close to the surface, the black guard had pitched me, as he supposed, to my death.

"A few miles west lay a great waterway. When I reached it, I found to my delight that it belonged to Helium. Here, a thoat was procured for me—the rest, as you know, is history."

For many minutes, no one spoke. The thought of Dejah Thoris in the clutches of the First Born sent a chill through me, but suddenly, the old fire of unconquerable self-confidence surged within me. I sprang to my feet, threw back my shoulders, raised my sword, and took a solemn vow to reach, rescue, and avenge my Princess.

A hundred swords leaped from their scabbards, and a hundred fighting-men sprang onto the table-top, pledging their lives and fortunes to the expedition. My plans were already formulated. I thanked each loyal friend, leaving Carthoris to entertain them, and withdrew to my own audience chamber with Kantos Kan, Tars Tarkas, Xodar, and Hor Vastus.

Here we discussed the details of our expedition until long after dark. Xodar was positive that Issus would choose both Dejah Thoris and Thuvia to serve her for a year.

"For that length of time at least, they will be comparatively safe," he reasoned. "And we will at least know where to look for them."

Regarding the equipping of a fleet to enter Omean, the details were left to Kantos Kan and Xodar. The former agreed to take such vessels as we required into dock as rapidly as possible, where Xodar would direct their equipment with water propellers. For many years, the black had been in charge of refitting captured battleships to navigate Omean, and thus was familiar with the construction of the propellers, housings, and auxiliary gearing required.

It was estimated that it would require six months to complete our preparations, given that the utmost secrecy must be maintained to keep the project from the ears of Zat Arras. Kantos Kan was confident now that the man's ambitions were fully aroused and that nothing short of the title of Jeddak of Helium would satisfy him.

"I doubt," he said, "if he would even welcome Dejah Thoris' return, for it would mean another nearer the throne than he. With you and Carthoris out of the way, there would be little to prevent him from assuming the title of Jeddak. You may rest assured that so long as he is supreme here, there is no safety for either of you."

"There is a way," cried Hor Vastus, "to thwart him effectually and forever."

"What?" I asked.

He smiled.

"I shall whisper it here, but some day I shall stand upon the dome of the Temple of Reward and shout it to cheering multitudes below."

"What do you mean?" asked Kantos Kan.

"John Carter, Jeddak of Helium," said Hor Vastus in a low voice.

The eyes of my companions lighted, and grim smiles of pleasure and anticipation overspread their faces, as each turned toward me questioningly. But I shook my head.

"No, my friends," I said, smiling, "I thank you, but it cannot be. Not yet, at least. When we know that Tardos Mors and Mors Kajak are gone to return no more; if I be here, then I shall join you all to see that the people of Helium are permitted to choose fairly their next Jeddak. Whom they choose may count upon the loyalty of my sword, nor shall I seek the honor for myself. Until then, Tardos Mors is Jeddak of Helium, and Zat Arras is his representative."

"As you will, John Carter," said Hor Vastus, "but—What was that?" he whispered, pointing toward the window overlooking the gardens.

The words were scarce out of his mouth ere he had sprung to the balcony without.

"There he goes!" he cried excitedly. "The guards! Below there! The guards!"

We were close behind him, and all saw the figure of a man run quickly across a little piece of sward and disappear in the shrubbery beyond.

"He was on the balcony when I first saw him," cried Hor Vastus. "Quick! Let us follow him!"

Together we ran to the gardens, but even though we scoured the grounds with the entire guard for hours, no trace could we find of the night marauder.

"What do you make of it, Kantos Kan?" asked Tars Tarkas.

"A spy sent by Zat Arras," he replied. "It was ever his way."

"He will have something interesting to report to his master then," laughed Hor Vastus.

"I hope he heard only our references to a new Jeddak," I said. "If he overheard our plans to rescue Dejah Thoris, it will mean civil war, for he will attempt to thwart us, and in that I will not be thwarted. There would I turn against Tardos Mors himself, were it necessary. If it throws all Helium into a bloody conflict, I shall go on with these plans to save my Princess. Nothing shall stay me now short of death. And should I die, my friends, will you take oath to prosecute the search for her and bring her back in safety to her grandfather's court?"

Upon the hilt of his sword, each of them swore to do as I had asked.

It was agreed that the battleships to be remodeled should be ordered to Hastor, another Heliumetic city far to the southwest. Kantos Kan thought that the docks there, in addition to their regular work, would accommodate at least six battleships at a time. As he was commander-in-chief of the navy, it would be a simple matter for him to order the vessels there as they could be handled, and thereafter keep the remodeled fleet in remote parts of the empire until we should be ready to assemble it for the dash upon Omean.

It was late that night before our conference broke up, but each man there had his particular duties outlined, and the details of the entire plan had been mapped out. Kantos Kan and Xodar were to attend to the remodelling of the ships. Tars Tarkas was to get into communication with Thark and learn the sentiments of his people toward his return from Dor. If favorable, he was to repair immediately to Thark and devote his time to assembling a great horde of green warriors whom it was our plan to send in transports directly to the Valley Dor and the Temple of Issus, while the fleet entered Omean and destroyed the vessels of the First Born.

Upon Hor Vastus devolved the delicate mission of organizing a secret force of fighting-men sworn to follow John Carter wherever he might lead. As we estimated that it would require over a million men to man the thousand great battleships we intended to use on Omean and the transports for the green men, as well as the ships that were to convoy the transports, it was no trifling job that Hor Vastus had before him.

After they had left, I bid Carthoris good-night, for I was very tired, and going to my own apartments, bathed and lay down upon my sleeping silks and furs for the first good night's sleep I had had an opportunity to look forward to since I had returned to Barsoom. But even now, I was to be disappointed.

How long I slept I do not know. When I awoke suddenly, it was to find a half-dozen powerful men upon me, a gag already in my mouth, and a moment later my arms and legs securely bound. So quickly had they worked and to such good purpose that I was utterly beyond the power to resist them by the time I was fully awake.

Never a word did they speak, and the gag effectually prevented me from doing so. Silently they lifted me and bore me toward the door of my chamber. As they passed the window through which the farther moon was casting its brilliant beams, I saw that each of the party had his face swathed in layers of silk—I could not recognize one of them.

When they had come into the corridor with me, they turned toward a secret panel in the wall which led to the passage terminating in the pits beneath the palace. That any knew of this panel outside my own household, I was doubtful. Yet the leader of the band did not hesitate a moment. He stepped directly to the panel, touched the concealed button, and as the door swung open, he stood aside while his companions entered with me. Then he closed the panel behind him and followed us.

Down through the passageways to the pits we went
