“PACK CLOUDS AWAY.” “For joy or grief, for hope or fear, For all hereafter, as for here, In peace or strife, in storm or shine.” ANON. Edith went about on tip-toe, and checked Sholto in all loud speaking that next morning, as if any sudden noise would interrupt the conference that was taking place in the drawing-room. Two o’clock came; and they still sate there with closed doors. Then there was a man’s footstep running down stairs; and Edith peeped out of the drawing-room. “Well, Henry?” said she, with a look of interrogation. “Well!” said he, rather shortly. “Come in to lunch!” “No, thank you, I can’t. I’ve lost too much time here already.” “Then it’s not all settled?” said Edith, despondingly. “No! not at all. It never will be settled, if the ‘it’ is what I conjecture you mean.

you would not understand: Investments, and leases, and value of land.” “Oh, go away if that’s all. You and she will be unbearably stupid, if you’ve been talking all this time about such weary things.” “Very well. I’m coming again to-morrow, and bringing Mr. Thornton with me, to have some more talk with Miss Hale.” “Mr. Thornton! What has he to do with it?” “He is Miss Hale’s tenant,” said Mr. Lennox, turning away. “And he wishes to give up his lease.” “Oh! very well. I can’t understand details, so don’t give them me.” “The only detail I want you to understand is, to let us have the back drawing-room undisturbed, as it was to-day. In general, the children and servants are so in and out, that I can never get any business satisfactorily explained; and the arrangements we have to make to-morrow are of importance.” No one ever knew why Mr.

thrown back to the starting-point which requires the hopeful energy of youth—to feel one half of life gone, and nothing done—nothing remaining of wasted opportunity, but the bitter recollection that it has been. Miss Hale, I would rather not hear Mr. Lennox’s opinion of my affairs. Those who are happy and successful themselves are too apt to make light of the misfortunes of others.” “You are unjust,” said Margaret, gently. “Mr. Lennox has only spoken of the great probability which he believes there to be of your redeeming—your more than redeeming what you have lost—don’t speak till I have ended—pray don’t.” And collecting herself once more, she went on rapidly turning over some law papers, and statement of accounts in a trembling hurried manner. “Oh! here it is! and—he drew me out a proposal—I wish he was here to explain it—showing that if you would take some money of mine, eighteen hundred and fifty-seven pounds, lying just at this moment unused in the bank, and bringing me in only two and a half per cent.—you could pay me much better interest, and might go on working Marlborough Mills.” Her voice had cleared itself and become more steady.

head; more closely hidden was the face, almost resting on the table before her. He came close to her. He knelt by her side, to bring his face to a level with her ear; and whispered—panted out the words:— “Take care.—If you do not speak—I shall claim you as my own in some strange presumptuous way.—Send me away at once, if I must go;—Margaret!—” At that third call she turned her face, still covered with her small white hands, towards him, and laid it on his shoulder, even hiding it there; and it was too delicious to feel her soft cheek against his, for him to wish to see either deep blushes or loving eyes. He clasped her close. But they both kept silence. At length she murmured in a broken voice: “Oh, Mr. Thornton, I am not good enough!” “Not good enough!

to see the place where Margaret grew to what she is, even at the worst time of all, when I had no hope of ever calling her mine. I went there on my return from Havre.” “You must give them to me,” she said, trying to take them out of his hand with gentle violence. “Very well. Only you must pay me for them!” “How shall I ever tell Aunt Shaw?” she whispered, after some time of delicious silence. “Let me speak to her.” “Oh, no! I owe to her,—but what will she say?” “I can guess. Her first exclamation will be, ‘That man!’” “Hush!” said Margaret, “or I shall try and show you your mother’s indignant tones as she says, ‘That woman!’” THE END. THE WALTER SCOTT PRESS, NEWCASTLE-ON TYNE.
