For sufficient reasons, which this narrative will itself unfold as it advances, a fictitious name must be bestowed upon the old Cathedral town. Let it stand in these pages as Cloisterham. It was once possibly known to the Druids by another name, and certainly to the Romans by another, and to the Saxons by another, and to the Normans by another; and a name more or less in the course of many centuries can be of little moment to its dusty chronicles. An ancient city, Cloisterham, and no meet dwelling-place for any one with hankerings after the noisy world. A monotonous, silent city, deriving an earthy flavour throughout from its Cathedral crypt, and so abounding in vestiges of monastic graves, that the Cloisterham children grow small salad in the dust of abbots and abbesses, and make dirt-pies of nuns and friars; while every ploughman in its outlying fields renders to once puissant Lord Treasurers, Archbishops, Bishops, and such-like, the attention which the Ogre in the story-book desired to render to his unbidden visitor, and grinds their bones to make his bread.

A drowsy city, Cloisterham, whose inhabitants seem to suppose, with an inconsistency more strange than rare, that all its changes lie behind it, and that there are no more to come. A queer moral to derive from antiquity, yet older than any traceable antiquity. So silent are the streets of Cloisterham (though prone to echo on the smallest provocation), that of a summer-day the sunblinds of its shops scarce dare to flap in the south wind; while the sun-browned tramps, who pass along and stare, quicken their limp a little, that they may the sooner get beyond the confines of its oppressive respectability.

of achievement, seeing that the streets of Cloisterham city are little more than one narrow street by which you get into it and get out of it: the rest being mostly disappointing yards with pumps in them and no thoroughfare—exception made of the Cathedral-close, and a paved Quaker settlement, in colour and general confirmation very like a Quakeress’s bonnet, up in a shady corner. In a word, a city of another and a bygone time is Cloisterham, with its hoarse Cathedral-bell, its hoarse rooks hovering about the Cathedral tower, its hoarser and less distinct rooks in the stalls far beneath. Fragments of old wall, saint’s chapel, chapter-house, convent and monastery, have got incongruously or obstructively built into many of its houses and gardens, much as kindred jumbled notions have become incorporated into many of its citizens’ minds. All things in it are of the past.

conventual uses. On the trim gate enclosing its old courtyard is a resplendent brass plate flashing forth the legend: “Seminary for Young Ladies. Miss Twinkleton.” The house-front is so old and worn, and the brass plate is so shining and staring, that the general result has reminded imaginative strangers of a battered old beau with a large modern eye-glass stuck in his blind eye. Whether the nuns of yore, being of a submissive rather than a stiff-necked generation, habitually bent their contemplative heads to avoid collision with the beams in the low ceilings of the many chambers of their House; whether they sat in its long low windows telling their beads for their mortification, instead of making necklaces of them for their adornment; whether they were ever walled up alive in odd angles and jutting gables of the building for having some ineradicable leaven of busy mother Nature in them which has kept the fermenting world alive ever since; these may be matters of interest to its haunting ghosts (if any), but constitute no item in Miss Twinkleton’s half-yearly accounts.

They are neither of Miss Twinkleton’s inclusive regulars, nor of her extras. The lady who undertakes the poetical department of the establishment at so much (or so little) a quarter has no pieces in her list of recitals bearing on such unprofitable questions. As, in some cases of drunkenness, and in others of animal magnetism, there are two states of consciousness which never clash, but each of which pursues its separate course as though it were continuous instead of broken (thus, if I hide my watch when I am drunk, I must be drunk again before I can remember where), so Miss Twinkleton has two distinct and separate phases of being. Every night, the moment the young ladies have retired to rest, does Miss Twinkleton smarten up her curls a little, brighten up her eyes a little, and become a sprightlier Miss Twinkleton than the young ladies have ever seen.

is one Mrs. Tisher: a deferential widow with a weak back, a chronic sigh, and a suppressed voice, who looks after the young ladies’ wardrobes, and leads them to infer that she has seen better days. Perhaps this is the reason why it is an article of faith with the servants, handed down from race to race, that the departed Tisher was a hairdresser. The pet pupil of the Nuns’ House is Miss Rosa Bud, of course called Rosebud; wonderfully pretty, wonderfully childish, wonderfully whimsical. An awkward interest (awkward because romantic) attaches to Miss Bud in the minds of the young ladies, on account of its being known to them that a husband has been chosen for her by will and bequest, and that her guardian is bound down to bestow her on that husband when he comes of age.

lady who is “practising,” practises out of time; and the French class becomes so demoralised that the mark goes round as briskly as the bottle at a convivial party in the last century. On the afternoon of the day next after the dinner of two at the gatehouse, the bell is rung with the usual fluttering results. “Mr. Edwin Drood to see Miss Rosa.” This is the announcement of the parlour-maid in chief. Miss Twinkleton, with an exemplary air of melancholy on her, turns to the sacrifice, and says, “You may go down, my dear.” Miss Bud goes down, followed by all eyes. Mr. Edwin Drood is waiting in Miss Twinkleton’s own parlour: a dainty room, with nothing more directly scholastic in it than a terrestrial and a celestial globe. These expressive machines imply (to parents and guardians) that even when Miss Twinkleton retires into the bosom of privacy, duty may at any moment compel her to become a sort of Wandering Jewess, scouring the earth and soaring through the skies in search of knowledge for her pupils.

appears to have a thumb in the corner of its mouth while making this complaint. “You give me an affectionate reception, Pussy, I must say.” “Well, I will in a minute, Eddy, but I can’t just yet. How are you?” (very shortly.) “I am unable to reply that I am much the better for seeing you, Pussy, inasmuch as I see nothing of you.” This second remonstrance brings a dark, bright, pouting eye out from a corner of the apron; but it swiftly becomes invisible again, as the apparition exclaims: “O good gracious! you have had half your hair cut off!” “I should have done better to have had my head cut off, I think,” says Edwin, rumpling the hair in question, with a fierce glance at the looking-glass, and giving an impatient stamp. “Shall I go?” “No; you needn’t go just yet, Eddy.

I like them very much. They are beauties.” “Well, that’s something,” the affianced replies, half grumbling. “The smallest encouragement thankfully received. And how did you pass your birthday, Pussy?” “Delightfully! Everybody gave me a present. And we had a feast. And we had a ball at night.” “A feast and a ball, eh? These occasions seem to go off tolerably well without me, Pussy.” “De-lightfully!” cries Rosa, in a quite spontaneous manner, and without the least pretence of reserve. “Hah! And what was the feast?” “Tarts, oranges, jellies, and shrimps.” “Any partners at the ball?” “We danced with one another, of course, sir. But some of the girls made game to be their brothers. It was so droll!” “Did anybody make game to be—” “To be you? O dear yes!” cries Rosa, laughing with great enjoyment. “That was the first thing done.” “I hope she did it pretty well,” says Edwin rather doubtfully.

am sorry for the poor old place. Somehow, I feel as if it would miss me, when I am gone so far away, so young.” “Perhaps we had better stop short, Rosa?” She looks up at him with a swift bright look; next moment shakes her head, sighs, and looks down again. “That is to say, is it, Pussy, that we are both resigned?” She nods her head again, and after a short silence, quaintly bursts out with: “You know we must be married, and married from here, Eddy, or the poor girls will be so dreadfully disappointed!” For the moment there is more of compassion, both for her and for himself, in her affianced husband’s face, than there is of love. He checks the look, and asks: “Shall I take you out for a walk, Rosa dear?” Rosa dear does not seem at all clear on this point, until her face, which has been comically reflective, brightens.

and keep close to the house yourself—squeeze and graze yourself against it.” “By all means, Rosa, if you wish it. Might I ask why?” “O! because I don’t want the girls to see you.” “It’s a fine day; but would you like me to carry an umbrella up?” “Don’t be foolish, sir. You haven’t got polished leather boots on,” pouting, with one shoulder raised. “Perhaps that might escape the notice of the girls, even if they did see me,” remarks Edwin, looking down at his boots with a sudden distaste for them. “Nothing escapes their notice, sir. And then I know what would happen. Some of them would begin reflecting on me by saying (for they are free) that they never will on any account engage themselves to lovers without polished leather boots. Hark! Miss Twinkleton. I’ll ask for leave.” That discreet lady being indeed heard without, inquiring of nobody in a blandly conversational tone as she advances: “Eh?

him (which he rather indignantly declines), begins to partake of it with great zest: previously taking off and rolling up a pair of little pink gloves, like rose-leaves, and occasionally putting her little pink fingers to her rosy lips, to cleanse them from the Dust of Delight that comes off the Lumps. “Now, be a good-tempered Eddy, and pretend. And so you are engaged?” “And so I am engaged.” “Is she nice?” “Charming.” “Tall?” “Immensely tall!” Rosa being short. “Must be gawky, I should think,” is Rosa’s quiet commentary. “I beg your pardon; not at all,” contradiction rising in him. “What is termed a fine woman; a splendid woman.” “Big nose, no doubt,” is the quiet commentary again. “Not a little one, certainly,” is the quick reply, (Rosa’s being a little one.) “Long pale nose, with a red knob in the middle.

turn of his eyes downward upon the fairy figure: “do you object, Rosa, to her feeling that interest?” “Object? my dear Eddy! But really, doesn’t she hate boilers and things?” “I can answer for her not being so idiotic as to hate Boilers,” he returns with angry emphasis; “though I cannot answer for her views about Things; really not understanding what Things are meant.” “But don’t she hate Arabs, and Turks, and Fellahs, and people?” “Certainly not.” Very firmly. “At least she must hate the Pyramids? Come, Eddy?” “Why should she be such a little—tall, I mean—goose, as to hate the Pyramids, Rosa?” “Ah! you should hear Miss Twinkleton,” often nodding her head, and much enjoying the Lumps, “bore about them, and then you wouldn’t ask. Tiresome old burying-grounds! Isises, and Ibises, and Cheopses, and Pharaohses; who cares about them?

were. If you are, why haven’t you mentioned it to me? I can’t find out your plans by instinct.” “Now, Rosa, you know very well what I mean, my dear.” “Well then, why did you begin with your detestable red-nosed giantesses? And she would, she would, she would, she would, she WOULD powder it!” cries Rosa, in a little burst of comical contradictory spleen. “Somehow or other, I never can come right in these discussions,” says Edwin, sighing and becoming resigned. “How is it possible, sir, that you ever can come right when you’re always wrong? And as to Belzoni, I suppose he’s dead;—I’m sure I hope he is—and how can his legs or his chokes concern you?” “It is nearly time for your return, Rosa. We have not had a very happy walk, have we?” “A happy walk? A detestably unhappy walk, sir.

seeming to involve the enforced infliction of himself upon her, Edwin Drood stands watching her as she childishly cries and sobs, with both hands to the handkerchief at her eyes, and then—she becoming more composed, and indeed beginning in her young inconstancy to laugh at herself for having been so moved—leads her to a seat hard by, under the elm-trees. [Illustration: Under the trees] “One clear word of understanding, Pussy dear. I am not clever out of my own line—now I come to think of it, I don’t know that I am particularly clever in it—but I want to do right. There is not—there may be—I really don’t see my way to what I want to say, but I must say it before we part—there is not any other young—” “O no, Eddy! It’s generous of you to ask me; but no, no, no!” They have come very near to the Cathedral windows, and at this moment the organ and the choir sound out sublimely.

sight empty, Edwin bends down his face to Rosebud’s. She remonstrates, laughing, and is a childish schoolgirl again. “Eddy, no! I’m too sticky to be kissed. But give me your hand, and I’ll blow a kiss into that.” He does so. She breathes a light breath into it and asks, retaining it and looking into it:— “Now say, what do you see?” “See, Rosa?” “Why, I thought you Egyptian boys could look into a hand and see all sorts of phantoms. Can’t you see a happy Future?” For certain, neither of them sees a happy Present, as the gate opens and closes, and one goes in, and the other goes away.
