The two young men, having seen the damsels, their charges, enter the courtyard of the Nuns’ House, and finding themselves coldly stared at by the brazen door-plate, as if the battered old beau with the glass in his eye were insolent, look at one another, look along the perspective of the moonlit street, and slowly walk away together. “Do you stay here long, Mr. Drood?” says Neville. “Not this time,” is the careless answer. “I leave for London again, to-morrow. But I shall be here, off and on, until next Midsummer; then I shall take my leave of Cloisterham, and England too; for many a long day, I expect.” “Are you going abroad?” “Going to wake up Egypt a little,” is the condescending answer. “Are you reading?” “Reading?” repeats Edwin Drood, with a touch of contempt. “No. Doing, working, engineering.

his remark in a watchfully advancing, and yet furtive and shy manner, very expressive of that peculiar air already noticed, of being at once hunter and hunted. Edwin has made his retort with an abruptness not at all polite. They stop and interchange a rather heated look. “I hope,” says Neville, “there is no offence, Mr. Drood, in my innocently referring to your betrothal?” “By George!” cries Edwin, leading on again at a somewhat quicker pace; “everybody in this chattering old Cloisterham refers to it. I wonder no public-house has been set up, with my portrait for the sign of The Betrothed’s Head. Or Pussy’s portrait. One or the other.” “I am not accountable for Mr. Crisparkle’s mentioning the matter to me, quite openly,” Neville begins. “No; that’s true; you are not,” Edwin Drood assents. “But,” resumes Neville, “I am accountable for mentioning it to you.

But I live a busy life, and I speak under correction by you readers, who ought to know everything, and I daresay do.” By this time they had both become savage; Mr. Neville out in the open; Edwin Drood under the transparent cover of a popular tune, and a stop now and then to pretend to admire picturesque effects in the moonlight before him. “It does not seem to me very civil in you,” remarks Neville, at length, “to reflect upon a stranger who comes here, not having had your advantages, to try to make up for lost time. But, to be sure, I was not brought up in ‘busy life,’ and my ideas of civility were formed among Heathens.” “Perhaps, the best civility, whatever kind of people we are brought up among,” retorts Edwin Drood, “is to mind our own business.

it?” “By whom, for instance?” asks Edwin Drood, coming to a halt, and surveying the other with a look of disdain. But, here a startling right hand is laid on Edwin’s shoulder, and Jasper stands between them. For, it would seem that he, too, has strolled round by the Nuns’ House, and has come up behind them on the shadowy side of the road. “Ned, Ned, Ned!” he says; “we must have no more of this. I don’t like this. I have overheard high words between you two. Remember, my dear boy, you are almost in the position of host to-night. You belong, as it were, to the place, and in a manner represent it towards a stranger. Mr. Neville is a stranger, and you should respect the obligations of hospitality. And, Mr. Neville,” laying his left hand on the inner shoulder of that young gentleman, and thus walking on between them, hand to shoulder on either side: “you will pardon me; but I appeal to you to govern your temper too.

had better not say anything having the appearance of a remonstrance or condition; it might not seem generous. Frankly and freely, you see there is no anger in Ned. Frankly and freely, there is no anger in you, Mr. Neville?” “None at all, Mr. Jasper.” Still, not quite so frankly or so freely; or, be it said once again, not quite so carelessly perhaps. “All over then! Now, my bachelor gatehouse is a few yards from here, and the heater is on the fire, and the wine and glasses are on the table, and it is not a stone’s throw from Minor Canon Corner. Ned, you are up and away to-morrow. We will carry Mr. Neville in with us, to take a stirrup-cup.” “With all my heart, Jack.” “And with all mine, Mr. Jasper.” Neville feels it impossible to say less, but would rather not go.

Neville?” shading the lamp to throw the light upon it. “I recognise it, but it is far from flattering the original.” “O, you are hard upon it! It was done by Ned, who made me a present of it.” “I am sorry for that, Mr. Drood.” Neville apologises, with a real intention to apologise; “if I had known I was in the artist’s presence—” “O, a joke, sir, a mere joke,” Edwin cuts in, with a provoking yawn. “A little humouring of Pussy’s points! I’m going to paint her gravely, one of these days, if she’s good.” The air of leisurely patronage and indifference with which this is said, as the speaker throws himself back in a chair and clasps his hands at the back of his head, as a rest for it, is very exasperating to the excitable and excited Neville.

“My sister’s consent to sit for it being first got, I suppose? As it never will be got, I am afraid I shall never see what you can do. I must bear the loss.” Jasper turns round from the fire, fills a large goblet glass for Neville, fills a large goblet glass for Edwin, and hands each his own; then fills for himself, saying: “Come, Mr. Neville, we are to drink to my nephew, Ned. As it is his foot that is in the stirrup—metaphorically—our stirrup-cup is to be devoted to him. Ned, my dearest fellow, my love!” Jasper sets the example of nearly emptying his glass, and Neville follows it. Edwin Drood says, “Thank you both very much,” and follows the double example. “Look at him,” cries Jasper, stretching out his hand admiringly and tenderly, though rallyingly too. “See where he lounges so easily, Mr.

apologetic for having my way smoothed as you describe. But you know what I know, Jack, and it may not be so very easy as it seems, after all. May it, Pussy?” To the portrait, with a snap of his thumb and finger. “We have got to hit it off yet; haven’t we, Pussy? You know what I mean, Jack.” [Illustration: On dangerous ground] His speech has become thick and indistinct. Jasper, quiet and self-possessed, looks to Neville, as expecting his answer or comment. When Neville speaks, his speech is also thick and indistinct. “It might have been better for Mr. Drood to have known some hardships,” he says, defiantly. “Pray,” retorts Edwin, turning merely his eyes in that direction, “pray why might it have been better for Mr. Drood to have known some hardships?” “Ay,” Jasper assents, with an air of interest; “let us know why?” “Because they might have made him more sensible,” says Neville, “of good fortune that is not by any means necessarily the result of his own merits.” Mr.

long way off, I believe? Yes; I see! That part of the world is at a safe distance.” “Say here, then,” rejoins the other, rising in a fury. “Say anywhere! Your vanity is intolerable, your conceit is beyond endurance; you talk as if you were some rare and precious prize, instead of a common boaster. You are a common fellow, and a common boaster.” “Pooh, pooh,” says Edwin Drood, equally furious, but more collected; “how should you know? You may know a black common fellow, or a black common boaster, when you see him (and no doubt you have a large acquaintance that way); but you are no judge of white men.” This insulting allusion to his dark skin infuriates Neville to that violent degree, that he flings the dregs of his wine at Edwin Drood, and is in the act of flinging the goblet after it, when his arm is caught in the nick of time by Jasper.

waiting to be struggled with, and to struggle to the death. But, nothing happening, and the moon looking down upon him as if he were dead after a fit of wrath, he holds his steam-hammer beating head and heart, and staggers away. Then, he becomes half-conscious of having heard himself bolted and barred out, like a dangerous animal; and thinks what shall he do? Some wildly passionate ideas of the river dissolve under the spell of the moonlight on the Cathedral and the graves, and the remembrance of his sister, and the thought of what he owes to the good man who has but that very day won his confidence and given him his pledge. He repairs to Minor Canon Corner, and knocks softly at the door. It is Mr. Crisparkle’s custom to sit up last of the early household, very softly touching his piano and practising his favourite parts in concerted vocal music.

have had a very little indeed to drink, and that it overcame me in the strangest and most sudden manner.” “Mr. Neville, Mr. Neville,” says the Minor Canon, shaking his head with a sorrowful smile; “I have heard that said before.” “I think—my mind is much confused, but I think—it is equally true of Mr. Jasper’s nephew, sir.” “Very likely,” is the dry rejoinder. “We quarrelled, sir. He insulted me most grossly. He had heated that tigerish blood I told you of to-day, before then.” “Mr. Neville,” rejoins the Minor Canon, mildly, but firmly: “I request you not to speak to me with that clenched right hand. Unclench it, if you please.” “He goaded me, sir,” pursues the young man, instantly obeying, “beyond my power of endurance. I cannot say whether or no he meant it at first, but he did it.

of wretched self-reproach. The gentle Minor Canon has had it in his thoughts to leave the room, without a word. But looking round at the door, and seeing this dejected figure, he turns back to it, touches it with a mild hand, says “Good night!” A sob is his only acknowledgment. He might have had many a worse; perhaps, could have had few better. Another soft knock at the outer door attracts his attention as he goes down-stairs. He opens it to Mr. Jasper, holding in his hand the pupil’s hat. “We have had an awful scene with him,” says Jasper, in a low voice. “Has it been so bad as that?” “Murderous!” Mr. Crisparkle remonstrates: “No, no, no. Do not use such strong words.” “He might have laid my dear boy dead at my feet. It is no fault of his, that he did not.
