Nothing occurred in the night to flutter the tired dove; and the dove arose refreshed. With Mr. Grewgious, when the clock struck ten in the morning, came Mr. Crisparkle, who had come at one plunge out of the river at Cloisterham. “Miss Twinkleton was so uneasy, Miss Rosa,” he explained to her, “and came round to Ma and me with your note, in such a state of wonder, that, to quiet her, I volunteered on this service by the very first train to be caught in the morning. I wished at the time that you had come to me; but now I think it best that you did as you did, and came to your guardian.” “I did think of you,” Rosa told him; “but Minor Canon Corner was so near him—” “I understand. It was quite natural.” “I have told Mr.

the door—after having rapped, and been authorised to present herself—announcing that a gentleman wished for a word with another gentleman named Crisparkle, if any such gentleman were there. If no such gentleman were there, he begged pardon for being mistaken. “Such a gentleman is here,” said Mr. Crisparkle, “but is engaged just now.” “Is it a dark gentleman?” interposed Rosa, retreating on her guardian. “No, Miss, more of a brown gentleman.” “You are sure not with black hair?” asked Rosa, taking courage. “Quite sure of that, Miss. Brown hair and blue eyes.” “Perhaps,” hinted Mr. Grewgious, with habitual caution, “it might be well to see him, reverend sir, if you don’t object. When one is in a difficulty or at a loss, one never knows in what direction a way out may chance to open. It is a business principle of mine, in such a case, not to close up any direction, but to keep an eye on every direction that may present itself.

instant! Tartar!” The two shook hands with the greatest heartiness, and then went the wonderful length—for Englishmen—of laying their hands each on the other’s shoulders, and looking joyfully each into the other’s face. “My old fag!” said Mr. Crisparkle. “My old master!” said Mr. Tartar. “You saved me from drowning!” said Mr. Crisparkle. “After which you took to swimming, you know!” said Mr. Tartar. “God bless my soul!” said Mr. Crisparkle. “Amen!” said Mr. Tartar. And then they fell to shaking hands most heartily again. “Imagine,” exclaimed Mr. Crisparkle, with glistening eyes: “Miss Rosa Bud and Mr. Grewgious, imagine Mr. Tartar, when he was the smallest of juniors, diving for me, catching me, a big heavy senior, by the hair of the head, and striking out for the shore with me like a water-giant!” “Imagine my not letting him sink, as I was his fag!” said Mr.

the room, so unexpected and unaccountable that they all stared at him, doubtful whether he was choking or had the cramp—“I think I have an idea. I believe I have had the pleasure of seeing Mr. Tartar’s name as tenant of the top set in the house next the top set in the corner?” “Yes, sir,” returned Mr. Tartar. “You are right so far.” “I am right so far,” said Mr. Grewgious. “Tick that off;” which he did, with his right thumb on his left. “Might you happen to know the name of your neighbour in the top set on the other side of the party-wall?” coming very close to Mr. Tartar, to lose nothing of his face, in his shortness of sight. “Landless.” “Tick that off,” said Mr. Grewgious, taking another trot, and then coming back. “No personal knowledge, I suppose, sir?” “Slight, but some.” “Tick that off,” said Mr.

to say, to extend my flower-garden to his windows.” “Would you have the kindness to take seats?” said Mr. Grewgious. “I have an idea!” They complied; Mr. Tartar none the less readily, for being all abroad; and Mr. Grewgious, seated in the centre, with his hands upon his knees, thus stated his idea, with his usual manner of having got the statement by heart. “I cannot as yet make up my mind whether it is prudent to hold open communication under present circumstances, and on the part of the fair member of the present company, with Mr. Neville or Miss Helena. I have reason to know that a local friend of ours (on whom I beg to bestow a passing but a hearty malediction, with the kind permission of my reverend friend) sneaks to and fro, and dodges up and down.

friend, who comes and goes there, our local friend would supply for himself, from his own previous knowledge, the identity of the parties. Nobody can be set to watch all Staple, or to concern himself with comers and goers to other sets of chambers: unless, indeed, mine.” “I begin to understand to what you tend,” said Mr. Crisparkle, “and highly approve of your caution.” “I needn’t repeat that I know nothing yet of the why and wherefore,” said Mr. Tartar; “but I also understand to what you tend, so let me say at once that my chambers are freely at your disposal.” “There!” cried Mr. Grewgious, smoothing his head triumphantly, “now we have all got the idea. You have it, my dear?” “I think I have,” said Rosa, blushing a little as Mr. Tartar looked quickly towards her. “You see, you go over to Staple with Mr.

she withdrew for the purpose. Mr. Crisparkle took the opportunity of giving Mr. Tartar a summary of the distresses of Neville and his sister; the opportunity was quite long enough, as the hat happened to require a little extra fitting on. Mr. Tartar gave his arm to Rosa, and Mr. Crisparkle walked, detached, in front. “Poor, poor Eddy!” thought Rosa, as they went along. Mr. Tartar waved his right hand as he bent his head down over Rosa, talking in an animated way. “It was not so powerful or so sun-browned when it saved Mr. Crisparkle,” thought Rosa, glancing at it; “but it must have been very steady and determined even then.” Mr. Tartar told her he had been a sailor, roving everywhere for years and years. “When are you going to sea again?” asked Rosa. “Never!” Rosa wondered what the girls would say if they could see her crossing the wide street on the sailor’s arm.
