1 By six o'clock on the following evening, however, Sally had been forced to the conclusion that Ginger would have to struggle through life as best he could without the assistance of her contemplated remarks: for she had seen nothing of him all day and in another hour she would have left Roville on the seven-fifteen express which was to take her to Paris, en route for Cherbourg and the liner whereon she had booked her passage for New York. It was in the faint hope of finding him even now that, at half-past six, having conveyed her baggage to the station and left it in charge of an amiable porter, she paid a last visit to the Casino Municipale. She disliked the thought of leaving Ginger without having uplifted him. Like so many alert and active-minded girls, she possessed in a great degree the quality of interesting herself in--or, as her brother Fillmore preferred to put it, messing about with--the private affairs of others.

Ginger had impressed her as a man to whom it was worth while to give a friendly shove on the right path; and it was with much gratification, therefore, that, having entered the Casino, she perceived a flaming head shining through the crowd which had gathered at one of the roulette-tables. There are two Casinos at Roville-sur-Mer. The one on the Promenade goes in mostly for sea-air and a mild game called boule. It is the big Casino Municipale down in the Palace Massena near the railway station which is the haunt of the earnest gambler who means business; and it was plain to Sally directly she arrived that Ginger Kemp not only meant business but was getting results. Ginger was going extremely strong. He was entrenched behind an opulent-looking mound of square counters: and, even as Sally looked, a wooden-faced croupier shoved a further instalment across the table to him at the end of his long rake.

right, and silence fell again. Sally, who had shifted to a spot where the pressure of the crowd was less acute, was now able to see Ginger's face, and as she saw it she gave an involuntary laugh. He looked exactly like a dog at a rat-hole. His hair seemed to bristle with excitement. One could almost fancy that his ears were pricked up. In the tense hush which had fallen on the crowd at the restarting of the wheel, Sally's laugh rang out with an embarrassing clearness. It had a marked effect on all those within hearing. There is something almost of religious ecstasy in the deportment of the spectators at a table where anyone is having a run of luck at roulette, and if she had guffawed in a cathedral she could not have caused a more pained consternation.

had suddenly walked off the stage in the middle of his big scene; and not even a loud and violent quarrel which sprang up at this moment between two excitable gamblers over a disputed five-franc counter could wholly console them. “I say,” said Ginger, dexterously plucking Sally out of the crowd, “this is topping, meeting you like this. I've been looking for you everywhere.” “It's funny you didn't find me, then, for that's where I've been. I was looking for you.” “No, really?” Ginger seemed pleased. He led the way to the quiet ante-room outside the gambling-hall, and they sat down in a corner. It was pleasant here, with nobody near except the gorgeously uniformed attendant over by the door. “That was awfully good of you.” “I felt I must have a talk with you before my train went.” Ginger started violently.

stared at his vermilion profile in frank amazement. Ginger, she had realized by this time, was in many ways a surprising young man, but she had not expected him to be as surprising as this. “Marry you!” “You know what I mean.” “Well, yes, I suppose I do. You allude to the holy state. Yes, I know what you mean.” “Then how about it?” Sally began to regain her composure. Her sense of humour was tickled. She looked at Ginger gravely. He did not meet her eye, but continued to drink in the uniformed official, who was by now so carried away by the romance of it all that he had begun to hum a love-ballad under his breath. The official could not hear what they were saying, and would not have been able to understand it even if he could have heard; but he was an expert in the language of the eyes.

by the door “I dare say it is sudden. I can't help that. I fell in love with you the moment I saw you, and there you are!” “But...” “Now, look here, I know I'm not much of a chap and all that, but... well, I've just won the deuce of a lot of money in there...” “Would you buy me with your gold?” “I mean to say, we should have enough to start on, and... of course I've made an infernal hash of everything I've tried up till now, but there must be something I can do, and you can jolly well bet I'd have a goodish stab at it. I mean to say, with you to buck me up and so forth, don't you know. Well, I mean...” “Has it struck you that I may already be engaged to someone else?” “Oh, golly!

for something wholly out of their power to bestow, feel that same wavering between tears and laughter. Sally wanted to pick Ginger up and kiss him. The one thing she could not do was to look on him, sorry as she was for him, as a reasonable, grown-up man. “You don't really mean it, you know.” “Don't I!” said Ginger, hollowly. “Oh, don't I!” “You can't! There isn't such a thing in real life as love at first sight. Love's a thing that comes when you know a person well and...” She paused. It had just occurred to her that she was hardly the girl to lecture in this strain. Her love for Gerald Foster had been sufficiently sudden, even instantaneous. What did she know of Gerald except that she loved him? They had become engaged within two weeks of their first meeting.

suppose we say? Really, the best plan would be for you to adopt me as an honorary sister. What do you think?” Ginger did not appear noticeably elated at the suggested relationship. “Because I really do take a tremendous interest in you.” Ginger brightened. “That's awfully good of you.” “I'm going to speak words of wisdom. Ginger, why don't you brace up?” “Brace up?” “Yes, stiffen your backbone and stick out your chin, and square your elbows, and really amount to something. Why do you simply flop about and do nothing and leave everything to what you call 'the family'? Why do you have to be helped all the time? Why don't you help yourself? Why do you have to have jobs found for you? Why don't you rush out and get one? Why do you have to worry about what, 'the family' thinks of you?

reply for a moment. He seemed greatly impressed. “When you talk quick,” he said at length, in a serious meditative voice, “your nose sort of goes all squiggly. Ripping, it looks!” Sally uttered an indignant cry. “Do you mean to say you haven't been listening to a word I've been saying,” she demanded. “Oh, rather! Oh, by Jove, yes.” “Well, what did I say?” “You... er... And your eyes sort of shine, too.” “Never mind my eyes. What did I say?” “You told me,” said Ginger, on reflection, “to get a job.” “Well, yes. I put it much better than that, but that's what it amounted to, I suppose. All right, then. I'm glad you...” Ginger was eyeing her with mournful devotion. “I say,” he interrupted, “I wish you'd let me write to you. Letters, I mean, and all that.

me, and remember what I said.” Ginger, alert after his unexpected fashion when it became a question of physical action, had followed her through the swing-door, and they emerged together and started running down the square. “Stick it!” said Ginger, encouragingly. He was running easily and well, as becomes a man who, in his day, had been a snip for his international at scrum-half. Sally saved her breath. The train was beginning to move slowly out of the station as they sprinted abreast on to the platform. Ginger dived for the nearest door, wrenched it open, gathered Sally neatly in his arms, and flung her in. She landed squarely on the toes of a man who occupied the corner seat, and, bounding off again, made for the window. Ginger, faithful to the last, was trotting beside the train as it gathered speed.

of the station. Sally cast one last look back at her red-haired friend, who had now halted and was waving a handkerchief. Then she turned to apologize to the other occupant of the carriage. “I'm so sorry,” she said, breathlessly. “I hope I didn't hurt you.” She found herself facing Ginger's cousin, the dark man of yesterday's episode on the beach, Bruce Carmyle. 3 Mr. Carmyle was not a man who readily allowed himself to be disturbed by life's little surprises, but at the present moment he could not help feeling slightly dazed. He recognized Sally now as the French girl who had attracted his cousin Lancelot's notice on the beach. At least he had assumed that she was French, and it was startling to be addressed by her now in fluent English. How had she suddenly acquired this gift of tongues?

is handling her aims well and uses plenty of vigour. “If you don't mind,” said Sally, sitting down, “I think I'll breathe a little.” She breathed. The train sped on. “Quite a close thing,” said Bruce Carmyle, affably. The pain in his toe was diminishing. “You nearly missed it.” “Yes. It was lucky Mr. Kemp was with me. He throws very straight, doesn't he.” “Tell me,” said Carmyle, “how do you come to know my Cousin? On the beach yesterday morning...” “Oh, we didn't know each other then. But we were staying at the same hotel, and we spent an hour or so shut up in an elevator together. That was when we really got acquainted.” A waiter entered the compartment, announcing in unexpected English that dinner was served in the restaurant car. “Would you care for dinner?” “I'm starving,” said Sally.

Mr. Carmyle, who had been irritably waving aside the servitor's light-hearted advice--at the Hotel Splendide the waiters never bent over you and breathed cordial suggestions down the side of your face--gave his order crisply in the Anglo-Gallic dialect of the travelling Briton. The waiter remarked, “Boum!” in a pleased sort of way, and vanished. “Nice old man!” said Sally. “Infernally familiar!” said Mr. Carmyle. Sally perceived that on the topic of the waiter she and her host did not see eye to eye and that little pleasure or profit could be derived from any discussion centring about him. She changed the subject. She was not liking Mr. Carmyle quite so much as she had done a few minutes ago, but it was courteous of him to give her dinner, and she tried to like him as much as she could.

last few minutes. “He told me all about himself.” “And you found that interesting?” “Why not?” “Well...” A frigid half-smile came and went on Bruce Carmyle's dark face. “My cousin has many excellent qualities, no doubt--he used to play football well, and I understand that he is a capable amateur pugilist--but I should not have supposed him entertaining. We find him a little dull.” “I thought it was only royalty that called themselves 'we.'” “I meant myself--and the rest of the family.” The mention of the family was too much for Sally. She had to stop talking in order to allow her mind to clear itself of rude thoughts. “Mr. Kemp was telling me about Mr. Scrymgeour,” she went on at length. Bruce Carmyle stared for a moment at the yard or so of French bread which the waiter had placed on the table.

man who would throw away an excellent position simply because...” “Oh, well, if that's your view, I suppose it is useless to talk about it.” “Quite.” “Still, there's no harm in asking what you propose to do about Gin--about Mr. Kemp.” Mr. Carmyle became more glacial. “I'm afraid I cannot discuss...” Sally's quick impatience, nobly restrained till now, finally got the better of her. “Oh, for goodness' sake,” she snapped, “do try to be human, and don't always be snubbing people. You remind me of one of those portraits of men in the eighteenth century, with wooden faces, who look out of heavy gold frames at you with fishy eyes as if you were a regrettable incident.” “Rosbif,” said the waiter genially, manifesting himself suddenly beside them as if he had popped up out of a trap. Bruce Carmyle attacked his roast beef morosely.
