It was not till she saw him actually standing there before her with his hair rumpled and a large smut on the tip of his nose, that Sally really understood how profoundly troubled she had been about this young man, and how vivid had been that vision of him bobbing about on the waters of the Thames, a cold and unappreciated corpse. She was a girl of keen imagination, and she had allowed her imagination to riot unchecked. Astonishment, therefore, at the extraordinary fact of his being there was for the moment thrust aside by relief. Never before in her life had she experienced such an overwhelming rush of exhilaration. She flung herself into a chair and burst into a screech of laughter which even to her own ears sounded strange. It struck Ginger as hysterical. “I say, you know!” said Ginger, as the merriment showed no signs of abating.

wearing it for ornament, as a sort of beauty-spot,” said Sally, “all right. But in case you don't know, you've a smut on your nose.” “Oh, my aunt! Not really?” “Now would I deceive you on an important point like that?” “Do you mind if I have a look in the glass?” “Certainly, if you can stand it.” Ginger moved hurriedly to the dressing-table. “You're perfectly right,” he announced, applying his handkerchief. “I thought I was. I'm very quick at noticing things.” “My hair's a bit rumpled, too.” “Very much so.” “You take my tip,” said Ginger, earnestly, “and never lie about under beds. There's nothing in it.” “That reminds me. You won't be offended if I asked you something?” “No, no. Go ahead.” “It's rather an impertinent question. You may resent it.” “No, no.” “Well, then, what were you doing under my bed?” “Oh, under your bed?” “Yes.

seem to be making myself pretty well at home.” “Oh, no.” “Touching the matter of soap...” “Use mine. We Americans are famous for our hospitality.” “Thanks awfully.” “The towel is on your right.” “Thanks awfully.” “And I've a clothes brush in my bag.” “Thanks awfully.” Splashing followed like a sea-lion taking a dip. “Now, then,” said Sally, “why were you hiding from Mrs. Meecher?” A careworn, almost hunted look came into Ginger's face. “I say, you know, that woman is rather by way of being one of the lads, what! Scares me! Word was brought that she was on the prowl, so it seemed to me a judicious move to take cover till she sort of blew over. If she'd found me, she'd have made me take that dog of hers for a walk.” “Toto?” “Toto. You know,” said Ginger, with a strong sense of injury, “no dog's got a right to be a dog like that.

of the matter is, I went back to the tables that night and lost a goodish bit of what I'd won. And, somehow or another, when I got to America, the stuff seemed to slip away.” “What made you come to America at all?” said Sally, asking the question which, she felt, any sensible person would have asked at the opening of the conversation. One of his familiar blushes raced over Ginger's face. “Oh, I thought I would. Land of opportunity, you know.” “Have you managed to find any of the opportunities yet?” “Well, I have got a job of sorts, I'm a waiter at a rummy little place on Second Avenue. The salary isn't big, but I'd have wangled enough out of it to pay last week's rent, only they docked me a goodish bit for breaking plates and what not.

pick it up. I'll take you round to him now. He's staying at the Astor.” “There's just one thing,” said Ginger. “What's that?” “I might make a hash of it.” “Heavens, Ginger! There must be something in this world that you wouldn't make a hash of. Don't stand arguing any longer. Are you dry? and clean? Very well, then. Let's be off.” “Right ho.” Ginger took a step towards the door, then paused, rigid, with one leg in the air, as though some spell had been cast upon him. From the passage outside there had sounded a shrill yapping. Ginger looked at Sally. Then he looked--longingly--at the bed. “Don't be such a coward,” said Sally, severely. “Yes, but...” “How much do you owe Mrs. Meecher?” “Round about twelve dollars, I think it is.” “I'll pay her.” Ginger flushed awkwardly. “No, I'm hanged if you will!

Kemp! I been looking for you.” Sally intervened brightly. “Oh, Mrs. Meecher,” she said, shepherding her young charge through the danger zone, “I was so surprised to meet Mr. Kemp here. He is a great friend of mine. We met in France. We're going off now to have a long talk about old times, and then I'm taking him to see my brother...” “Toto...” “Dear little thing! You ought to take him for a walk,” said Sally. “It's a lovely day. Mr. Kemp was saying just now that he would have liked to take him, but we're rather in a hurry and shall probably have to get into a taxi. You've no idea how busy my brother is just now. If we're late, he'll never forgive us.” She passed on down the stairs, leaving Mrs. Meecher dissatisfied but irresolute. There was something about Sally which even in her pre-wealthy days had always baffled Mrs.

us lunch. I want to hear all about you. I've heard something already. I met your cousin, Mr. Carmyle. He was on the train coming from Detroit. Did you know that he was in America?” “No, I've--er--rather lost touch with the Family.” “So I gathered from Mr. Carmyle. And I feel hideously responsible. It was all through me that all this happened.” “Oh, no.” “Of course it was. I made you what you are to-day--I hope I'm satisfied--I dragged and dragged you down until the soul within you died, so to speak. I know perfectly well that you wouldn't have dreamed of savaging the Family as you seem to have done if it hadn't been for what I said to you at Roville. Ginger, tell me, what did happen? I'm dying to know. Mr. Carmyle said you insulted your uncle!” “Donald.

soup, you know.” “How do you mean, 'all that about the soup'? What about the soup? What soup?” “Well, things sort of hotted up a bit when the soup arrived.” “I don't understand.” “I mean, the trouble seemed to start, as it were, when the waiter had finished ladling out the mulligatawny. Thick soup, you know.” “I know mulligatawny is a thick soup. Yes?” “Well, my old uncle--I'm not blaming him, don't you know--more his misfortune than his fault--I can see that now--but he's got a heavy moustache. Like a walrus, rather, and he's a bit apt to inhale the stuff through it. And I--well, I asked him not to. It was just a suggestion, you know. He cut up fairly rough, and by the time the fish came round we were more or less down on the mat chewing holes in one another.

impossible not to perceive in the light of this fresh evidence that Mr. Carmyle had made a journey of three thousand miles with the sole object of renewing his acquaintance with her. It did not matter, of course, but it was vaguely disturbing. No girl cares to be dogged by a man she rather dislikes. “Go on telling me about your uncle,” she said. “Well, there's not much more to tell. I'd happened to get that wireless of yours just before I started out to dinner with him, and I was more or less feeling that I wasn't going to stand any rot from the Family. I'd got to the fish course, hadn't I? Well, we managed to get through that somehow, but we didn't survive the fillet steak. One thing seemed to lead to another, and the show sort of bust up.
