There is in certain men--and Bruce Carmyle was one of them--a quality of resilience, a sturdy refusal to acknowledge defeat, which aids them as effectively in affairs of the heart as in encounters of a sterner and more practical kind. As a wooer, Bruce Carmyle resembled that durable type of pugilist who can only give of his best after he has received at least one substantial wallop on some tender spot. Although Sally had refused his offer of marriage quite definitely at Monk's Crofton, it had never occurred to him to consider the episode closed. All his life he had been accustomed to getting what he wanted, and he meant to get it now. He was quite sure that he wanted Sally. There had been moments when he had been conscious of certain doubts, but in the smart of temporary defeat these had vanished.

her. Her gay prettiness seemed to flick at him like a whip in the darkness of wakeful nights, lashing him to pursuit. And quietly and methodically, like a respectable wolf settling on the trail of a Red Riding Hood, he prepared to pursue. Delicacy and imagination might have kept him back, but in these qualities he had never been strong. One cannot have everything. His preparations for departure, though he did his best to make them swiftly and secretly, did not escape the notice of the Family. In many English families there seems to exist a system of inter-communication and news-distribution like that of those savage tribes in Africa who pass the latest item of news and interest from point to point over miles of intervening jungle by some telepathic method never properly explained. On his last night in London, there entered to Bruce Carmyle at his apartment in South Audley Street, the Family's chosen representative, the man to whom the Family pointed with pride--Uncle Donald, in the flesh.

like seaweed on a ground-swell. There had been stairs to climb. “What's this? What's this?” he contrived to ejaculate at last. “You packing?” “Yes,” said Mr. Carmyle, shortly. For the first time in his life he was conscious of that sensation of furtive guilt which was habitual with his cousin Ginger when in the presence of this large, mackerel-eyed man. “You going away?” “Yes.” “Where you going?” “America.” “When you going?” “To-morrow morning.” “Why you going?” This dialogue has been set down as though it had been as brisk and snappy as any cross-talk between vaudeville comedians, but in reality Uncle Donald's peculiar methods of conversation had stretched it over a period of nearly three minutes: for after each reply and before each question he had puffed and sighed and inhaled his moustache with such painful deliberation that his companion's nerves were finding it difficult to bear up under the strain.

Hitherto, his actions had received neither criticism nor been subjected to it. “I'm not a fool.” “You are a fool. A damn fool,” continued Uncle Donald, specifying more exactly. “Don't like the girl. Never did. Not a nice girl. Didn't like her. Right from the first.” “Need we discuss this?” said Bruce Carmyle, dropping, as he was apt to do, into the grand manner. The Head of the Family drank in a layer of moustache and blew it out again. “Need we discuss it?” he said with asperity. “We're going to discuss it! Whatch think I climbed all these blasted stairs for with my weak heart? Gimme another!” Mr. Carmyle gave him another. “'S a bad business,” moaned Uncle Donald, having gone through the movements once more. “Shocking bad business. If your poor father were alive, whatch think he'd say to your tearing across the world after this girl?

some sense and a weak heart... Whatch know of this girl? Whatch know of her? That's the point. Who is she? Wherej meet her?” “I met her at Roville, in France.” “Travelling with her family?” “Travelling alone,” said Bruce Carmyle, reluctantly. “Not even with that brother of hers? Bad!” said Uncle Donald. “Bad, bad!” “American girls are accustomed to more independence than English girls.” “That young man,” said Uncle Donald, pursuing a train of thought, “is going to be fat one of these days, if he doesn't look out. Travelling alone, was she? What did you do? Catch her eye on the pier?” “Really, Uncle Donald!” “Well, must have got to know her somehow.” “I was introduced to her by Lancelot. She was a friend of his.” “Lancelot!” exploded Uncle Donald, quivering all over like a smitten jelly at the loathed name.

having started to defy, evidently decided to make a good job of it. “I am over twenty-one,” said he. “I am financially independent. I shall do as I please.” “But, consider!” pleaded Uncle Donald, painfully conscious of the weakness of his words. “Reflect!” “I have reflected.” “Your position in the county...” “I've thought of that.” “You could marry anyone you pleased.” “I'm going to.” “You are determined to go running off to God-knows-where after this Miss I-can't-even-remember-her-dam-name?” “Yes.” “Have you considered,” said Uncle Donald, portentously, “that you owe a duty to the Family.” Bruce Carmyle's patience snapped and he sank like a stone to absolutely Gingerian depths of plain-spokenness. “Oh, damn the Family!” he cried. There was a painful silence, broken only by the relieved sigh of the armchair as Uncle Donald heaved himself out of it. “After that,” said Uncle Donald, “I have nothing more to say.” “Good!” said Mr.
