THE PRINCESS OF THE GOLDEN LOCKS SENDS PAUL A RING. It took me three years to win that handshake. For the first six months I remained in Deptford. There was excellent material to be found there for humorous articles, essays, stories; likewise for stories tragic and pathetic. But I owed a hundred and fifty pounds--a little over two hundred it reached to, I found, when I came to add up the actual figures. So I paid strict attention to business, left the tears to be garnered by others--better fitted maybe for the task; kept to my own patch, reaped and took to market only the laughter.

At the beginning I sent each manuscript to Norah; she had it copied out, debited me with the cost received payment, and sent me the balance. At first my earnings were small; but Norah was an excellent agent; rapidly they increased. Dan grew quite cross with her, wrote in pained surprise at her greed. The “matter” was fair, but in no way remarkable. Any friend of hers, of course, he was anxious to assist; but business was business.

either case. Nor was he allowed to decide the question for himself. Competition was introduced into the argument. Of purpose a certain proportion of my work my agent sent elsewhere. “Jack Homer” grew to be a commodity in demand. For, seated at my rickety table, I laughed as I wrote, the fourth wall of the dismal room fading before my eyes revealing vistas beyond. Still, it was slow work. Humour is not an industrious maid; declines to be bustled, will work only when she feels inclined--does not often feel inclined; gives herself a good many unnecessary airs; if worried, packs up and goes off, Heaven knows where! comes back when she thinks she will: a somewhat unreliable young person. To my literary labours I found it necessary to add journalism. I lacked Dan's magnificent assurance. Fate never befriends the nervous.

we would follow that particular case, the fulness and completeness of our notes, would be quite remarkable. Our spokesman would rise, drift carelessly away, to return five minutes later, wiping his mouth. “Not a very interesting case, gentlemen, I don't think. Shall we say five shillings apiece?” Sometimes a sense of the dignity of our calling would induce us to stand out for ten. And here also my sense of humour came to my aid; gave me perhaps an undue advantage over my competitors. Twelve good men and true had been asked to say how a Lascar sailor had met his death. It was perfectly clear how he had met his death. A plumber, working on the roof of a small two-storeyed house, had slipped and fallen on him. The plumber had escaped with a few bruises; the unfortunate sailor had been picked up dead.

before I knew what had happened, I hears him go, smack! I rushes to the window and looks out: I see him on the pavement, sitting up like. “'Hullo, Jim,' I says. 'Have you hurt yourself?' “'I think I'm all right,' he says, 'as far as I can tell. But I wish you'd come down. This bloke I've fallen on looks a bit sick.'” The others headed their flimsy “Sad Accident,” a title truthful but not alluring. I altered mine to “Plumber in a Hurry--Fatal Result.” Saying as little as possible about the unfortunate sailor, I called the attention of plumbers generally to the coroner's very just remarks upon the folly of undue haste; pointed out to them, as a body, the trouble that would arise if somehow they could not cure themselves of this tendency to rush through their work without a moment's loss of time.

cunning. Had I let him have his way, he would have led me through the maze of streets he knew so well, past the broken railings (outside which he would have left my body standing), along the weedy pathway, through the cracked and dented door, up the creaking staircase to the dismal little chamber where we once--he and I together--had sat dreaming foolish dreams. “Come,” he would whisper; “it is so near. Let us push aside the chest of drawers very quietly, softly raise the broken sash, prop it open with the Latin dictionary, lean our elbows on the sill, listen to the voices of the weary city, voices calling to us from the darkness.” But I was too wary to be caught. “Later on,” I would reply to him; “when I have made my way, when I am stronger to withstand your wheedling.

bed and washstand with a screen.” So my father had his way. It was a pleasant, sunny little room, overlooking the gardens of the hospital. I followed my father's suggestion, shut out the bed and washstand with a screen. And sometimes of an evening it would amuse me to hear my father turn the handle of the door. “How are you getting on--all right?” “Famously.” Often there came back to me the words he had once used. “You must be the practical man, Paul, and get on. Myself, I have always been somewhat of a dreamer. I meant to do such great things in the world, and somehow I suppose I aimed too high. I wasn't--practical.” “But ought not one to aim high?” I had asked. My father had fidgeted in his chair. “It is very difficult to say. It is all so--so very ununderstandable.

expensive as my means would permit, I made my way on the following Thursday, clad in frock coat and light grey trousers, to Kennington Church. The ceremony was already in progress. Creeping on tiptoe up the aisle, I was about to slip into an empty pew, when a hand was laid upon my sleeve. “We're all here,” whispered the O'Kelly; “just room for ye.” Squeezing his hand as I passed, I sat down between the Signora and Mrs. Peedles. Both ladies were weeping; the Signora silently, one tear at a time clinging fondly to her pretty face as though loath to fall from it; Mrs. Peedles copiously, with explosive gurgles, as of water from a bottle. “It is such a beautiful service,” murmured the Signora, pressing my hand as I settled myself down. “I should so--so love to be married.” “Me darling,” whispered the O'Kelly, seizing her other hand and kissing it covertly behind his open Prayer Book, “perhaps ye will be--one day.” The Signora through her tears smiled at him, but with a sigh shook her head.

met old friends. The maternal Sellars, stouter than ever, had been accommodated with a chair--at least, I assumed so, she being in a sitting posture; the chair itself was not in evidence. She greeted me with more graciousness than I had expected, enquiring after my health with pointedness and an amount of tender solicitude that, until the explanation broke upon me, somewhat puzzled me. Mr. Reginald Clapper was a small but energetic gentleman, much impressed, I was glad to notice, with a conviction of his own good fortune. He expressed the greatest delight at being introduced to me, shook me heartily by the hand, and hoped we should always be friends. “Won't be my fault if we're not,” he added. “Come and see us whenever you like.” He repeated this three times. I gathered the general sentiment to be that he was acting, if anything, with excess of generosity.

I told her,” added the fat young lady--or the lean one grown stouter, “a dozen times if I told her once. But there!” I murmured my obligations. Cousin Joseph, 'whom I found no difficulty in recognising by reason of his watery eyes, appeared not so chirpy as of yore. “You take my tip,” advised Cousin Joseph, drawing me aside, “and keep out of it.” “You speak from experience?” I suggested. “I'm as fond of a joke,” said the watery-eyed Joseph, “as any man. But when it comes to buckets of water--” A reminder from the maternal Sellars that breakfast had been ordered for eleven o'clock caused a general movement and arrested Joseph's revelations. “See you again, perhaps,” he murmured, and pushed past me. What Mrs. Sellars, I suppose, would have alluded to as a cold col-la-shon had been arranged for at a restaurant near by.

he returned, somewhat puzzled; “though if you wanted to call me names I shouldn't have blamed you. Anyhow, you've took it like a sensible chap. You've got over it, as I always told her you would. Young men out of story-books don't die of broken hearts, even if for a month or two they do feel like standing on their head in the water-butt.” “Why, I was in love myself three times,” explained Uncle Gutton, “before I married the old woman.” Aunt Gutton sighed and said she was afraid gentlemen didn't feel these things as much as they ought to. “They've got their living to earn,” retorted Uncle Gutton. I agreed with Uncle Gutton that life could not be wasted in vain regret. “As for the rest,” admitted Uncle Gutton, handsomely, “I was wrong. You've turned out better than I expected you would.” I thanked him for his improved opinion, and as we entered the restaurant we shook hands.

have paid a ten pound note for it.” “I hope you'll find it useful,” I said. The maternal Sellars, drifting away, joined the others gathered together at the opposite end of the room. “I suppose you think I set my cap at you merely because you were a gentleman,” said the Lady 'Ortensia. “Don't let's talk about it,” I answered. “We were both foolish.” “I don't want you to think it was merely that,” continued the Lady 'Ortensia. “I did like you. And I wouldn't have disgraced you--at least, I'd have tried not to. We women are quick to learn. You never gave me time.” “Believe me, things are much better as they are,” I said. “I suppose so,” she answered. “I was a fool.” She glanced round; we still had the corner to ourselves. “I told a rare pack of lies,” she said; “I didn't seem able to help it; I was feeling sore all over.

embellished with the mysterious significance of the unseen oracle. For the first quarter of an hour or so the meal proceeded almost in silence. The maternal Sellars when not engaged in whispered argument with the perspiring waiter, was furtively occupied in working sums upon the table-cloth by aid of a blunt pencil. The Signora, strangely unlike her usual self, was not in talkative mood. “It was so kind of them to invite me,” said the Signora, speaking low. “But I feel I ought not to have come. “Why not?” I asked “I'm not fit to be here,” murmured the Signora in a broken voice. “What right have I at wedding breakfasts? Of course, for dear Willie it is different. He has been married.” The O'Kelly, who never when the Signora was present seemed to care much for conversation in which she was unable to participate, took advantage of his neighbour's being somewhat deaf to lapse into abstraction.

of material nature, embraced the table with a smile. “But it is a sad thing,” sighed the maternal Sellars the next moment, with a shake of her huge head, “when your daughter marries, and goes away and leaves you.” “Damned sight sadder,” commented Uncle Gutton, “when she don't go off, but hangs on at home year after year and expects you to keep her.” I credit Uncle Gutton with intending this as an aside for the exclusive benefit of the maternal Sellars; but his voice was not of the timbre that lends itself to secrecy. One of the bridesmaids, a plain, elderly girl, bending over her plate, flushed scarlet. I concluded her to be Miss Gutton. “It doesn't seem to me,” said Aunt Gutton from the other end of the table, “that gentlemen are as keen on marrying nowadays as they used to be.” “Got to know a bit about it, I expect,” sounded the small, shrill voice of the unseen Joseph.

on the slightest provocation into a laugh instinct with all the characteristics of genuine delight. “Give and take,” observed the maternal Sellars, so soon as Mr. Clapper's roar had died away; “that's what you've got to do when you're married.” “Give a deal more than you bargained for and take what you don't want--that sums it up,” came the bitter voice of the unseen. “Oh, do be quiet, Joe,” advised the stout young lady, from which I concluded she had once been the lean young lady. “You talk enough for a man.” “Can't I open my mouth?” demanded the indignant oracle. “You look less foolish when you keep it shut,” returned the stout young lady. “We'll show them how to get on,” observed the Lady 'Ortensia to her bridegroom, with a smile. Mr. Clapper responded with a gurgle. “When me and the old girl there fixed things up,” said Uncle Gutton, “we didn't talk no nonsense, and we didn't start with no misunderstandings.

blaming the poor woman. We all have our moments of despair.” The unfortunate Clapper again exploded. Uncle Gutton rose to his feet. The ready Jarman saved the situation. “'Ear! 'ear!” cried Jarman, banging the table with the handles of two knives. “Silence for Uncle Gutton! 'E's going to propose a toast. 'Ear, 'ear!” Mrs. Clapper, seconding his efforts, the whole table broke into applause. “What, as a matter of fact, I did get up to say--” began Uncle Gutton. “Good old Uncle Gutton!” persisted the determined Jarman. “Bride and bridegroom--long life to 'em!” Uncle Sutton, evidently pleased, allowed his indignation against Minikin to evaporate. “Well,” said Uncle Gutton, “if you think I'm the one to do it--” The response was unmistakable. In our enthusiasm we broke two glasses and upset a cruet; a small, thin lady was unfortunate enough to shed her chignon.

Thus encouraged, Uncle Sutton launched himself upon his task. Personally, I should have been better pleased had Fate not interposed to assign to him the duty. Starting with a somewhat uninstructive history of his own career, he suddenly, and for no reason at all obvious, branched off into fierce censure of the Adulteration Act. Reminded of the time by the maternal Sellars, he got in his first sensible remark by observing that with such questions, he took it, the present company was not particularly interested, and directed himself to the main argument. To his, Uncle Gutton's, foresight, wisdom and instinctive understanding of humanity, Mr.

beyond his weekly newspaper, he, Uncle Gutton, was unable to understand; but if there were fools in the world who wanted to read rubbish written by other fools, then the other fools would of course write it; Uncle Gutton did not blame them. He mentioned no names, but what he would say was: a plain man for a sensible girl, and no painted baubles. The waiter here entering with a message from the cabman to the effect that if he was to catch the twelve-forty-five from Charing Cross, it was about full time he started, Uncle Gutton was compelled to bring his speech to a premature conclusion. The bride and bridegroom were hustled into their clothes. There followed much female embracing and male hand-shaking. The rice having been forgotten, the waiter was almost thrown downstairs, with directions to at once procure some.

other. For the third time now had the O'Kelly proved his utter unworthiness to be the husband of the lady to whom he still referred as his “dear good wife.” “But, under the circumstances, would it not be better,” I suggested, “for her to obtain a divorce? Then you and the Signora could marry and there would be an end to the whole trouble.” “From a strictly worldly point of view,” replied the O'Kelly, “it certainly would be; but Mrs. O'Kelly”--his voice took to itself unconsciously a tone of reverence--“is not an ordinary woman. You can have no conception, my dear Kelver, of her goodness. I had a letter from her only two months ago, a few weeks after the--the last occurrence. Not one word of reproach, only that if I trespassed against her even unto seven times seven she would still consider it her duty to forgive me; that the 'home' would always be there for me to return to and repent.” A tear stood in the O'Kelly's eye.

ye wouldn't blame me.” I laughed. “Why don't you be firm,” I suggested to the Signora, “send him packing about his business?” “I ought to,” admitted the Signora. “I always mean to, until I see him. Then I don't seem able to say anything--not anything I ought to.” “Ye do say it,” contradicted the O'Kelly. “Ye're an angel, only I won't listen to ye.” “I don't say it as if I meant it,” persisted the Signora. “It's evident I don't.” “I still think it a pity,” I said, “someone does not explain to Mrs. O'Kelly that a divorce would be the truer kindness.” “It is difficult to decide,” argued the Signora. “If ever you should want to leave me--” “Me darling!” exclaimed the O'Kelly. “But you may,” insisted the Signora. “Something may happen to help you, to show you how wicked it all is.

to walk steadily. Sure you have left nothing behind you--in the slough?” “Nothing worth bringing out of it,” I said. “Why do you ask so seriously?” He laid his hand upon my head, rumpling my hair, as in the old days. “Don't leave him behind you,” he said; “the little boy Paul--Paul the dreamer.” I laughed. “Oh, he! He was only in my way.” “Yes, here,” answered Dan. “This is not his world. He is of no use to you here; won't help you to bread and cheese--no, nor kisses either. But keep him near you. Later, you will find, perhaps, that all along he has been the real Paul--the living, growing Paul; the other--the active, worldly, pushful Paul, only the stuff that dreams are made of, his fretful life a troubled night rounded by a sleep.” “I have been driving him away,” I said.

regards your affairs. Women never have where they--” He broke off to stir the fire. “You like her?” I asked. The words sounded feeble. It is only the writer who fits the language to the emotion; the living man more often selects by contrast. “She is my ideal woman,” returned Dan; “true and strong and tender; clear as crystal, pure as dawn. Like her!” He knocked the ashes from his pipe. “We do not marry our ideals,” he went on. “We love with our hearts, not with our souls. The woman I shall marry”--he sat gazing into the fire, a smile upon his face--“she will be some sweet, clinging, childish woman, David Copperfield's Dora. Only I am not Doady, who always seems to me to have been somewhat of a--He reminds me of you, Paul, a little. Dickens was right; her helplessness, as time went on, would have bored him more and more instead of appealing to him.” “And the women,” I suggested, “do they marry their ideals?” He laughed.

a twinkle in his eye. “A nice enough fellow--clever, perhaps, but someone--well, someone who will want looking after, taking care of, managing; someone who will appeal to the mother side of her--not her ideal man, but the man for whom nature intended her.” “Perhaps with her help,” I said, “he may in time become her ideal.” “There's a long road before him,” growled Dan. It was Norah herself who broke to me the news of Barbara's elopement with Hal. I had seen neither of them since my return to London. Old Hasluck a month or so before I had met in the City one day by chance, and he had insisted on my lunching with him. I had found him greatly changed. His buoyant self-assurance had deserted him; in its place a fretful eagerness had become his motive force. At first he had talked boastingly: Had I seen the Post for last Monday, the Court Circular for the week before?

her. “I thought you would rather hear it quietly,” said Norah, “than learn it from a newspaper paragraph. Besides, I wanted to tell you this. She did wrong when she married, putting aside love for position. Now she has done right. She has put aside her shame with all the advantages she derived from it. She has proved herself a woman: I respect her.” Norah would not have said that to please me had she not really thought it. I could see it from that light; but it brought me no comfort. My goddess had a heart, passions, was a mere human creature like myself. From her cold throne she had stepped down to mingle with the world. So some youthful page of Arthur's court may have felt, learning the Great Queen was but a woman. I never spoke with her again but once.

Kelver.” The Baron rose. He was a red-faced, pot-bellied little man. “Delighted to meet Mr. Kelver,” he said, speaking in excellent English. “Any friend of my wife's is always a friend of mine.” He held out his fat, perspiring hand. I was not in the mood to attach much importance to ceremony. I bowed and turned away, careless whether he was offended or not. “I am glad I saw you,” she continued. “Do you remember a girl called Barbara? You and she were rather chums, years ago. “Yes,” I answered, “I remember her.” “Well, she died, poor girl, three years ago.” She was rubbing paint into her cheeks as she spoke. “She asked me if ever I saw you to give you this. I have been carrying it about with me ever since.” She took a ring from her finger.
