PAUL FINDS HIS WAY. Slowly, surely, steadily I climbed, putting aside all dreams, paying strict attention to business. Often my other self, little Paul of the sad eyes, would seek to lure me from my work. But for my vehement determination never to rest for a moment till I had purchased back my honesty, my desire--growing day by day, till it became almost a physical hunger--to feel again the pressure of Norah's strong white hand in mine, he might possibly have succeeded. Heaven only knows what then he might have made of me: politician, minor poet, more or less able editor, hampered by convictions--something most surely of but little service to myself. Now and again, with a week to spare--my humour making holiday, nothing to be done but await patiently its return--I would write stories for my own pleasure. They made no mark; but success in purposeful work is of slower growth.

your career all over again.” “You would find it almost impossible now,” explained those who spoke, I knew, words of wisdom, of experience. “The world would never listen to you. Once a humourist always a humourist. As well might a comic actor insist upon playing Hamlet. It might be the best Hamlet ever seen upon the stage; the audience would only laugh--or stop away.” Drawn by our mutual need of sympathy, “Goggles” and I, seeking some quiet corner in the Club, would pour out our souls to each other. He would lay before me, at some length, his conception of Romeo--an excellent conception, I have no doubt, though I confess it failed to interest me. Somehow I could not picture him to myself as Romeo. But I listened with every sign of encouragement. It was the price I paid him for, in turn, listening to me while I unfolded to him my ideas how monumental literature, helpful to mankind, should be imagined and built up.

that the true work of man--of the live man, not the dreamer? I saw them round me, giving to my life dignity, responsibility. The fair, sweet woman, helper, comrade, comforter, the little faces fashioned in our image, their questioning voices teaching us the answers to life's riddles. All other hopes, ambitions, dreams, what were they? Phantoms of the morning mist fading in the sunlight. Hodgson came to me one evening. “I want you to write me a comic opera,” he said. He had an open letter in his hand which he was reading. “The public seem to be getting tired of these eternal translations from the French. I want something English, something new and original.” “The English is easy enough,” I replied; “but I shouldn't clamour for anything new and original if I were you.” “Why not?” he asked, looking up from his letter.

take the theatrical public by storm, to establish myself as a serious playwright. “It's very simple,” urged Hodgson. “Provide Atherton plenty of comic business; you ought to be able to do that all right. Give Gleeson something pretty in waltz time, and Duncan a part in which she can change her frock every quarter of an hour or so, and the thing is done.” “I'll tell you what,” continued Hodgson, “I'll take the whole crowd down to Richmond on Sunday. We'll have a coach, and leave the theatre at half-past ten. It will be an opportunity for you to study them. You'll be able to have a talk with them and get to know just what they can do. Atherton has ideas in his head; he'll explain them to you. Then, next week, we'll draw up a contract and set to work.” It was too good an opportunity to let slip, though I knew that if successful I should find myself pinned down firmer than ever to my role of jester.

who twice, making believe to miss his footing, slid down again into the arms of the stolid door-keeper. The crowd, composed for the most part of small boys approving the endeavour to amuse them, laughed and applauded. Our low comedian thus encouraged, made a third attempt upon his hands and knees, and, gaining the roof, sat down upon the tenor, who smiled somewhat mechanically. The first dozen or so 'busses we passed our low comedian greeted by rising to his feet and bowing profoundly, afterwards falling back upon either the tenor or myself. Except by the tenor and myself his performance appeared to be much appreciated. Charing Cross passed, and nobody seeming to be interested in our progress, to the relief of the tenor and myself, he settled down. “People sometimes ask me,” said the low comedian, brushing the dust off his knees, “why I do this sort of thing off the stage.

can never understand the desire that comes over us all, I suppose, at times, to play the fool. As a rule, when she is with me I don't do it.” “She's not here today?” I asked, glancing round. “She suffers so from headaches,” he answered, “she hardly ever goes anywhere.” “I'm sorry.” I spoke not out of mere politeness; I really did feel sorry. During the drive to Richmond this irrepressible desire to amuse himself got the better of him more than once or twice. Through Kensington he attracted a certain amount of attention by balancing the horn upon his nose. At Kew he stopped the coach to request of a young ladies' boarding school change for sixpence. At the foot of Richmond Hill he caused a crowd to assemble while trying to persuade a deaf old gentleman in a Bath-chair to allow his man to race us up the hill for a shilling.

low comedian. “Dear old Aunt Martha! Well, I am glad! You do look bonny! How is she?” “I'm afraid--” commenced the elderly gentleman. Our low comedian started back. Other visitors had gathered round. “Don't tell me anything has happened to her! Not dead? Don't tell me that!” He seized the bewildered gentleman by the shoulders and presented to him a face distorted by terror. “I really have not the faintest notion what you are talking about,” returned the gentleman, who seemed annoyed. “I don't know you.” “Not know me? Do you mean to tell me you've forgotten--? Isn't your name Steggles?” “No, it isn't,” returned the stranger, somewhat shortly. “My mistake,” replied our low comedian. He tossed off at one gulp what remained of the stranger's Vermouth and walked away rapidly. The elderly gentleman, not seeing the humour of the joke, one of our party to soothe him explained to him that it was Atherton, the Atherton--Charlie Atherton.

so might be difficult. “Not at all,” he answered. “Now, my idea is this. I am a young fellow, and I'm in love with a girl.” I promised to make a note of it. “Her father, apoplectic old idiot--make him comic: 'Damme, sir! By gad!' all that sort of thing.” By persuading him that I understood what he meant, I rose in his estimation. “He won't have anything to say to me--thinks I'm an ass. I'm a simple sort of fellow--on the outside. But I'm not such a fool as I look.” “You don't think we are getting too much out of the groove?” I enquired. His opinion was that the more so the better. “Very well. Then, in the second act I disguise myself. I'll come on as an organ-grinder, sing a song in broken English, then as a policeman, or a young swell about town.

in the new opera. Now, can't you give me something original? Do.” Her pleading was so pretty, there was nothing for it but to pledge compliance. “I am so tired of being the simple village maiden,” said the leading lady; “what I want is a part with some opportunity in it--a coquettish part. I can flirt,” assured me the leading lady, archly. “Try me.” I satisfied her of my perfect faith. “You might,” said the leading lady, “see your way to making the plot depend upon me. It always seems to me that the woman's part is never made enough of in comic opera. I am sure a comic opera built round a woman would be a really great success. Don't you agree with me, Mr. Kelver,” pouted the leading lady, laying her pretty hand on mine. “We are much more interesting than the men--now, aren't we?” Personally, as I told her, I agreed with her.

truth in what he said. “Of course, so far as I am personally concerned,” went on the tenor, “it is immaterial. I draw the same salary whether I'm on the stage five minutes or an hour. But when you have a man of my position in the cast, and give him next to nothing to do--well, the public are disappointed.” “Most naturally,” I commented. “The lover,” whispered the tenor, noticing the careless approach towards us of the low comedian, “that's the character they are thinking about all the time--men and women both. It's human nature. Make your lover interesting--that's the secret.” Waiting for the horses to be put to, I became aware of the fact that I was standing some distance from the others in company with a tall, thin, somewhat oldish-looking man. He spoke in low, hurried tones, fearful evidently of being overheard and interrupted.

small part leading up to a little business with a soda-water syphon, it might help the piece.” I wrote him his soda-water scene, I am glad to remember, and insisted upon it, in spite of a good deal of opposition. Some of the critics found fault with the incident, as lacking in originality. But Marmaduke Trevor was quite right, it did help a little. Our return journey was an exaggerated repetition of our morning drive. Our low comedian produced hideous noises from the horn, and entered into contests of running wit with 'bus drivers--a decided mistake from his point of view, the score generally remaining with the 'bus driver. At Hammersmith, seizing the opportunity of a block in the traffic, he assumed the role of Cheap Jack, and, standing up on the back seat, offered all our hats for sale at temptingly low prices.

“Got any ideas out of them?” asked Hodgson, when the time came for us to say good-night. “I'm thinking, if you don't mind,” I answered, “of going down into the country and writing the piece quietly, away from everybody.” “Perhaps you are right,” agreed Hodgson. “Too many cooks--Be sure and have it ready for the autumn.” I wrote it with some pleasure to myself amid the Yorkshire Wolds, and was able to read it to the whole company assembled before the close of the season. My turning of the last page was followed by a dead silence. The leading lady was the first to speak. She asked if the clock upon the mantelpiece could be relied upon; because, if so, by leaving at once, she could just catch her train. Hodgson, consulting his watch, thought, if anything, it was a little fast.

never made a mistake in my life,” replied Hodgson. “You have produced one or two failures,” I reminded him. “And shall again,” he laughed. “The right thing isn't easy to get.” “Cheer up,” he added kindly, “this is only your first attempt. We must try and knock it into shape at rehearsal.” Their notion of “knocking it into shape” was knocking it to pieces. “I'll tell you what we'll do,” would say the low comedian; “we'll cut that scene out altogether.” Joyously he would draw his pencil through some four or five pages of my manuscript. “But it is essential to the story,” I would argue. “Not at all.” “But it is. It is the scene in which Roderick escapes from prison and falls in love with the gipsy.” “My dear boy, half-a-dozen words will do all that. I meet Roderick at the ball.

standing there bathed in moonlight.” “But the first act takes place in the early morning.” “I've thought of that. We must alter it to the evening.” “But the opera opens with a hunting scene. People don't go hunting by moonlight.” “It will be a novelty. That's what's wanted for comic opera. The ordinary hunting scene! My dear boy, it has been done to death.” I stood this sort of thing for a week. “They are people of experience,” I argued to myself; “they must know more about it than I do.” By the end of the week I had arrived at the conclusion that anyhow they didn't. Added to which I lost my temper. It is a thing I should advise any lady or gentleman thinking of entering the ranks or dramatic authorship to lose as soon as possible. I took both manuscripts with me, and, entering Mr.

better nature. It occupied him forty minutes by the clock. Then he called me an obstinate young fool, flung the opera as “knocked into shape” into the waste-paper basket--which was the only proper place for it, and, striding into the middle of the company, gave curt directions that the damned opera was to be played as it was written, and be damned to it! The company shrugged its shoulders, and for the next month kept them shrugged. For awhile Hodgson remained away from the rehearsals, then returning, developed by degrees a melancholy interest in the somewhat gloomy proceedings. So far I had won, but my difficulty was to maintain the position. The low comedian, reciting his lines with meaningless monotony, would pause occasionally to ask of me politely, whether this or that passage was intended to be serious or funny.

Hodgson generously supporting me against his own judgment. “It's bound to be a failure,” he told me. “I am spending some twelve to fifteen hundred pounds to teach you a lesson. When you have learnt it we'll square accounts by your writing me an opera that will pay.” “And if it does succeed?” I suggested. “My dear boy,” replied Hodgson, “I never make mistakes.” From all which a dramatic author of more experience would have gathered cheerfulness and hope, knowing that the time to be depressed is when the manager and company unanimously and unhesitatingly predict a six months' run. But new to the business, I regarded my literary career as already at an end. Belief in oneself is merely the match with which one lights oneself. The oil is supplied by the belief in one of others; if that be not forthcoming, one goes out.

good deal that will be praised. The idea is distinctly original. As a matter of fact, that's the fault with it,” added Hodgson, “it's too original.” “You said you wanted it original,” I reminded him. He laughed. “Yes, but original for the stage, I meant--the old dolls in new frocks.” I thanked him for all his kindness, and went home and packed my knapsack. For two months I wandered, avoiding beaten tracks, my only comrades a few books, belonging to no age, no country. My worries fell from me, the personal affairs of Paul Kelver ceasing to appear the be all and the end all of the universe. But for a chance meeting with Wellbourne, Deleglise's amateur caretaker of Gower Street fame, I should have delayed yet longer my return. It was in one of the dead cities of the Zuyder Zee.

pulled from his pocket a handful of loose coins and looked at them. “The thread that connects us, I am sorrow to say, is wearing somewhat thin,” he sighed; “I shall have to be getting back to him before long--concern myself again with his troubles, follies. It is somewhat vexing. Life is really beautiful, when one is dead.” “What was the trouble?” I enquired. “Haven't you heard?” he replied. “Tom died five weeks ago, quite suddenly, of syncope. We had none of us any idea.” So Norah was alone in the world. I rose to my feet. The slowly moving speck had grown into a thin, dark streak; minute by minute it took shape and form. “By the way, I have to congratulate you,” said Wellbourne. “Your opera looked like being a big thing when I left London. You didn't sell outright, I hope?” “No,” I answered.

the leading lady. “It is so delightful to play a real live woman, for a change.” The tenor was quite fatherly. “It is what I have been telling Hodgson for years,” he said, “give them a simple human story.” Crossing the stage, I ran against Marmaduke Trevor. “You will stay for my scene,” he urged. “Another night,” I answered. “I have only just returned.” He sank his voice to a whisper. “I want to talk to you on business, when you have the time. I am thinking of taking a theatre myself--not just now, but later on. Of course, I don't want it to get about.” I assured him of my secrecy. “If it comes off, I want you to write for me. You understand the public. We will talk it over.” He passed onward with stealthy tread. I found Hodgson in the front of the house.

to get quite cross with him at times. But I should not like to go against his wishes--now.” “Was there any reason for it?” I asked. “No,” she answered; “if there had been I could have argued him out of it.” She paused at the door of the studio. “I'll just get rid of these,” she said, “and then I will be with you.” A wood fire was burning on the open hearth, flashing alternate beams of light and shadow down the long bare room. The high oak stool stood in its usual place beside the engraving desk, upon which lay old Deleglise's last unfinished plate, emitting a dull red glow. I paced the creaking boards with halting steps, as through some ghostly gallery hung with dim portraits of the dead and living. In a little while Norah entered and came to me with outstretched hand.

be appraised at truer value, for it was out of fashion while he lived. “Was he a disappointed man, do you think?” I asked. “No,” answered Norah. “I am sure not. He was too fond of his work.” “But he dreamt of becoming a second Millet. He confessed it to me once. And he died an engraver.” “But they were good engravings,” smiled Norah. “I remember a favourite saying of his,” continued Norah, after a pause; “I do not know whether it was original or not. 'The stars guide us. They are not our goal.'” “Ah, yes, we aim at the moon and--hit the currant bush.” “It is necessary always to allow for deflection,” laughed Norah. “Apparently it takes a would-be poet to write a successful comic opera.” “Ah, you do not understand!” I cried. “It was not mere ambition; cap and bells or laurel wreath! that is small matter.
