CHAPTER XXVII

HOW SALVATION YEO FOUND HIS LITTLE MAID AGAIN

     “All precious things, discover'd late,
        To them who seek them issue forth;
     For love in sequel works with fate,
        And draws the veil from hidden worth.”

                         The Sleeping Beauty.

And so Ayacanora took up her abode in Lucy's cabin, as a regularly
accredited member of the crew.

But a most troublesome member; for now began in her that perilous crisis
which seems to endanger the bodies and souls of all savages and savage
tribes, when they first mingle with the white man; that crisis which,
a few years afterwards, began to hasten the extermination of the North
American tribes; and had it not been for the admirable good sense and
constancy of Amyas, Ayacanora might have ended even more miserably than
did the far-famed Pocahontas, daughter of the Virginian king; who, after
having been received at Court by the old pedant James the First,
with the honors of a sister sovereign, and having become the reputed
ancestress of more than one ancient Virginian family, ended her days in
wretchedness in some Wapping garret.

For the mind of the savage, crushed by the sight of the white man's
superior skill, and wealth, and wisdom, loses at first its self-respect;
while his body, pampered with easily obtained luxuries, instead
of having to win the necessaries of life by heavy toil, loses its
self-helpfulness; and with self-respect and self-help vanish all the
savage virtues, few and flimsy as they are, and the downward road toward
begging and stealing, sottishness and idleness, is easy, if not sure.

And down that road, it really seemed at first, that poor Ayacanora was
walking fast. For the warrior-prophetess of the Omaguas soon became, to
all appearance, nothing but a very naughty child; and the Diana of the
Meta, after she had satisfied her simple wonder at the great floating
house by rambling from deck to deck, and peeping into every cupboard
and cranny, manifested a great propensity to steal and hide (she was too
proud or too shy to ask for) every trumpery which smit her fancy; and
when Amyas forbade her to take anything without leave, threatened
to drown herself, and went off and sulked all day in her cabin.
Nevertheless, she obeyed him, except in the matter of sweet things.
Perhaps she craved naturally for the vegetable food of her native
forests; at all events the bishop's stores of fruit and sweetmeats
diminished rapidly; and what was worse, so did the sweet Spanish wine
which Amyas had set apart for poor Lucy's daily cordial. Whereon another
severe lecture, in which Amyas told her how mean it was to rob poor
sick Lucy; whereat she, as usual, threatened to drown herself; and was
running upon deck to do it, when Amyas caught her and forgave her. On
which a violent fit of crying, and great penitence and promises; and
a week after, Amyas found that she had cheated Satan and her own
conscience by tormenting the Portuguese steward into giving her some
other wine instead: but luckily for her, she found Amyas's warnings
about wine making her mad so far fulfilled, that she did several foolish
things one evening, and had a bad headache next morning; so the murder
was out, and Amyas ordered the steward up for a sound flogging; but
Ayacanora, honorably enough, not only begged him off, but offered to be
whipped instead of him, confessing that the poor fellow spoke truly when
he swore that she had threatened to kill him, and that he had given her
the wine in bodily fear for his life.

However, her own headache and Amyas's cold looks were lesson enough, and
after another attempt to drown herself, the wilful beauty settled down
for awhile; and what was better, could hardly be persuaded, thenceforth
to her dying day, to touch fermented liquors.

But, in the meanwhile, poor Amyas had many a brains-beating as to how
he was to tame a lady who, on the least provocation, took refuge in
suicide. Punish her he dared not, even if he had the heart. And as for
putting her ashore, he had an instinct, and surely not a superstitious
one, that her strange affection for the English was not unsent by
Heaven, and that God had committed her into his charge, and that He
would require an account at his hands of the soul of that fair lost
lamb.

So, almost at his wits' end, he prayed to God, good simple fellow, and
that many a time, to show him what he should do with her before she
killed either herself, or what was just as likely, one of the crew; and
it seemed best to him to make Parson Jack teach her the rudiments of
Christianity, that she might be baptized in due time when they got home
to England.

But here arose a fresh trouble--for she roundly refused to learn of
Jack, or of any one but Amyas himself; while he had many a good reason
for refusing the office of schoolmaster; so, for a week or two more,
Ayacanora remained untaught, save in the English tongue, which she
picked up with marvellous rapidity.

And next, as if troubles would never end, she took a violent dislike,
not only to John Brimblecombe, whose gait and voice she openly mimicked
for the edification of the men; but also to Will Cary, whom she never
allowed to speak to her or approach her. Perhaps she was jealous of his
intimacy with Amyas; or perhaps, with the subtle instinct of a woman,
she knew that he was the only other man on board who might dare to make
love to her (though Will, to do him justice, was as guiltless of any
such intention as Amyas himself). But when she was remonstrated with,
her only answer was that Cary was a cacique as well as Amyas, and that
there ought not to be two caciques; and one day she actually proposed to
Amyas to kill his supposed rival, and take the ship all to himself;
and sulked for several days at hearing Amyas, amid shouts of laughter,
retail her precious advice to its intended victim.

Moreover, the negroes came in for their share, being regarded all along
by her with an unspeakable repugnance, which showed itself at first in
hiding from them whenever she could, and, afterwards, in throwing at
them everything she could lay hands on, till the poor Quashies, in
danger of their lives, complained to Amyas, and got rest for awhile.

Over the rest of the sailors she lorded it like a very princess, calling
them from their work to run on her errands and make toys for her,
enforcing her commands now and then by a shrewd box on the ears; while
the good fellows, especially old Yeo, like true sailors, petted her,
obeyed her, even jested with her, much as they might have done with a
tame leopard, whose claws might be unsheathed and about their ears at
any moment. But she amused them, and amused Amyas too. They must of
course have a pet; and what prettier one could they have? And as for
Amyas, the constant interest of her presence, even the constant
anxiety of her wilfulness, kept his mind busy, and drove out many a sad
foreboding about that meeting with his mother, and the tragedy which
he had to tell her, which would otherwise, so heavily did they weigh on
him, have crushed his spirit with melancholy, and made all his worldly
success and marvellous deliverance worthless in his eyes.

At last the matter, as most things luckily do, came to a climax; and it
came in this way.

The ship had been slipping along now for many a day, slowly but steadily
before a favorable breeze. She had passed the ring of the West India
islands, and was now crawling, safe from all pursuit, through the vast
weed-beds of the Sargasso Sea. There, for the first time, it was thought
safe to relax the discipline which had been hitherto kept up, and to
“rummage” (as was the word in those days) their noble prize. What they
found, of gold and silver, jewels, and merchandise, will interest no
readers. Suffice it to say, that there was enough there, with the other
treasure, to make Amyas rich for life, after all claims of Cary's and
the crew, not forgetting Mr. Salterne's third, as owner of the ship,
had been paid off. But in the captain's cabin were found two chests, one
full of gorgeous Mexican feather dresses, and the other of Spanish and
East Indian finery, which, having come by way of Havana and Cartagena,
was going on, it seemed, to some senora or other at the Caracas. Which
two chests were, at Cary's proposal, voted amid the acclamations of
the crew to Ayacanora, as her due and fit share of the pillage, in
consideration of her Amazonian prowess and valuable services.

So the poor child took greedy possession of the trumpery, had them
carried into Lucy's cabin, and there knelt gloating over them many an
hour. The Mexican work she chose to despise as savage; but the Spanish
dresses were a treasure; and for two or three days she appeared on the
quarter-deck, sunning herself like a peacock before the eyes of Amyas in
Seville mantillas, Madrid hats, Indian brocade farthingales, and I know
not how many other gewgaws, and dare not say how put on.

The crew tittered: Amyas felt much more inclined to cry. There is
nothing so pathetic as a child's vanity, saving a grown person aping a
child's vanity; and saving, too, a child's agony of disappointment when
it finds that it has been laughed at instead of being admired. Amyas
would have spoken, but he was afraid: however, the evil brought its own
cure. The pageant went on, as its actor thought, most successfully
for three days or so; but at last the dupe, unable to contain herself
longer, appealed to Amyas,--“Ayacanora quite English girl now; is she
not?”--heard a titter behind her, looked round, saw a dozen honest
faces in broad grin, comprehended all in a moment, darted down the
companion-ladder, and vanished.

Amyas, fully expecting her to jump overboard, followed as fast as he
could. But she had locked herself in with Lucy, and he could hear her
violent sobs, and Lucy's faint voice entreating to know what was the
matter.

In vain he knocked. She refused to come out all day, and at even they
were forced to break the door open, to prevent Lucy being starved.

There sat Ayacanora, her finery half torn off, and scattered about the
floor in spite, crying still as if her heart would break; while poor
Lucy cried too, half from fright and hunger, and half for company.

Amyas tried to comfort the poor child, assured her that the men should
never laugh at her again; “But then,” added he, “you must not be
so--so--” What to say he hardly knew.

“So what?” asked she, crying more bitterly than ever.

“So like a wild girl, Ayacanora.”

Her hands dropped on her knees: a strong spasm ran through her
throat and bosom, and she fell on her knees before him, and looked up
imploringly in his face.

“Yes; wild girl--poor, bad wild girl. . . . But I will be English girl
now!”

“Fine clothes will never make you English, my child,” said Amyas.

“No! not English clothes--English heart! Good heart, like yours! Yes, I
will be good, and Sir John shall teach me!”

“There's my good maid,” said Amyas. “Sir John shall begin and teach you
to-morrow.”

“No! Now! now! Ayacanora cannot wait. She will drown herself if she is
bad another day! Come, now!”

And she made him fetch Brimblecombe, heard the honest fellow patiently
for an hour or more, and told Lucy that very night all that he had said.
And from that day, whenever Jack went in to read and pray with the
poor sufferer, Ayacanora, instead of escaping on deck as before, stood
patiently trying to make it all out, and knelt when he knelt, and tried
to pray too--that she might have an English heart; and doubtless her
prayers, dumb as they were, were not unheard.

So went on a few days more, hopefully enough, without any outbreak, till
one morning, just after they had passed the Sargasso-beds. The ship
was taking care of herself; the men were all on deck under the awning,
tinkering, and cobbling, and chatting; Brimblecombe was catechising his
fair pupil in the cabin; Amyas and Cary, cigar in mouth, were chatting
about all heaven and earth, and, above all, of the best way of getting
up a fresh adventure against the Spaniards as soon as they returned;
while Amyas was pouring out to Will that dark hatred of the whole
nation, that dark purpose of revenge for his brother and for Rose, which
had settled down like a murky cloud into every cranny of his heart and
mind. Suddenly there was a noise below; a scuffle and a shout,
which made them both leap to their feet; and up on deck rushed Jack
Brimblecombe, holding his head on with both his hands.

“Save me! save me from that she-fiend! She is possessed with a legion!
She has broken my nose--torn out half my hair!--and I'm sure I have none
to spare! Here she comes! Stand by me, gentlemen both! Satanas, I defy
thee!” And Jack ensconced himself behind the pair, as Ayacanora whirled
upon deck like a very Maenad, and, seeing Amyas, stopped short.

“If you had defied Satan down below there,” said Cary, with a laugh, “I
suspect he wouldn't have broken out on you so boldly, Master Jack.”

“I am innocent--innocent as the babe unborn! Oh! Mr. Cary! this is too
bad of you, sir!” quoth Jack indignantly, while Amyas asked what was the
matter.

“He looked at me,” said she, sturdily.

“Well, a cat may look at a king.”

“But he sha'n't look at Ayacanora. Nobody shall but you, or I'll kill
him!”

In vain Jack protested his innocence of having even looked at her. The
fancy (and I verily believe it was nothing more) had taken possession of
her. She refused to return below to her lesson. Jack went off grumbling,
minus his hair, and wore a black eye for a week after.

“At all events,” quoth Cary, re-lighting his cigar, “it's a fault on the
right side.”

“God give me grace, or it may be one on the wrong side for me.”

“He will, old heart-of-oak!” said Cary, laying his arm around Amyas's
neck, to the evident disgust of Ayacanora, who went off to the side,
got a fishing-line, and began amusing herself therewith, while the ship
slipped on quietly and silently as ever, save when Ayacanora laughed and
clapped her hands at the flying-fish scudding from the bonitos. At last,
tired of doing nothing, she went forward to the poop-rail to listen to
John Squire the armorer, who sat tinkering a headpiece, and humming a
song, mutato nomine, concerning his native place--

     “Oh, Bideford is a pleasant place, it shines where it stands,
     And the more I look upon it, the more my heart it warms;
     For there are fair young lasses, in rows upon the quay,
     To welcome gallant mariners, when they come home from say.”

“'Tis Sunderland, John Squire, to the song, and not Bidevor,” said his
mate.

“Well, Bidevor's so good as Sunderland any day, for all there's
no say-coals there blacking a place about; and makes just so good
harmonies, Tommy Hamblyn--

     “Oh, if I was a herring, to swim the ocean o'er,
     Or if I was a say-dove, to fly unto the shoor,
     To fly unto my true love, a waiting at the door,
     To wed her with a goold ring, and plough the main no moor.”

Here Yeo broke in--

“Aren't you ashamed, John Squire, to your years, singing such carnal
vanities, after all the providences you have seen? Let the songs of Zion
be in your mouth, man, if you must needs keep a caterwauling all day
like that.”

“You sing 'em yourself then, gunner.”

“Well,” says Yeo, “and why not?” And out he pulled his psalm-book, and
began a scrap of the grand old psalm--

     “Such as in ships and brittle barks
        Into the seas descend,
     Their merchandise through fearful floods
        To compass and to end;
     There men are forced to behold
        The Lord's works what they be;
     And in the dreadful deep the same,
        Most marvellous they see.”

“Humph!” said John Squire. “Very good and godly: but still I du like
a merry catch now and then, I du. Wouldn't you let a body sing
'Rumbelow'--even when he's heaving of the anchor?”

“Well, I don't know,” said Yeo; “but the Lord's people had better
praise the Lord then too, and pray for a good voyage, instead of howling
about--

       “A randy, dandy, dandy O,
        A whet of ale and brandy O,
     With a rumbelow and a Westward-ho!
        And heave, my mariners all, O!”

“Is that fit talk for immortal souls? How does that child's-trade sound
beside the Psalms, John Squire?”

Now it befell that Salvation Yeo, for the very purpose of holding up to
ridicule that time-honored melody, had put into it the true nasal twang,
and rung it out as merrily as he had done perhaps twelve years before,
when he got up John Oxenham's anchor in Plymouth Sound. And it befell
also that Ayacanora, as she stood by Amyas's side, watching the men, and
trying to make out their chat, heard it, and started; and then, half to
herself, took up the strain, and sang it over again, word for word, in
the very same tune and tone.

Salvation Yeo started in his turn, and turned deadly pale.

“Who sung that?” he asked quickly.

“The little maid here. She's coming on nicely in her English,” said
Amyas.

“The little maid?” said Yeo, turning paler still. “Why do you go about
to scare an old servant, by talking of little maids, Captain Amyas?
Well,” he said aloud to himself, “as I am a sinful saint, if I hadn't
seen where the voice came from, I could have sworn it was her; just as
we taught her to sing it by the river there, I and William Penberthy of
Marazion, my good comrade. The Lord have mercy on me!”

All were silent as the grave whenever Yeo made any allusion to that lost
child. Ayacanora only, pleased with Amyas's commendation, went humming
on to herself--

     “And heave, my mariners all, O!”

Yeo started up from the gun where he sat.

“I can't abear it! As I live, I can't! You, Indian maiden, where did you
learn to sing that there?”

Ayacanora looked up at him, half frightened by his vehemence, then at
Amyas, to see if she had been doing anything wrong; and then turned
saucily away, looked over the side, and hummed on.

“Ask her, for mercy's sake--ask her, Captain Leigh!”

“My child,” said Amyas, speaking in Indian, “how is it you sing that so
much better than any other English? Did you ever hear it before?”

Ayacanora looked up at him puzzled, and shook her head; and then--

“If you tell Indian to Ayacanora, she dumb. She must be English girl
now, like poor Lucy.”

“Well then,” said Amyas, “do you recollect, Ayacanora--do you
recollect--what shall I say? anything that happened when you were a
little girl?”

She paused awhile; and then moving her hands overhead--

“Trees--great trees like the Magdalena--always nothing but trees--wild
and bad everything. Ayacanora won't talk about that.”

“Do you mind anything that grew on those trees?” asked Yeo, eagerly.

She laughed. “Silly! Flowers and fruit, and nuts--grow on all trees, and
monkey-cups too. Ayacanora climbed up after them--when she was wild. I
won't tell any more.”

“But who taught you to call them monkey-cups?” asked Yeo, trembling with
excitement.

“Monkey's drink; mono drink.”

“Mono?” said Yeo, foiled on one cast, and now trying another. “How did
you know the beasts were called monos?”

“She might have heard it coming down with us,” said Cary, who had joined
the group.

“Ay, monos,” said she, in a self-justifying tone. “Faces like little
men, and tails. And one very dirty black one, with a beard, say Amen in
a tree to all the other monkeys, just like Sir John on Sunday.”

This allusion to Brimblecombe and the preaching apes upset all but old
Yeo.

“But don't you recollect any Christians?--white people?”

She was silent.

“Don't you mind a white lady?”

“Um?”

“A woman, a very pretty woman, with hair like his?” pointing to Amyas.

“No.”

“What do you mind, then, beside those Indians?” added Yeo, in despair.

She turned her back on him peevishly, as if tired with the efforts of
her memory.

“Do try to remember,” said Amyas; and she set to work again at once.

“Ayacanora mind great monkeys--black, oh, so high,” and she held up her
hand above her head, and made a violent gesture of disgust.

“Monkeys? what, with tails?”

“No, like man. Ah! yes--just like Cooky there--dirty Cooky!”

And that hapless son of Ham, who happened to be just crossing the
main-deck, heard a marlingspike, which by ill luck was lying at hand,
flying past his ears.

“Ayacanora, if you heave any more things at Cooky, I must have you
whipped,” said Amyas, without, of course, any such intention.

“I'll kill you, then,” answered she, in the most matter-of-fact tone.

“She must mean negurs,” said Yeo; “I wonder where she saw them, now.
What if it were they Cimaroons?”

“But why should any one who had seen whites forget them, and yet
remember negroes?” asked Cary.

“Let us try again. Do you mind no great monkeys but those black ones?”
 asked Amyas.

“Yes,” she said, after a while,--“devil.”

“Devil?” asked all three, who, of course, were by no means free from the
belief that the fiend did actually appear to the Indian conjurors, such
as had brought up the girl.

“Ay, him Sir John tell about on Sundays.”

“Save and help us!” said Yeo; “and what was he like unto?”

She made various signs to intimate that he had a monkey's face, and
a gray beard like Yeo's. So far so good: but now came a series of
manipulations about her pretty little neck, which set all their fancies
at fault.

“I know,” said Cary, at last, bursting into a great laugh. “Sir Urian
had a ruff on, as I live! Trunk-hose too, my fair dame? Stop--I'll make
sure. Was his neck like the senor commandant's, the Spaniard?”

Ayacanora clapped her hands at finding herself understood, and the
questioning went on.

“The 'devil' appeared like a monkey, with a gray beard, in a
ruff;--humph!--”

“Ay!” said she in good enough Spanish, “Mono de Panama; viejo diablo de
Panama.”

Yeo threw up his hands with a shriek--“Oh Lord of all mercies! Those
were the last words of Mr. John Oxenham! Ay--and the devil is surely
none other than the devil Don Francisco Xararte! Oh dear! oh dear! oh
dear! my sweet young lady! my pretty little maid! and don't you know me?
Don't you know Salvation Yeo, that carried you over the mountains,
and used to climb for the monkey-cups for you, my dear young lady? And
William Penberthy too, that used to get you flowers; and your poor dear
father, that was just like Mr. Cary there, only he had a black beard,
and black curls, and swore terribly in his speech, like a Spaniard, my
dear young lady?”

And the honest fellow, falling on his knees, covered Ayacanora's hands
with kisses; while all the crew, fancying him gone suddenly mad, crowded
aft.

“Steady, men, and don't vex him!” said Amyas. “He thinks that he has
found his little maid at last.”

“And so do I, Amyas, as I live,” said Cary.

“Steady, steady, my masters all! If this turn out a wrong scent after
all, his wits will crack. Mr. Yeo, can't you think of any other token?”

Yeo stamped impatiently. “What need then? it's her, I tell ye, and
that's enough! What a beauty she's grown! Oh dear! where were my eyes
all this time, to behold her, and not to see her! 'Tis her very mortal
self, it is! And don't you mind me, my dear, now? Don't you mind
Salvation Yeo, that taught you to sing 'Heave my mariners all, O!'
a-sitting on a log by the boat upon the sand, and there was a sight of
red lilies grew on it in the moss, dear, now, wasn't there? and we made
posies of them to put in your hair, now?”--And the poor old man ran on
in a supplicating, suggestive tone, as if he could persuade the girl
into becoming the person whom he sought.

Ayacanora had watched him, first angry, then amused, then attentive, and
at last with the most intense earnestness. Suddenly she grew crimson,
and snatching her hands from the old man's, hid her face in them, and
stood.

“Do you remember anything of all this, my child?” asked Amyas, gently.

She lifted up her eyes suddenly to his, with a look of imploring agony,
as if beseeching him to spare her. The death of a whole old life,
the birth of a whole new life, was struggling in that beautiful face,
choking in that magnificent throat, as she threw back her small head,
and drew in her breath, and dashed her locks back from her temples, as
if seeking for fresh air. She shuddered, reeled, then fell weeping on
the bosom, not of Salvation Yeo, but of Amyas Leigh.

He stood still a minute or two, bearing that fair burden, ere he could
recollect himself. Then,--

“Ayacanora, you are not yet mistress of yourself, my child. You were
better to go down, and see after poor Lucy, and we will talk about it
all to-morrow.”

She gathered herself up instantly, and with eyes fixed on the deck slid
through the group, and disappeared below.

“Ah!” said Yeo, with a tone of exquisite sadness; “the young to the
young! Over land and sea, in the forests and in the galleys, in battle
and prison, I have sought her! And now!--”

“My good friend,” said Amyas, “neither are you master of yourself yet.
When she comes round again, whom will she love and thank but you?”

“You, sir! She owes all to you; and so do I. Let me go below, sir. My
old wits are shaky. Bless you, sir, and thank you for ever and ever!”

And Yeo grasped Amyas's hand, and went down to his cabin, from which he
did not reappear for many hours.

From that day Ayacanora was a new creature. The thought that she was
an Englishwoman; that she, the wild Indian, was really one of the
great white people whom she had learned to worship, carried in it some
regenerating change: she regained all her former stateliness, and with
it a self-restraint, a temperance, a softness which she had never shown
before. Her dislike to Cary and Jack vanished. Modest and distant as
ever, she now took delight in learning from them about England and
English people; and her knowledge of our customs gained much from the
somewhat fantastic behaviour which Amyas thought good, for reasons
of his own, to assume toward her. He assigned her a handsome cabin to
herself, always addressed her as madam, and told Cary, Brimblecombe, and
the whole crew that as she was a lady and a Christian, he expected them
to behave to her as such. So there was as much bowing and scraping
on the poop as if it had been a prince's court: and Ayacanora, though
sorely puzzled and chagrined at Amyas's new solemnity, contrived to
imitate it pretty well (taking for granted that it was the right thing);
and having tolerable masters in the art of manners (for both Amyas and
Cary were thoroughly well-bred men), profited much in all things, except
in intimacy with Amyas, who had, cunning fellow, hit on this parade of
good manners, as a fresh means of increasing the distance between him
and her. The crew, of course, though they were a little vexed at losing
their pet, consoled themselves with the thought that she was a “real
born lady,” and Mr. Oxenham's daughter, too; and there was not a man on
board who did not prick up his ears for a message if she approached him,
or one who would not have, I verily believe, jumped overboard to do her
a pleasure.

Only Yeo kept sorrowfully apart. He never looked at her, spoke to her,
met her even, if he could. His dream had vanished. He had found her! and
after all, she did not care for him? Why should she?

But it was hard to have hunted a bubble for years, and have it break
in his hand at last. “Set not your affections on things on the earth,”
 murmured Yeo to himself, as he pored over his Bible, in the vain hope of
forgetting his little maid.

But why did Amyas wish to increase the distance between himself and
Ayacanora? Many reasons might be given: I deny none of them. But the
main one, fantastic as it may seem, was simply, that while she had
discovered herself to be an Englishwoman, he had discovered her to be a
Spaniard. If her father were seven times John Oxenham (and even that the
perverse fellow was inclined to doubt), her mother was a Spaniard--Pah!
one of the accursed race; kinswoman--perhaps, to his brother's
murderers! His jaundiced eyes could see nothing but the Spanish element
in her; or, indeed, in anything else. As Cary said to him once, using a
cant phrase of Sidney's, which he had picked up from Frank, all heaven
and earth were “spaniolated,” to him. He seemed to recollect nothing but
that Heaven had “made Spaniards to be killed, and him to kill them.” If
he had not been the most sensible of John Bulls, he would certainly have
forestalled the monomania of that young Frenchman of rank, who, some
eighty years after him, so maddened his brain by reading of the Spanish
cruelties, that he threw up all his prospects and turned captain of
filibusters in the West Indies, for the express purpose of ridding them
of their tyrants; and when a Spanish ship was taken, used to relinquish
the whole booty to his crew, and reserve for himself only the pleasure
of witnessing his victims' dying agonies.

But what had become of that bird-like song of Ayacanora's which had
astonished them on the banks of the Meta, and cheered them many a time
in their anxious voyage down the Magdalena? From the moment that she
found out her English parentage, it stopped. She refused utterly to sing
anything but the songs and psalms which she picked up from the English.
Whether it was that she despised it as a relic of her barbarism, or
whether it was too maddening for one whose heart grew heavier and
humbler day by day, the nightingale notes were heard no more.

So homeward they ran, before a favoring southwest breeze: but long
ere they were within sight of land, Lucy Passmore was gone to her rest
beneath the Atlantic waves.
