WHAT BEFELL AT LA GUAYRA “Great was the crying, the running and riding, Which at that season was made in the place; The beacons were fired, as need then required, To save their great treasure they had little space.” Winning of Cales.

The men would gladly have hawked awhile round Margarita and Cubagua for another pearl prize. But Amyas having, as he phrased it, “fleshed his dogs,” was loth to hang about the islands after the alarm had been given. They ran, therefore, south-west across the mouth of that great bay which stretches from the Peninsula of Paria to Cape Codera, leaving on their right hand Tortuga, and on their left the meadow-islands of the Piritoos, two long green lines but a few inches above the tideless sea. Yeo and Drew knew every foot of the way, and had good reason to know it; for they, the first of all English mariners, had tried to trade along this coast with Hawkins.

Cape, they became aware of that strong eastward current which, during the winter months, so often baffles the mariner who wishes to go to the westward. All night long they struggled through the billows, with the huge wall of Cape Codera a thousand feet above their heads to the left, and beyond it again, bank upon bank of mountain, bathed in the yellow moonlight. Morning showed them a large ship, which had passed them during the night upon the opposite course, and was now a good ten miles to the eastward. Yeo was for going back and taking her. Of the latter he made a matter of course; and the former was easy enough, for the breeze blowing dead off the land, was a “soldier's wind, there and back again,” for either ship; but Amyas and Frank were both unwilling.

to cripple the Spaniard, and exalt her majesty the queen. And I had thought that nothing was more dear than that to Captain Leigh's heart.” Amyas stood somewhat irresolute. His duty to the queen bade him follow the Spanish vessel: his duty to his vow, to go on to La Guayra. It may seem a far-fetched dilemma. He found it a practical one enough. However, the counsel of Frank prevailed, and on to La Guayra he went. He half hoped that the Spaniard would see and attack them. However, he went on his way to the eastward; which if he had not done, my story had had a very different ending. About mid-day a canoe, the first which they had seen, came staggering toward them under a huge three-cornered sail. As it came near, they could see two Indians on board.

feet high, and as bold and graceful of bearing as Frank or Amyas's self. He looked round for the first moment smilingly, showing his white teeth; but the next, his countenance changed; and springing to the side, he shouted to his comrade in Spanish-- “Treachery! No Spaniard,” and would have leaped overboard, but a dozen strong fellows caught him ere he could do so. It required some trouble to master him, so strong was he, and so slippery his naked limbs; Amyas, meanwhile, alternately entreated the men not to hurt the Indian, and the Indian to be quiet, and no harm should happen to him; and so, after five minutes' confusion, the stranger gave in sulkily. “Don't bind him. Let him loose, and make a ring round him. Now, my man, there's a dollar for you.” The Indian's eyes glistened, and he took the coin.

and loyal man he is, and as such will I treat him. Tell me, my brave fellow, how do you know us to be his Catholic majesty's enemies?” The Indian, with a shrewd smile, pointed to half-a-dozen different objects, saying to each, “Not Spanish.” “Well, and what of that?” “None but Spaniards and free Guayquerias have a right to sail these seas.” Amyas laughed. “Thou art a right valiant bit of copper. Pick up thy dollar, and go thy way in peace. Make room for him, men. We can learn what we want without his help.” The Indian paused, incredulous and astonished. “Overboard with you!” quoth Amyas. “Don't you know when you are well off?” “Most illustrious senor,” began the Indian, in the drawling sententious fashion of his race (when they take the trouble to talk at all), “I have been deceived.

I took yours.” Amyas stamped upon the deck: that then was the ship which they had passed! “Fool that I was to have been close to my enemy, and let my opportunity slip! If I had but done my duty, all would have gone right!” But it was too late to repine; and after all, the Indian's story was likely enough to be false. “Off with you!” said he; and the Indian bounded over the side into his canoe, leaving the whole crew wondering at the stateliness and courtesy of this bold sea-cavalier. So Westward-ho they ran, beneath the mighty northern wall, the highest cliff on earth, some seven thousand feet of rock parted from the sea by a narrow strip of bright green lowland. Here and there a patch of sugar-cane, or a knot of cocoa-nut trees, close to the water's edge, reminded them that they were in the tropics; but above, all was savage, rough, and bare as an Alpine precipice.

they say.” “Is it a strong place?” asked Amyas. “No forts to it at all, they say. The Spaniards boast, that Heaven has made such good walls to it already, that man need make none.” “I don't know,” quoth Amyas. “Lads, could you climb those hills, do you think?” “Rather higher than Harty Point, sir: but it depends pretty much on what's behind them.” And now the last point is rounded, and they are full in sight of the spot in quest of which they have sailed four thousand miles of sea. A low black cliff, crowned by a wall; a battery at either end. Within, a few narrow streets of white houses, running parallel with the sea, upon a strip of flat, which seemed not two hundred yards in breadth; and behind, the mountain wall, covering the whole in deepest shade.

than hawseholes in her idolatrous black sides, I think.” “We shall open her astern of the galleys in another minute,” said Amyas. “Look out, Cary, your eyes are better than mine.” “Six round portholes on the main deck,” quoth Will. “And I can see the brass patararoes glittering on her poop,” quoth Amyas. “Will, we're in for it.” “In for it we are, captain. “Farewell, farewell, my parents dear. I never shall see you more, I fear. “Let's go in, nevertheless, and pound the Don's ribs, my old lad of Smerwick. Eh? Three to one is very fair odds.” “Not underneath those fort guns, I beg leave to say,” quoth Yeo. “If the Philistines will but come out unto us, we will make them like unto Zeba and Zalmunna.” “Quite true,” said Amyas. “Game cocks are game cocks, but reason's reason.” “If the Philistines are not coming out, they are going to send a messenger instead,” quoth Cary.

time since, or how could they have got their craft hither?” “True, sir. They must have come from Santa Marta, at the least; perhaps from Cartagena. And that would take a month at least going and coming.” Amyas suddenly recollected Eustace's threat in the wayside inn. Could he have betrayed their purpose? Impossible! “Let us hold a council of war, at all events, Frank.” Frank was absorbed in a very different matter. A half-mile to the eastward of the town, two or three hundred feet up the steep mountain side, stood a large, low, white house embosomed in trees and gardens. There was no other house of similar size near; no place for one. And was not that the royal flag of Spain which flaunted before it? That must be the governor's house; that must be the abode of the Rose of Torridge!

to treat with them, and to inquire for-- “For her?” interrupted Frank. “If we show that we are aware of her existence, her name is blasted in the eyes of those jealous Spaniards.” “They will be, soon enough, then,” said Amyas. “I can see soldiers coming down the landing-stairs.” And, in fact, boats full of armed men began to push off to the ships. “We may thank Heaven,” said Drew, “that we were not here two hours agone. The sun will be down before they are ready for sea, and the fellows will have no stomach to go looking for us by night.” “So much the worse for us. If they will but do that, we may give them the slip, and back again to the town, and there try our luck; for I cannot find it in my heart to leave the place without having one dash at it.” Yeo shook his head.

their boats, and out of the roadstead. Two hours would suffice if the armada and the galleys were but once out of the way. Amyas went forward, called the men together, and told them the plan. It was not very cheerfully received: but what else was there to be done! They ran down about a mile and a half to the westward, and anchored. The night wore on, and there was no sign of stir among the shipping; for though they could not see the vessels themselves, yet their lights (easily distinguished by their relative height from those in the town above) remained motionless; and the men fretted and fumed for weary hours at thus seeing a rich prize (for of course the town was paved with gold) within arm's reach, and yet impossible.

Let Amyas and his men have patience. Some short five years more, and the great Armada will have come and gone; and then that avenging storm, of which they, like Oxenham, Hawkins, and Drake, are but the avant-couriers, will burst upon every Spanish port from Corunna to Cadiz, from the Canaries to Havana, and La Guayra and St. Yago de Leon will not escape their share. Captain Amyas Preston and Captain Sommers, the colonist of the Bermudas, or Sommers' Islands, will land, with a force tiny enough, though larger far than Leigh's, where Leigh dare not land; and taking the fort of Guayra, will find, as Leigh found, that their coming has been expected, and that the Pass of the Venta, three thousand feet above, has been fortified with huge barricadoes, abattis, and cannon, making the capital, amid its ring of mountain-walls, impregnable--to all but Englishmen or Zouaves.

of St. Jago, driving all before them; and having burnt the city in default of ransom, will return triumphant by the right road, and pass along the coast, the masters of the deep. * Humboldt says that there is a path from Caravellada to St. Jago, between the peaks, used by smugglers. This is probably the “unknowen way of the Indians,” which Preston used. I know not whether any men still live who count their descent from those two valiant captains; but if such there be, let them be sure that the history of the English navy tells no more Titanic victory over nature and man than that now forgotten raid of Amyas Preston and his comrade, in the year of grace 1595. But though a venture on the town was impossible, yet there was another venture which Frank was unwilling to let slip.

Amyas? Listen to me. I have long ceased to shrink from Death; but till I came into these magic climes, I never knew the beauty of his face.” “Of death?” said Cary. “I should have said, of life. God forgive me! but man might wish to live forever, if he had such a world as this wherein to live.” “Frank! Frank! remember our mother!” “I do remember her. I have talked over these things with her many a time; and where I would fain be, she would fain be also. She sent me out with my virgin honor, as the Spartan mother did her boy with the shield, saying, 'Come back either with this, or upon this;' and one or the other I must do, if I would meet her either in this life or in the next. But in the meanwhile do not mistake me; my life is God's, and I promise not to cast it away rashly.” “What would you do, then?” “Go up to that house, Amyas, and speak with her, if Heaven gives me an opportunity, as Heaven, I feel assured, will give.” “And do you call that no rashness?” “Is any duty rashness?

ship nor estates--except, I suppose, that I am not worthy to travel in such good company?” “Think of your old parents, John, and all your sisters.” “I thought of them before I started, sir, as Mr. Cary knows, and you know too. I came here to keep my vow, and I am not going to turn renegade at the very foot of the cross.” “Some one must go with you, Frank,” said Amyas; “if it were only to bring back the boat's crew in case--” and he faltered. “In case I fall,” replied Frank, with a smile. “I will finish your sentence for you, lad; I am not afraid of it, though you may be for me. Yet some one, I fear, must go. Unhappy me! that I cannot risk my own worthless life without risking your more precious lives!” “Not so, Mr.

they should be called by God, and not by man alone. Gentlemen, do you agree to Sir John's advice?” They agreed, seeing no better counsel, and John put three slips of paper into Frank's hand, with the simple old apostolic prayer-- “Show which of us three Thou hast chosen.” The lot fell upon Amyas Leigh. Frank shuddered, and clasped his hands over his face. “Well,” said Cary, “I have ill-luck to-night: but Frank goes at least in good company.” “Ah, that it had been I!” said Jack; “though I suppose I was too poor a body to have such an honor fall on me. And yet it is hard for flesh and blood; hard indeed to have come all this way, and not to see her after all!” “Jack,” said Frank, “you are kept to do better work than this, doubt not.

and as for the lady, God forbid that we should force her a step without her own will.” The honest sailor did not quite understand this punctilio: but-- “Well, captain,” quoth he, “as you like; but no man shall say that you asked for a volunteer, were it to jump down a shark's throat, but what you had me first of all the crew.” After this sort of temper had been exhibited, three or four more came forward--Yeo was very anxious to go, but Amyas forbade him. “I'll volunteer, sir, without reward, for this or anything; though” (added he in a lower tone) “I would to Heaven that the thought had never entered your head.” “And so would I have volunteered,” said Simon Evans, “if it were the ship's quarrel, or the queen's; but being it's a private matter of the captain's, and I've a wife and children at home, why, I take no shame to myself for asking money for my life.” So the crew was made up; but ere they pushed off, Amyas called Cary aside-- “If I perish, Will--” “Don't talk of such things, dear old lad.” “I must.

Tell my mother that I died like a gentleman; and mind--mind, dear lad, to keep your temper with the men, let the poor fellows grumble as they may. Mind but that, and fear God, and all will go well.” The tears were glistening in Cary's eyes as he pressed Amyas's hand, and watched the two brothers down over the side upon their desperate errand. They reached the pebble beach. There seemed no difficulty about finding the path to the house--so bright was the moon, and so careful a survey of the place had Frank taken. Leaving the men with the boat (Amyas had taken care that they should be well armed), they started up the beach, with their swords only. Frank assured Amyas that they would find a path leading from the beach up to the house, and he was not mistaken.

in the window still!” “But if not,” said Amyas, who had no such expectation, “what is your plan?” “I have none.” “None?” “I have imagined twenty different ones in the last hour; but all are equally uncertain, impossible. I have ceased to struggle--I go where I am called, love's willing victim. If Heaven accept the sacrifice, it will provide the altar and the knife.” Aymas was at his wits' end. Judging of his brother by himself, he had taken for granted that Frank had some well-concocted scheme for gaining admittance to the Rose; and as the wiles of love were altogether out of his province, he had followed in full faith such a sans-appel as he held Frank to be. But now he almost doubted of his brother's sanity, though Frank's manner was perfectly collected and his voice firm. Amyas, honest fellow, had no understanding of that intense devotion, which so many in those days (not content with looking on it as a lofty virtue, and yet one to be duly kept in its place by other duties) prided themselves on pampering into the most fantastic and self-willed excesses.

for heroes in God's cause, nothing but frivolity, heartlessness, and godlessness, becomes a laughing-stock,--and dies. One of the saddest books, I say again, which man can read. Amyas hardly dare trust himself to speak, for fear of saying too much; but he could not help saying-- “You are going to certain death, Frank.” “Did I not entreat,” answered he, very quietly, “to go alone?” Amyas had half a mind to compel him to return: but he feared Frank's obstinacy; and feared, too, the shame of returning on board without having done anything; so they went up through the wicket-gate, along a smooth turf walk, into what seemed a pleasure-garden, formed by the hand of man, or rather of woman. For by the light, not only of the moon, but of the innumerable fireflies, which flitted to and fro across the sward like fiery imps sent to light the brothers on their way, they could see that the bushes on either side, and the trees above their heads, were decked with flowers of such strangeness and beauty, that, as Frank once said of Barbados, “even the gardens of Wilton were a desert in comparison.” All around were orange and lemon trees (probably the only addition which man had made to Nature's prodigality), the fruit of which, in that strange colored light of the fireflies, flashed in their eyes like balls of burnished gold and emerald; while great white tassels swinging from every tree in the breeze which swept down the glade, tossed in their faces a fragrant snow of blossoms, and glittering drops of perfumed dew.

small head and bright eyes of a snake, hissing and glaring full in their faces. “See!” said Frank. “And he comes, as of old, in the likeness of an angel of light. Do not strike it. There are worse devils to be fought with to-night than that poor beast.” And stepping aside, they passed the snake safely, and arrived in front of the house. It was, as I have said, a long low house, with balconies along the upper story, and the under part mostly open to the wind. The light was still burning in the window. “Whither now?” said Amyas, in a tone of desperate resignation. “Thither! Where else on earth?” and Frank pointed to the light, trembling from head to foot, and pushed on. “For Heaven's sake! Look at the negroes on the barbecue!” It was indeed time to stop; for on the barbecue, or terrace of white plaster, which ran all round the front, lay sleeping full twenty black figures.

misery! So near and yet impossible?” “Would it be the less impossible were you face to face? Let us go back. We cannot go up without detection, even if our going were of use. Come back, for God's sake, ere all is lost! If you have seen her, as you say, you know at least that she is alive, and safe in his house--” “As his mistress? or as his wife? Do I know that yet, Amyas, and can I depart until I know?” There was a few minutes' silence, and then Amyas, making one last attempt to awaken Frank to the absurdity of the whole thing, and to laugh him, if possible, out of it, as argument had no effect-- “My dear fellow, I am very hungry and sleepy; and this bush is very prickly; and my boots are full of ants--” “So are mine.--Look!” and Frank caught Amyas's arm, and clenched it tight.

Not so. Another figure, cloaked likewise, but taller far, was following on her steps. It was a man's. They could see that he wore a broad sombrero. It could not be Don Guzman, for he was at sea. Who then? Here was a mystery; perhaps a tragedy. And both brothers held their breaths, while Amyas felt whether his sword was loose in the sheath. The Rose (if indeed it was she) was within ten yards of them, when she perceived that she was followed. She gave a little shriek. The cavalier sprang forward, lifted his hat courteously, and joined her, bowing low. The moonlight was full upon his face. “It is Eustace, our cousin! How came he here, in the name of all the fiends?” “Eustace! Then that is she, after all!” said Frank, forgetting everything else in her. And now flashed across Amyas all that had passed between him and Eustace in the moorland inn, and Parracombe's story, too, of the suspicious gipsy.

Amyas. “Thank God, thank God! I am content. Let us go.” But to go was impossible; for, as fate would have it, the two had stopped just opposite them. “The inestimable Senor Don Guzman--” began Eustace again. “What do you mean by praising him to me in this fulsome way, sir? Do you suppose that I do not know his virtues better than you?” “If you do, madam” (this was spoken in a harder tone), “it were wise for you to try them less severely, than by wandering down towards the beach on the very night that you know his most deadly enemies are lying in wait to slay him, plunder his house, and most probably to carry you off from him.” “Carry me off? I will die first!” “Who can prove that to him? Appearances are at least against you.” “My love to him, and his trust for me, sir!” “His trust?

you are here? You, sir, the tempter, you the eavesdropper, you the sunderer of loving hearts! You, serpent, who found our home a paradise, and see it now a hell!” “Do you dare to accuse me thus, madam, without a shadow of evidence?” “Dare? I dare anything, for I know all! I have watched you, sir, and I have borne with you too long.” “Me, madam, whose only sin towards you, as you should know by now, is to have loved you too well? Rose! Rose! have you not blighted my life for me--broken my heart? And how have I repaid you? How but by sacrificing myself to seek you over land and sea, that I might complete your conversion to the bosom of that Church where a Virgin Mother stands stretching forth soft arms to embrace her wandering daughter, and cries to you all day long, 'Come unto me, ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest!' And this is my reward!” “Depart with your Virgin Mother, sir, and tempt me no more!

how know you that I may not have orders, and that, after your last strange speech, my conscience may compel me to obey those orders, to take you with me?” “Me? with you?” “My heart has bled for you, madam, for many a year. It longs now that it had bled itself to death, and never known the last worst agony of telling you--” And drawing close to her he whispered in her ear--what, the brothers heard not--but her answer was a shriek which rang through the woods, and sent the night-birds fluttering up from every bough above their heads. “By Heaven!” said Amyas, “I can stand this no longer. Cut that devil's throat I must--” “She is lost if his dead body is found by her.” “We are lost if we stay here, then,” said Amyas; “for those negroes will hurry down at her cry, and then found we must be.” “Are you mad, madam, to betray yourself by your own cries?

at the unexpected apparition; but a second glance showed him Amyas's mighty bulk; and he spoke calmly-- “You see, madam, I did not call without need. Welcome, good cousins. My charity, as you perceive, has found means to outstrip your craft; while the fair lady, as was but natural, has been true to her assignation!” “Liar!” cried Frank. “She never knew of our being--” “Credat Judaeus!” answered Eustace; but, as he spoke, Amyas burst through the bushes at him. There was no time to be lost; and ere the giant could disentangle himself from the boughs and shrubs, Eustace had slipped off his long cloak, thrown it over Amyas's head, and ran up the alley shouting for help. Mad with rage, Amyas gave chase: but in two minutes more Eustace was safe among the ranks of the negroes, who came shouting and jabbering down the path.

escape with them? And would not Eustace use his power? The thought of the Inquisition crossed their minds. “Was that the threat which Eustace had whispered?” asked he of Frank. “It was,” groaned Frank, in answer. For the first and last time in his life, Amyas Leigh stood irresolute. “Back, and stab her to the heart first!” said Frank, struggling to escape from him. Oh, if Amyas were but alone, and Frank safe home in England! To charge the whole mob, kill her, kill Eustace, and then cut his way back again to the ship, or die,--what matter? as he must die some day,--sword in hand! But Frank!--and then flashed before his eyes his mother's hopeless face; then rang in his ears his mother's last bequest to him of that frail treasure. Let Rose, let honor, let the whole world perish, he must save Frank.

began to fly fast; small ones fortunately, and wide and wild for want of light--but when they reached the pebble-beach? Both were too proud to run; but, if ever Amyas prayed in his life, he prayed for the last twenty yards before he reached the water-mark. “Now, Frank! down to the boat as hard as you can run, while I keep the curs back.” “Amyas! what do you take me for? My madness brought you hither: your devotion shall not bring me back without you.” “Together, then!” And putting Frank's arm through his, they hurried down, shouting to their men. The boat was not fifty yards off: but fast travelling over the pebbles was impossible, and long ere half the distance was crossed, the negroes were on the beach, and the storm burst. A volley of great quartz pebbles whistled round their heads.

is up to his knees in water--battered with stones--blinded with blood. The boat is swaying off and on against the steep pebble-bank: he clutches at it--misses--falls headlong--rises half-choked with water: but Frank is still in his arms. Another heavy blow--a confused roar of shouts, shots, curses--a confused mass of negroes and English, foam and pebbles--and he recollects no more. * * * * * He is lying in the stern-sheets of the boat; stiff, weak, half blind with blood. He looks up; the moon is still bright overhead: but they are away from the shore now, for the wave-crests are dancing white before the land-breeze, high above the boat's side. The boat seems strangely empty. Two men are pulling instead of six! And what is this lying heavy across his chest? He pushes, and is answered by a groan. He puts his hand down to rise, and is answered by another groan.

get there. Isn't it enough to bring us out to death (as you knew yourself, sir, for you're prudent enough) to please that poor young gentleman's fancy about a wench; but you must call coward an honest man that have saved your life this night, and not a one of us but has his wound to show?” Amyas was silent; the rebuke was just. “I tell you, sir, if we've hove a stone out of this boat since we got off, we've hove two hundredweight, and, if the Lord had not fought for us, she'd have been beat to noggin-staves there on the beach.” “How did I come here, then?” “Tom Hart dragged you in out of five feet water, and then thrust the boat off, and had his brains beat out for reward. All were knocked down but us two.
