During the first days of my stay at the Terrace, Dr. John avoided sitting near me. Even when he paced the room, he steered clear of my corner, his expression heavy with a preoccupation that suggested he was waiting for a name to slip from his lips. I knew it was Miss Fanshawe. My mind remained in a state of perpetual readiness, my patience held at full alert, and my sympathy stocked like a granary, waiting to pour out its grain at the slightest sign of need. Finally, after an internal struggle I observed with respect, he broached the subject. He did so delicately, almost anonymously.

"Your friend is spending her vacation traveling, I hear?"

*Friend, forsooth!* I thought, but contradiction was impossible. I must yield to his rhythm; I must accept the soft impeachment. "Friend" it shall be. Yet, driven by curiosity, I asked whom he meant.

He took a seat at my worktable and began to unwind a reel of thread with reckless speed.

"Ginevra—Miss Fanshawe—has accompanied the Cholmondeleys on a tour through southern France?"

"She has."

"Do you and she correspond?"

"It will astonish you to learn that I never once considered applying for that privilege."

"You have seen letters of her writing?"

"Yes; several addressed to her uncle."

"They will not lack wit and *naïveté*; there is so much sparkle and so little art in her soul?"

"She writes comprehensively enough when addressing M. de Bassompierre: he who runs may read." (In truth, Ginevra's letters to her wealthy kinsman were often mere business documents, unequivocal applications for cash.)

"And her handwriting? It must be pretty, light, and ladylike, I should think?"

It was, and I confirmed it.

"I verily believe that all she does is well done," Dr. John said. Seeing that I showed no inclination to echo this sentiment, he pressed further. "You, who know her, could you name a point in which she is deficient?"

"She does several things very well." (*Flirtation, amongst the rest,* I added in thought.)

"When do you suppose she will return to town?" he inquired shortly.

"Pardon me, Dr. John, I must explain. You honor me too greatly by ascribing to me an intimacy with Miss Fanshawe that I do not possess. I have never been the depositary of her plans or secrets. You will find her particular friends in another sphere entirely: amongst the Cholmondeleys, for instance."

He seemed genuinely convinced I was stinging with a jealousy identical to his own.

"Excuse her," he said gently. "Judge her indulgently. The glitter of fashion misleads her, but she will soon discover these people are hollow. She will return to you with augmented attachment and confirmed trust. I know the Cholmondeleys well: they are superficial, showy, and selfish. Depend on it, at heart, Ginevra values you beyond a score of such."

"You are very kind," I replied briefly.

A disclaimer of the sentiments he attributed to me burned on my lips, but I extinguished the flame. I submitted to being viewed as the humiliated, cast-off, and now pining confidante of the distinguished Miss Fanshawe; but, reader, it was a bitter submission.

"Yet, you see," continued Graham, "while I comfort *you*, I cannot take the same consolation for myself. I cannot hope she will do me justice. De Hamal is most worthless, yet I fear he pleases her. Wretched delusion!"

My patience finally snapped. Illness and weakness had rendered it brittle. Without warning, I exploded.

"Dr. Bretton," I cried, "there is no delusion like your own. On all points but one, you are a man—frank, healthful, right-thinking, clear-sighted. On this exceptional point, you are but a slave. I declare, where Miss Fanshawe is concerned, you merit no respect; nor do I give you mine."

I rose and left the room, my heart racing.

That afternoon's scene was followed by an evening meeting where I realized I had caused harm. He was not made of common clay. While the broad outlines of his nature were shaped with vigor, the details possessed a workmanship of almost feminine delicacy—finer, much finer, than one could expect to find inherent in him, even after years of acquaintance. Only a sharp contact with his nerves revealed this acute sensibility. Furthermore, his sympathetic faculty was not prominent; to feel deeply and to instantly grasp another's feelings are separate properties. Dr. John possessed the former in exquisite perfection. Because I acknowledged he lacked the latter in equal measure, I must refrain from labeling him unsympathetic or unfeeling. On the contrary, he was a kind and generous man. Make your need known, and his hand was open. Pour your grief into words, and he would not turn a deaf ear. Do not, however, expect miracles of intuition.

That night, when Dr. John entered the room and met the evening lamp, I saw his entire mechanism clearly. To a man who had been called a "slave" and banned from respect, he must harbor peculiar feelings. He offered no denial that the epithet was well-applied; his mind candidly revolved around that possibility of unmanning. He sought in this accusation the cause of the galling ill-success that had seized his mental peace. Amidst a self-condemnatory soliloquy, his demeanor appeared grave, perhaps cold, to both me and his mother. Yet, there was no malice, no rancor, no littleness in his countenance. It remained beautiful with a man's best beauty, even in its depression. When I hurried to place his chair at the table and handed him his tea with trembling care, he said, "Thank you, Lucy," in a kindly tone of his full, pleasant voice as my ear had ever welcomed.

For my part, I had only one plan: I must expiate my culpable vehemence, or I would not sleep that night. This path was untenable. I could not endure it. Living embroiled with Dr. John seemed preferable only to the school solitude and conventual stagnation I had known. As for Ginevra, she might take the silver wings of a dove or any other flying creature and mount straight to the highest stars, where her lover's fancy fixed the constellation of her charms; never again would it be mine to dispute the arrangement.

I longed to catch his eye. Again and again, it met mine, but having nothing to say, it withdrew, leaving me baffled. After tea, he sat sad and quiet, reading a book. I wished to dare sitting near him, but feared that any such step would evoke hostility and indignation. I longed to speak and dared not whisper. When his mother left the room, moved by insupportable regret, I merely murmured, "Dr. Bretton."

He looked up from his book. His eyes were not cold or malevolent; his mouth was not cynical. He was ready and willing to hear whatever I had to say; his spirit was too mellow and generous to sour in a single thunderclap.

"Dr. Bretton, forgive my hasty words: *do, do* forgive them."

He smiled the moment I spoke. "Perhaps I deserved them, Lucy. If you don't respect me, I am sure it is because I am not respectable. I fear I am an awkward fool; I must manage badly in some way, for where I wish to please, it seems I don't please."

"Of that you cannot be sure; and even if such be the case, is it the fault of your character or of another's perceptions? But now, let me unsay what I said in anger. In one thing, and in all things, I deeply respect you. If you think scarcely enough of yourself and too much of others, what is that but an excellence?"

"Can I think too much of Ginevra?"

"*I* believe you may; *you* believe you can't. Let us agree to differ. Let me be pardoned; that is what I ask."

"Do you think I cherish ill-will for one warm word?"

"I see you do not and cannot; but just say, 'Lucy, I forgive you!' Say that, to ease me of the heart-ache."

"Put away your heart-ache, as I will put away mine; for you wounded me a little, Lucy. Now, when the pain is gone, I more than forgive: I feel grateful, as to a sincere well-wisher."

"I *am* your sincere well-wisher: you are right."

Thus our quarrel ended.

Reader, if in the course of this work you find that my opinion of Dr. John undergoes modification, excuse the seeming inconsistency. I give the feeling as I felt it at the time; I describe the view of character as it appeared when discovered.

He demonstrated the fineness of his nature by being kinder to me after this misunderstanding than before. Nay, the very incident that, by my theory, should have estranged us somewhat altered our relations, indeed, but not in the sense I painfully anticipated. An invisible, yet chilling something—very slight, very transparent, but very cold—had glazed the medium through which we exchanged intercourse throughout our lives. A screen of ice. Those few warm words, though warmed only by anger, breathed upon that frail frost-work of reserve. About this time, it gave note of dissolution. I think from that day, so long as we continued friends, he never stood on topics of ceremony with me in discourse. He seemed to know that if he would but talk about himself and what interested him most, my expectation would always be answered, my wish always satisfied. It followed, as a matter of course, that I continued to hear much of "Ginevra."

"Ginevra!" He thought her so fair, so good. He spoke so lovingly of her charms, her sweetness, her innocence that, in spite of my plain prose knowledge of the reality, a kind of reflected glow began to settle on her idea, even for me. Still, reader, I am free to confess that he often talked nonsense; but I strove to be unfailingly patient with him. I had had my lesson: I had learned how severe the pain was of crossing, grieving, or disappointing him. In a strange and new sense, I grew most selfish, quite powerless to deny myself the delight of indulging his mood and being pliant to his will. He still seemed most absurd when he obstinately doubted and desponded about his power to win Miss Fanshawe's preference. The fancy became rooted in my own mind more stubbornly than ever—that she was only coquetting to goad him, and that at heart she coveted every one of his words and looks.

Sometimes he harassed me, in spite of my resolution to bear and hear. In the midst of the indescribable gall-honey pleasure of thus enduring him, he struck so hard against the flint of the firmness I owned that it emitted fire once and again. I chanced to assert one day, with a view to stilling his impatience, that in my own mind I felt positive Miss Fanshawe *must* intend eventually to accept him.

"Positive! It was easy to say so, but had I any grounds for such assurance?"

"The best grounds."

"Now, Lucy, *do* tell me what!"

"You know them as well as I; and, knowing them, Dr. John, it really amazes me that you should not repose the frankest confidence in her fidelity. To doubt, under the circumstances, is almost to insult."

"Now you are beginning to speak fast and to breathe short; but speak a little faster and breathe a little shorter, till you have given an explanation—a full explanation: I must have it."

"You shall, Dr. John. In some cases, you are a lavish, generous man: you are a worshipper ever ready with the votive offering should Père Silas ever convert *you*. You will give him abundance of alms for his poor, supply his altar with tapers, and enrich the shrine of your favorite saint. Ginevra, Dr. John—"

"Hush!" said he, "don't go on."

"Hush, I will *not*: and go on I *will*: Ginevra has had her hands filled from your hands more times than I can count. You have sought for her the costliest flowers; you have busied your brain in devising gifts the most delicate; such, one would have thought, as only a woman could imagine. And in addition, Miss Fanshawe owns a set of ornaments, to purchase which your generosity must have verged on extravagance."

The modesty Ginevra herself had never evinced in this matter now flushed all over the face of her admirer.

"Nonsense!" he said, destructively snipping a skein of silk with my scissors. "I offered them to please myself; I felt she did me a favor in accepting them."

"She did more than a favor, Dr. John: she pledged her very honor that she would make you some return; and if she cannot pay you in affection, she ought to hand out a business-like equivalent, in the shape of some rouleaux of gold pieces."

"But you don't understand her; she is far too disinterested to care for my gifts, and too simple-minded to know their value."

I laughed out. I had heard her adjudge to every jewel its price; I well knew money-embarrassment, money-schemes, money's worth, and endeavors to realize supplies had, young as she was, furnished the most frequent and favorite stimulus of her thoughts for years.

He pursued. "You should have seen her whenever I have laid on her lap some trifle. So cool, so unmoved: no eagerness to take, not even pleasure in contemplating. Just from amiable reluctance to grieve me, she would permit the bouquet to lie beside her, and perhaps consent to bear it away. Or, if I achieved the fastening of a bracelet on her ivory arm, however pretty the trinket might be—and I always carefully chose what seemed to *me* pretty, and what of course was not valueless
