I rose before the dawn, the grey light of pre-dawn filtering weakly through the dormitory window. My knees grew stiff as I knelt beside the centre stand, completing the final links of my chain by the faint, dying glow of the night-lamp. Every bead, every thread of silk was exhausted; I had worked double, knowing that to suit the particular taste I sought to gratify, an appearance of brilliance was indispensable. To finish the ornament, I needed a gold clasp, which I found in the fastening of my sole necklace. Detaching and re-attaching it, I coiled the completed guard compactly and placed it inside a small box I had purchased for its brilliance—a shell of "nacarat" color, decked with a coronal of sparkling blue stones. Inside the lid, I carefully graved my initials with the point of my scissors.

The reader may recall Madame Beck's fête, where a handsome present was subscribed annually for the school. This observance was a distinction accorded only to Madame, and in a modified form, to her kinsman and counsellor, M. Emanuel. In his case, it was an honor spontaneously awarded, not contrived beforehand, serving as proof of the esteem in which the professor of literature was held by his pupils, despite his partialities and irritabilities. No article of value was offered to him; he distinctly understood that he would accept neither plate nor jewelry. Yet he liked a slight tribute; the monetary value did not touch him. A diamond ring or gold snuff-box presented with pomp would have pleased him less than a flower or a drawing offered simply and with sincere feelings. Such was his nature. He was a man not wise in his generation, yet he claimed a filial sympathy with "the dayspring on high."

M. Paul's fête fell on the first of March, a Thursday. It proved a fine, sunny day, coinciding with the morning mass and the half-holiday that permitted walking or shopping in the afternoon. These combined considerations induced a general smartness of dress. Clean collars were in vogue; the ordinary dingy woolen classes-dress was exchanged for something lighter. Mademoiselle Zélie St. Pierre, on this particular Thursday, even assumed a "robe de soie," deemed in economical Labassecour an article of hazardous splendour. She had sent for a coiffeur to dress her hair, and pupils acute enough to discover that she had bedewed her handkerchief and hands with a new, fashionable perfume. Poor Zélie! It was much her wont to declare about this time that she was tired to death of a life of seclusion and labor, longing for the means and leisure for relaxation, for a husband who would pay her debts, supply her wardrobe, and leave her at liberty to "goûter un peu les plaisirs." Rumors had long circulated that her eye was upon M. Emanuel. His eye was certainly often upon her. He would sit and watch her perseveringly for minutes together. I have seen him give her a quarter-of-an-hour's gaze while the class was silently composing, sitting throned on his estrade, unoccupied. Conscious of this basilisk attention, she would writhe under it, half-flattered, half-puzzled. Monsieur would follow her sensations, sometimes looking appallingly acute. For in some cases, he had the terrible, unerring penetration of instinct, piercing in its hiding-place the last lurking thought of the heart, discerning under florid veilings the bare, barren places of the spirit: yes, and its perverted tendencies, its hidden false curves—all that men and women would not have known—the twisted spine, the malformed limb born with them, and far worse, the stain or disfigurement they had brought on themselves. No calamity so accursed but M. Emanuel could pity and forgive if acknowledged candidly; but where his questioning eyes met dishonest denial, where his ruthless researches found deceitful concealment, oh, then he could be cruel. I thought him wicked! He would exultantly snatch the screen from poor shrinking wretches, passionately hurry them to the summit of the mount of exposure, and there show them all naked, all false—poor living lies—the spawn of that horrid Truth which cannot be looked on unveiled. He thought he did justice; for my part, I doubt whether man has a right to do such justice on man. More than once in these visitations, I have felt compelled to give tears to his victims, and not spared ire and keen reproach to himself. He deserved it, but it was difficult to shake him in his firm conviction that the work was righteous and needed.

Breakfast being over and mass attended, the school-bell rang and the rooms filled. A very pretty spectacle was presented in classe. Pupils and teachers sat neatly arrayed, orderly and expectant, each bearing in her hand the bouquet of felicitation—the prettiest spring-flowers all fresh, filling the air with their fragrance. I only had no bouquet. I like to see flowers growing, but when they are gathered, they cease to please. I look on them as things rootless and perishable; their likeness to life makes me sad. I never offer flowers to those I love; I never wish to receive them from hands dear to me. Mademoiselle St. Pierre marked my empty hands—she could not believe I had been so remiss. With avidity, her eye roved over and round me: surely I must have some solitary symbolic flower somewhere, some small knot of violets to win myself praise for taste, commendation for ingenuity. The unimaginative "Anglaise" proved better than the Parisienne's fears: she sat literally unprovided, as bare of bloom or leaf as the winter tree. This ascertained, Zélie smiled, well pleased.

"How wisely you have acted to keep your money, Miss Lucie," she said. "Silly I have gone and thrown away two francs on a bouquet of hot-house flowers!" And she showed with pride her splendid nosegay.

But hush! a step: *the* step. It came prompt, as usual, but with a promptitude we felt disposed to flatter ourselves, inspired by other feelings than mere excitability of nerve and vehemence of intent. We thought our Professor's "foot-fall" had in it a friendly promise this morning; and so it had.

He entered in a mood which made him as good as a new sunbeam to the already well-lit first classe. The morning light playing amongst our plants and laughing on our walls caught an added lustre from M. Paul's all-benignant salute. Like a true Frenchman, though I don't know why I should say so, for he was of strain neither French nor Labassecourien, he had dressed for the "situation" and the occasion. Not by the vague folds, sinister and conspirator-like, of his soot-dark paletôt were the outlines of his person obscured; on the contrary, his figure was well set off by a civilized coat and a silken vest quite pretty to behold. The defiant and pagan bonnet-grec had vanished; bare-headed, he came upon us, carrying a Christian hat in his gloved hand. The little man looked well, very well. There was a clearness of amity in his blue eye, and a glow of good feeling on his dark complexion which passed perfectly in the place of beauty. One really did not care to observe that his nose, though far from small, was of no particular shape, his cheek thin, his brow marked and square, his mouth no rose-bud. One accepted him as he was and felt his presence the reverse of damping or insignificant.

He passed to his desk, placing his hat and gloves upon it. "Bon jour, mes amies," he said, in a tone that somehow made amends to some amongst us for many a sharp snap and savage snarl. Not a jocund, good-fellow tone, still less an unctuous priestly accent, but a voice he had belonging to himself—a voice used when his heart passed the words to his lips. That same heart did speak sometimes; though irritable, it was not an ossified organ. In its core was a place tender beyond a man's tenderness, a place that humbled him to little children, that bound him to girls and women to whom, rebel as he would, he could not disown his affinity, nor quite deny that, on the whole, he was better with them than with his own sex.

"We all wish Monsieur a good day, and present to him our congratulations on the anniversary of his fête," said Mademoiselle Zélie, constituting herself spokeswoman of the assembly. Advancing with no more twists of affectation than were with her indispensable to the achievement of motion, she laid her costly bouquet before him. He bowed over it.

The long train of offerings followed. All the pupils, sweeping past with the gliding step foreigners practise, left their tributes as they went by. Each girl so dexterously adjusted her separate gift that when the last bouquet was laid on the desk, it formed the apex to a blooming pyramid—a pyramid blooming, spreading, and towering with such exuberance as, in the end, to eclipse the hero behind it. This ceremony over, seats were resumed, and we sat in dead silence, expectant of a speech.

I suppose five minutes might have elapsed, and the hush remained unbroken; ten—and there was no sound. Many present began, doubtless, to wonder for what Monsieur waited; as well they might. Voiceless and viewless, stirless and wordless, he kept his station behind the pile of flowers.

At last there issued forth a voice, rather deep, as if it spoke out of a hollow:—"Est-ce là tout?"

Mademoiselle Zélie looked round. "You have all presented your bouquets?" she inquired of the pupils. Yes; they had all given their nosegays, from the eldest to the youngest, from the tallest to the most diminutive. The senior mistress signified as much.

"Est-ce là tout?" was reiterated in an intonation which, deep before, had now descended some notes lower.

"Monsieur," said Mademoiselle St. Pierre, rising, and this time speaking with her own sweet smile, "I have the honor to tell you that, with a single exception, every person in classe has offered her bouquet. For Meess Lucie, Monsieur will kindly make allowance; as a foreigner she probably did not know our customs, or did not appreciate their significance. Meess Lucie has regarded this ceremony as too frivolous to be honored by her observance."

"Famous!" I muttered between my teeth. "You are no bad speaker, Zélie, when you begin."

The answer vouchsafed to Mademoiselle St. Pierre from the estrade was given in the gesticulation of a hand from behind the pyramid. This manual action seemed to deprecate words, to enjoin silence.

A form, ere long, followed the hand. Monsieur emerged from his eclipse; and producing himself on the front of his estrade, and gazing straight and fixedly before him at a vast "mappe-monde" covering the wall opposite, he demanded a third time, and now in really tragic tones—

"Est-ce là tout?"

I might yet have made all right by stepping forwards and slipping into his hand the ruddy little shell-box I at that moment held tight in my own. It was what I had fully purposed to do; but, first, the comic side of Monsieur's behavior had tempted me to delay, and now, Mademoiselle St. Pierre's affected interference provoked contumacy. The reader not having hitherto had any cause to ascribe to Miss Snowe's character the most distant pretensions to perfection, will be scarcely surprised to learn that she felt too perverse to defend herself from any imputation the Parisienne might choose to insinuate. Besides, M. Paul was so tragic, and took my defection so seriously, he deserved to be vexed. I kept, then, both my box and my countenance, and sat insensate as any stone.

"It is well!" dropped at length from the lips of M. Paul. Having uttered this phrase, the shadow of some great paroxysm—the swell of wrath, scorn, resolve—passed over his brow, rippled his lips, and lined his cheeks. Gulping down all further comment, he launched into his customary "discours."

I can't at all remember what this "discours" was; I did not listen to it. The gulping-down process, the abrupt dismissal of his mortification or vexation, had given me a sensation which half-counteracted the ludicrous effect of the reiterated "Est-ce là tout?" Towards the close of the speech there came a pleasing diversion; my attention was again amusingly arrested.

Owing to some little accidental movement—I think I dropped my thimble on the floor, and in stooping to regain it, hit the crown of my head against the sharp corner of my desk; which casualties, exasperating to me by rights if to anybody, naturally made a slight bustle—M. Paul became irritated. Dismissing his forced equanimity, and casting to the winds that dignity and self-control with which he never cared long to encumber himself, he broke forth into the strain best calculated to give him ease.

I don't know how, in the progress of his "discours", he had contrived to cross the Channel and land on British ground; but there I found him when I began to listen. Casting a quick, cynical glance round the room—a glance which scathed, or was intended to scathe, as it crossed me—he fell with fury upon "les Anglaises."

Never have I heard English women handled as M. Paul that morning handled them. He spared nothing—neither their minds, morals, manners, nor personal appearance. I specially remember his abuse of their tall stature, their long necks, their thin arms, their slovenly dress, their pedantic education, their impious scepticism, their insufferable pride, their pretentious virtue. Over which he ground his teeth malignantly and looked as if, had he dared, he would have said singular things. Oh! he was spiteful, acrid, savage; and, as a natural consequence, detestably ugly.

"Little wicked venomous man!" thought I. "Am I going to harass
