The spring had arrived with a sudden, feverish warmth, a change that brought not vitality but a temporary collapse of my strength. Even slight exertion left me drained; sleepless nights dragged me through languid days. One Sunday afternoon, after walking the half-league to the Protestant church, I returned to my solitary sanctuary, the first classe, utterly exhausted. I sank into my chair, making my desk a pillow for my weary head.

Through the glass door and the tender, lightly strewn foliage, I watched Madame Beck and a gay party of friends stroll beneath the orchard boughs. Their dresses were as pure and warm as mountain snow at sunrise. My gaze, however, was drawn to one figure: a handsome young girl, Mademoiselle Sauveur. I had seen her before, a "filleule" of M. Emanuel's, moving with the frank ease of a ward with an indulgent guardian beside M. Paul. She ran to him, linked her arm through his, and hung upon him. Watching her bright silk robe flash through the emerald leaves, I felt a strange, disagreeable presentiment strike through me—a sensation I refused to analyze. The hum of bees, the warmth, the sight of her, lulled me. My eyes closed, and I slept.

Two hours passed. When I awoke, the sun had set behind the towering houses, and the garden was grey. The guests were gone. Yet, I felt no chill. My cheek and arms were not benumbed by the hard wood of the desk. Instead, I found a thick shawl folded beneath me, and another wrapped warmly around my shoulders, taken from the corridor.

Who had done this? Who was my friend? None but St. Pierre was openly inimical to me, yet which of them possessed the quiet art of such tender care? Ginevra Fanshawe certainly would have pulled me from my chair. I concluded it was Madame Beck's doing; she viewed me as a useful machine and wished to prevent injury. "I'll take a walk," I decided, stepping out into the fresh evening.

I walked to my own alley, the place where I had once experienced a curious optical illusion. A ray of the setting sun still burnished the grey crown of Jean Baptiste. Pacing up and down, I reflected on my future. Living costs little in Villette, a town sensible of appearance and display. With a thousand francs saved, I could rent a tenement, furnish a room with benches, desks, and a black tableau, and begin teaching day-pupils. Madame Beck had started from nothing and now commanded a flourishing establishment.

"Courage, Lucy Snowe!" I whispered to myself. "With self-denial and economy, an object need not fail you. Labour for independence until you have won your right to look higher." But then the doubt crept in: Was there nothing more for me than this? No true home? No one dearer than myself, at whose feet I could lay down the burden of human egotism? I believed in a blending of hope and sunshine, that life was not all, neither beginning nor end. I trusted while I wept.

I settled my accounts with reality, refusing to falsify pain as privilege. Pausing before Methusaleh, the giant patriarch of the garden, I leaned my brow against his knotty trunk and rested my foot on the stone sealing the small sepulchre at his root. I recalled Dr. John. My warm affection for him, my faith in his excellence. What had become of that one-sided friendship, half marble and half life? Was it dead? I did not know, but it was buried. Sometimes I dreamed of disturbed earth and golden hair obtruding through coffin-chinks. Had I been too hasty? He still had such kind looks, such a warm hand; his voice kept a pleasant tone for my name. But I learned that this benignity belonged to him alone, the honey of his temper, not meant for me.

"Good-night, Dr. John; you are good, you are beautiful; but you are not mine."

The words left my lips, and then I heard an echo—quite close.

"Good-night, Mademoiselle; or, rather, good-evening—the sun is scarce set; I hope you slept well?"

I started, knowing the voice and speaker.

"Slept, Monsieur! When? Where?"

"You may well inquire. It seems you turn day into night, and choose a desk for a pillow; rather hard lodging—?"

"It was softened for me, Monsieur, while I slept. That unseen, gift-bringing thing which haunts my desk remembered me. No matter how I fell asleep; I awoke pillowed and covered."

"Did the shawls keep you warm?"

"Very warm. Do you ask thanks for them?"

"No. You looked pale in your slumbers: are you home-sick?"

"To be home-sick, one must have a home; which I have not."

"Then you have more need of a careful friend. I scarcely know anyone who needs a friend more absolutely than you; your very faults imperatively require it. You want so much checking, regulating, and keeping down."

This idea of "keeping down" never left M. Paul's head. I listened without troubling myself to be too submissive; his occupation would have been gone had I left him nothing to manage.

"You need watching, and watching over," he pursued. "And it is well for you that I see this. Do you see that window with a light in it?" He pointed to a lattice in a boarding-house. "That is a room I have hired, nominally for a study—virtually for a post of observation. There I sit and read for hours. My book is this garden; its contents are human nature—female human nature. I know you all by heart. Ah! I know you well—St. Pierre, the Parisienne, *cette maîtresse-femme*, my cousin Beck herself."

"It is not right, Monsieur."

"Comment? It is not right? By whose creed? Does some dogma of Calvin or Luther condemn it? What is that to me? I am no Protestant. My rich father was a good Catholic; he gave me a priest and a Jesuit for a tutor. I retain his lessons; and to what discoveries, *grand Dieu*! have they not aided me!"

"Discoveries made by stealth seem to me dishonourable."

"Puritaine! I doubt it not. Yet see how my Jesuit's system works. You know the St. Pierre?"

"Partially."

He laughed. "You say right—*partially*; whereas *I* know her *thoroughly*; there is the difference. She played before me the amiable; offered me *patte de velours*; caressed, flattered, fawned on me. Now, I am accessible to a woman's flattery—accessible against my reason. Though never pretty, she was—when I first knew her—young, or knew how to look young. Like all her countrywomen, she had the art of dressing—she had a certain cool, easy, social assurance, which spared me the pain of embarrassment—"

"Monsieur, that must have been unnecessary. I never saw you embarrassed in my life."

"Mademoiselle, you know little of me; I can be embarrassed as a *petite pensionnaire*; there is a fund of modesty and diffidence in my nature—"

"Monsieur, I never saw it."

"Mademoiselle, it is there. You ought to have seen it."

"Monsieur, I have observed you in public—on platforms, in tribunes, before titles and crowned heads—and you were as easy as you are in the third division."

"Mademoiselle, neither titles nor crowned heads excite my modesty; and publicity is very much my element. I like it well, and breathe in it quite freely;—but—but, in short, here is the sentiment brought into action, at this very moment; however, I disdain to be worsted by it. If, Mademoiselle, I were a marrying man (which I am not; and you may spare yourself the trouble of any sneer you may be contemplating at the thought), and found it necessary to ask a lady whether she could look upon me in the light of a future husband, then would it be proved that I am as I say—modest."

I quite believed him now; and, in believing, I honoured him with a sincerity of esteem which made my heart ache.

"As to the St. Pierre," he went on, recovering himself, for his voice had altered a little, "she once intended to be Madame Emanuel; and I don't know whither I might have been led, but for yonder little lattice with the light. Ah, magic lattice! what miracles of discovery hast thou wrought! Yes," he pursued, "I have seen her rancours, her vanities, her levities—not only here, but elsewhere: I have witnessed what bucklers me against all her arts: I am safe from poor Zélie."

"And my pupils," he presently recommenced, "those blondes *jeunes filles*—so mild and meek—I have seen the most reserved—romp like boys, the demurest—snatch grapes from the walls, shake pears from the trees. When the English teacher came, I saw her, marked her early preference for this alley, noticed her taste for seclusion, watched her well, long before she and I came to speaking terms; do you recollect my once coming silently and offering you a little knot of white violets when we were strangers?"

"I recollect it. I dried the violets, kept them, and have them still."

"It pleased me when you took them peacefully and promptly, without prudery—that sentiment which I ever dread to excite, and which, when it is revealed in eye or gesture, I vindictively detest. To return. Not only did *I* watch you; but often—especially at eventide—another guardian angel was noiselessly hovering near: night after night my cousin Beck has stolen down yonder steps, and glidingly pursued your movements when you did not see her."

"But, Monsieur, you could not from the distance of that window see what passed in this garden at night?"

"By moonlight I possibly might with a glass—I use a glass—but the garden itself is open to me. In the shed, at the bottom, there is a door leading into a court, which communicates with the college; of that door I possess the key, and thus come and go at pleasure. This afternoon I came through it, and found you asleep in classe; again this evening I have availed myself of the same entrance."

I could not help saying, "If you were a wicked, designing man, how terrible would all this be!"

His attention seemed incapable of being arrested by this view of the subject: he lit his cigar, and while he puffed it, leaning against a tree, and looking at me in a cool, amused way he had when his humour was tranquil, I thought proper to go on sermonizing him: he often lectured me by the hour together—I did not see why I should not speak my mind for once. So I told him my impressions concerning his Jesuit-system.

"The knowledge it brings you is bought too dear, Monsieur; this coming and going by stealth degrades your own dignity."

"My dignity!" he cried, laughing; "when did you ever see me trouble my head about my dignity? It is you, Miss Lucy, who are 'digne.' How often, in your high insular presence, have I taken a pleasure in trampling upon, what you are pleased to call, my dignity; tearing it, scattering it to the winds, in those mad transports you witness with such hauteur, and which I know you think very like the ravings of a third-rate London actor."

"Monsieur, I tell you every glance you cast from that lattice is a wrong done to the best part of your own nature. To study the human heart thus, is to banquet secretly and sacrilegiously on Eve's apples. I wish you were a Protestant."

Indifferent to the wish, he smoked on. After a space of smiling yet thoughtful silence, he said, rather suddenly—"I have seen other things."

"What other things?"

Taking the weed from his lips, he threw the remnant amongst the shrubs, where, for a moment, it lay glowing in the gloom.

"Look, at it," said he: "is not that spark like an eye watching you and me?"

He took a turn down the walk; presently returning, he went on:—"I have seen, Miss Lucy, things to me unaccountable, that have made me watch all night for a solution, and I have not yet found it."

The tone was peculiar; my veins thrilled; he saw me shiver.

"Are you afraid? Whether is it of my words or that red jealous eye just winking itself out?"

"I am cold; the night grows dark and late, and the air is changed; it is time to go in."

"It is little past eight, but you shall go in soon. Answer me only this question."

Yet he paused ere he put it. The garden was truly growing dark; dusk had come on with clouds, and drops of rain began to patter through the trees. I hoped he would feel this, but, for the moment, he seemed too much absorbed to be sensible of the change.

"Mademoiselle, do you Protestants believe in the supernatural?"

"There is a difference of theory and belief on this point amongst Protestants as amongst other sects," I answered. "Why, Monsieur, do you ask such a question?"

"Why do you shrink and speak so faintly? Are you superstitious?"

"I am constitutionally nervous. I dislike the discussion of such subjects. I dislike it the more because—"

"You believe?"

"No: but it has happened to me to experience impressions—"

"Since you came here?"

"Yes; not many months ago."

"Here?—in this house?"

"Yes."

"Bon! I am glad of it. I knew it, somehow; before you told me. I was conscious of rapport between you and myself. You are patient, and I am choleric; you are quiet and pale, and I am t
