It was a prudent decision for Paulina to withhold further correspondence from Graham until her father gave his blessing. Yet, Dr. Bretton, unable to reside within a league of the Hôtel Crécy, found himself drawn there with increasing frequency. Though they initially agreed to maintain a distance in their public conduct, their hearts drew nearer with every passing day.

In Graham's presence, the noblest aspects of his character awakened and flourished. While his past admiration for Miss Fanshawe had been rooted in intellect, his current devotion transcended mere reason; his entire being, his highest tastes, and his deepest faculties were now ignited by her. Paulina, in turn, did not consciously attempt to guide his conversation toward books or to refine his mind. She simply regarded him as perfect. It was Graham, by chance, who introduced a topic of literature, and in her responsive harmony, he found a resonance that compelled him to speak with a depth and eloquence he had never known. She listened with delight, answering with animation. With each exchange, Graham perceived a music in her voice that refined itself, unlocking a treasure house within his own soul and revealing latent goodness in his heart. They delighted in one another's wit and expression, their thoughts matching with the precision of carefully chosen pearls.

Paulina possessed no natural abundance of mirth; unstimulated, she was thoughtful and pensive. But in her lover's genial presence, she glowed like a soft, glad light. Where once there had been a gentle ice of reserve, now there was only warmth. Graham's generous influence quickly thawed her timid self-imposition.

They spoke of the old Bretton days, moving from hesitant smiles to open candor. Graham, having earned his independence from the reluctant Lucy, recounted his memories of "little Polly" with a kindness that made any suggestion from me seem pale by comparison. Paulina marveled at the richness of his memory. He recalled how she once gathered his head in her arms, crying out her affection, and how she climbed to his knee. He remembered the sensation of her small hands smoothing his cheek, the trembling touch of her finger in his chin's cleft, and the curious lisp with which she called it a "pretty dimple."

"Child as I was," Paulina admitted, her voice trembling slightly, "I wonder how I dared be so venturesome. To me, he seems now all sacred. His locks are inaccessible. When I look at his firm, marble chin, his straight Greek features, I feel a sort of fear. Women are called beautiful, Lucy; he is not like a woman. What is he, then? Do other people see him with my eyes? Do *you* admire him?"

"I'll tell you what I do, Paulina," I replied, silencing her tender confidences before they could melt into molten lead in my ear. "_I never see him_. I looked at him twice or thrice a year ago, before he recognized me, and then I shut my eyes. If he were to cross their balls twelve times between sunset and sunrise, I should hardly know what shape had gone by."

"Lucy, what do you mean?" she whispered.

"I mean that I value vision, and dread being struck stone blind."

Best to answer strongly and forever silence those passionate confidences that left her lips tasting of sweet honey. Yet, she would speak of him anyway—sometimes shyly, sometimes with a tenderness of cadence that chafed me miserably. Cloudless happiness had dazzled her native clear sight, making her view of me fitful.

"Spartan girl! Proud Lucy!" she would smile. "Graham says you are the most peculiar, capricious little woman he knows; but yet you are excellent; we both think so."

"You both think you know not what," I retorted. "Make me as little the subject of your mutual talk as possible. I have my sort of life apart from yours."

"But ours, Lucy, is a beautiful life, or it will be; and you shall share it."

"I shall share no man's or woman's life in this world, as you understand sharing. I think I have one friend of my own, but am not sure; and till I _am_ sure, I live solitary."

"But solitude is sadness."

"Yes; it is sadness. Life, however, has worse than that. Deeper than melancholy lies heart-break."

"Lucy, I wonder if anybody will ever comprehend you altogether."

Lovers possess an infatuation of egotism; they demand a witness to their happiness, regardless of the cost. Paulina had forbidden letters, yet Dr. Bretton wrote; she had resolved against correspondence, yet she answered, merely to chide. She showed me these letters with the wilfulness of a spoiled child and the imperiousness of an heiress, forcing me to read them. Graham's were fine, manly, modest, and gallant. Hers, though seemingly written to hide her feelings and bridle his ardor, glowed with an unconfessed confession that kindled every greeting to adieu.

"I wish papa knew; I _do_ wish papa knew!" she murmured anxiously. "I wish, and yet I fear. I can hardly keep Graham back from telling him. There is nothing I long for more than to have this affair settled, yet I dread the crisis. I know papa will be angry at first; I fear he will dislike me almost. It will seem an untoward business, a shock."

The fact was, her father, long calm and blind on this point, was beginning to be stirred by an importunate light. To her, he said nothing, but when she was not looking, I saw him gaze and meditate on her.

One evening, while Paulina wrote to Graham in her dressing-room, leaving me in the library, M. de Bassompierre entered. He sat near the window, opened a desk, and studied an entry in a memorandum-book.

"Miss Snowe," he said, laying it down, "do you know my little girl's age?"

"About eighteen, is it not, sir?"

"It seems so. This old pocket-book tells me she was born on the 5th of May, eighteen years ago. It is strange; I had lost the reckoning. I thought of her as twelve, fourteen—an indefinite date; but she seemed a child."

"She is about eighteen," I repeated. "She is grown up; she will be no taller."

"My little jewel!" he said, in a tone that penetrated like his daughter's accents.

He sat very thoughtful.

"Sir, don't grieve," I said, sensing his unspoken feelings.

"She is the only pearl I have," he said. "And now others will find out that she is pure and of price: they will covet her."

Graham Bretton had dined with us that day, shining in converse and looks. Under the stimulus of high hope, something had unfolded in his manner that compelled attention. M. de Bassompierre, slow to remark but logical in reasoning, had caught the direction of his homage.

"Where is she?" he asked.

"She is up-stairs."

"What is she doing?"

"She is writing."

"She writes, does she? Does she receive letters?"

"None but such as she can show me. And—sir—she—_they_ have long wanted to consult you."

"Pshaw! They don't think of me—an old father! I am in the way."

"Ah, M. de Bassompierre—not so! But Paulina must speak for herself: and Dr. Bretton, too, must be his own advocate."

"It is a little late. Matters are advanced, it seems."

"Sir, till you approve, nothing is done—only they love each other."

"Only!" he echoed.

Invested by fate as confidante and mediator, I continued: "Hundreds of times has Dr. Bretton been on the point of appealing to you, sir; but, with all his high courage, he fears you mortally."

"He may well—he may well fear me. He has touched the best thing I have. Had he but let her alone, she would have remained a child for years yet. So. Are they engaged?"

"They could not become engaged without your permission."

"It is well for you, Miss Snowe, to talk and think with that propriety which always characterizes you; but this matter is a grief to me; my little girl was all I had: I have no more daughters and no son; Bretton might as well have looked elsewhere; there are scores of rich and pretty women who would not, I daresay, dislike him: he has looks, and conduct, and connection. Would nothing serve him but my Polly?"

"If he had never seen your 'Polly,' others might and would have pleased him—your niece, Miss Fanshawe, for instance."

"Ah! I would have given him Ginevra with all my heart; but Polly!—I can't let him have her. No—I can't. He is not her equal," he affirmed, rather gruffly. "In what particular is he her match? They talk of fortune! I am not an avaricious or interested man, but the world thinks of these things—and Polly will be rich."

"Yes, that is known," said I: "all Villette knows her as an heiress."

"Do they talk of my little girl in that light?"

"They do, sir."

He fell into deep thought. I ventured, "Would you, sir, think anyone Paulina's match? Would you prefer any other to Dr. Bretton? Do you think higher rank or more wealth would make much difference in your feelings towards a future son-in-law?"

"You touch me there," said he.

"Look at the aristocracy of Villette—you would not like them, sir?"

"I should not—never a duc, baron, or vicomte of the lot."

"I am told many of these persons think about her, sir," I went on, gaining courage. "Other suitors will come, therefore, if Dr. Bretton is refused. Independent of heiress-ship, it appears to me that Paulina charms most of those who see her."

"Does she? How? My little girl is not thought a beauty."

"Sir, Miss de Bassompierre is very beautiful."

"Nonsense!—begging your pardon, Miss Snowe, but I think you are too partial. I like Polly: I like all her ways and all her looks—but then I am her father; and even I never thought about beauty. She is amusing, fairy-like, interesting to me;—you must be mistaken in supposing her handsome?"

"She attracts, sir: she would attract without the advantages of your wealth and position."

"My wealth and position! Are these any bait to Graham? If I thought so——"

"Dr. Bretton knows these points perfectly, as you may be sure, M. de Bassompierre, and values them as any gentleman would—as _you_ would yourself, under the same circumstances—but they are not his baits. He loves your daughter very much; he feels her finest qualities, and they influence him worthily."

"What! has my little pet 'fine qualities?'"

"Ah, sir! did you observe her that evening when so many men of eminence and learning dined here?"

"I certainly was rather struck and surprised with her manner that day; its womanliness made me smile."

"And did you see those accomplished Frenchmen gather round her in the drawing-room?"

"I did; but I thought it was by way of relaxation—as one might amuse oneself with a pretty infant."

"Sir, she demeaned herself with distinction; and I heard the French gentlemen say she was 'pétrie d'esprit et de graces.' Dr. Bretton thought the same."

"She is a good, dear child, that is certain; and I _do_ believe she has some character. When I think of it, I was once ill; Polly nursed me; they thought I should die; she, I recollect, grew at once stronger and tenderer as I grew worse in health. And as I recovered, what a sunbeam she was in my sick-room! Yes; she played about my chair as noiselessly and as cheerful as light. And now she is sought in marriage! I don't want to part with her," he said, and he groaned.

"You have known Dr. and Mrs. Bretton so long," I suggested, "it would be less like separation to give her to him than to another."

He reflected rather gloomily.

"True. I have long known Louisa Bretton," he murmured. "She and I are indeed old, old friends; a sweet, kind girl she was when she was young. You talk of beauty, Miss Snowe! _she_ was handsome, if you will—tall, straight, and blooming—not the mere child or elf my Polly seems to me: at eighteen, Louisa had a carriage and stature fit for a princess. She is a comely and a good woman now. The lad is like her; I have always thought so, and favoured and wished him well. Now he repays me by this robbery! My little treasure used to love her old father dearly and truly. It is all over now, doubtless—I am an incumbrance."

The door opened—his "little treasure" came in. She was dressed in evening beauty; that animation which sometimes comes with the close of day warmed her eye and cheek; a tinge of summer crimson heightened her complexion; her curls fell full and long on her lily neck; her white dress suited the heat of June. Thinking me alone, she had brought in her hand the letter just written—brought it folded but unsealed. I was to read it. When she saw her father, her tripping step faltered, paused a moment—the colour in her cheek flowed rosy over her whole face.

"Polly," said M. de Bassompierre, in a low voice, with a grave smile, "do you blush at seeing papa? That is something new."

"I don't blush—I never _do_ blush," she affirmed, while another eddy from the heart sent up its scarlet. "But I thought you were in the dining-room, and I wanted Lucy."

"You thought I was with John Graham Bret
