The cathedral tower stood in the air, a massive gray square impossibility suspended between the eye and the real prospect. There was no spike of rusty iron connecting the ground to the stone, yet something intervened. Perhaps it was the Sultan's order, impaling a horde of Turkish robbers one by one. Cymbals clashed; the Sultan paraded to his palace in a long procession. Ten thousand scimitars flashed in the sunlight, followed by thrice ten thousand dancing girls strewing flowers, and then white elephants caparisoned in countless colors, infinite in number and attended by infinite servants. Yet the tower remained, rising in the background where it could not be, and no writhing figure hung from the grim spike.

Stay. Was the spike so low a thing as the rusty nail on the top of a post of an old bedstead that had tumbled all awry? Some vague period of drowsy laughter must be devoted to the consideration of this possibility.

Shaking from head to foot, the man whose scattered consciousness had thus fantastically pieced itself together finally rose. He supported his trembling frame upon his arms and looked around. He was in the meanest and closest of small rooms. Through the ragged window-curtain, the light of early day stole in from a miserable court. He lay, dressed, across a large unseemly bed, upon a bedstead that had indeed given way under the weight upon it. Lying, also dressed and also across the bed, not longwise, were a Chinaman, a Lascar, and a haggard woman. The two first were in a sleep or stupor; the last was blowing at a kind of pipe to kindle it. As she blew, shading it with her lean hand and concentrating its red spark of light, it served in the dim morning as a lamp to show him what he saw of her.

"Another?" said this woman, in a querulous, rattling whisper. "Have another?"

He looked about him, with his hand to his forehead.

"Ye've smoked as many as five since ye come in at midnight," the woman went on, as she chronically complained. "Poor me, poor me, my head is so bad. Them two come in after ye. Ah, poor me, the business is slack, is slack! Few Chinamen about the Docks, and fewer Lascars, and no ships coming in, these say! Here's another ready for ye, deary. Ye'll remember like a good soul, won't ye, that the market price is dreffle high just now? More nor three shillings and sixpence for a thimbleful! And ye'll remember that nobody but me (and Jack Chinaman t'other side the court; but he can't do it as well as me) has the true secret of mixing it? Ye'll pay up accordingly, deary, won't ye?"

She blew at the pipe as she spoke, and, occasionally bubbling at it, inhaled much of its contents. "O me, O me, my lungs is weak, my lungs is bad! It's nearly ready for ye, deary. Ah, poor me, poor me, my poor hand shakes like to drop off! I see ye coming-to, and I ses to my poor self, 'I'll have another ready for him, and he'll bear in mind the market price of opium, and pay according.' O my poor head! I makes my pipes of old penny ink-bottles, ye see, deary—this is one—and I fits-in a mouthpiece, this way, and I takes my mixter out of this thimble with this little horn spoon; and so I fills, deary. Ah, my poor nerves! I got Heavens-hard drunk for sixteen year afore I took to this; but this don't hurt me, not to speak of. And it takes away the hunger as well as wittles, deary."

She handed him the nearly-emptied pipe and sank back, turning over on her face. He rose unsteadily from the bed, laid the pipe upon the hearth-stone, drew back the ragged curtain, and looked with repugnance at his three companions. He noticed that the woman had opium-smoked herself into a strange likeness of the Chinaman. Her form of cheek, eye, and temple, and her color, were repeated in him. The said Chinaman convulsively wrestled with one of his many Gods or Devils, perhaps, and snarled horribly. The Lascar laughed and dribbled at the mouth. The hostess was still.

"What visions can she have?" the waking man mused, as he turned her face towards him and stood looking down at it. "Visions of many butchers' shops, and public-houses, and much credit? Of an increase of hideous customers, and this horrible bedstead set upright again, and this horrible court swept clean? What can she rise to, under any quantity of opium, higher than that!—Eh?"

He bent down his ear to listen to her mutterings. "Unintelligible!"

As he watched the spasmodic shoots and darts that broke out of her face and limbs, like fitful lightning out of a dark sky, some contagion in them seized upon him: insomuch that he had to withdraw himself to a lean arm-chair by the hearth—placed there, perhaps, for such emergencies—and to sit in it, holding tight, until he had got the better of this unclean spirit of imitation.

Then he came back, pounced on the Chinaman, and seizing him with both hands by the throat, turned him violently on the bed. The Chinaman clutched the aggressive hands, resisted, gasped, and protested. "What do you say?"

A watchful pause. "Unintelligible!"

Slowly loosening his grasp as he listened to the incoherent jargon with an attentive frown, he turned to the Lascar and fairly dragged him forth upon the floor. As he fell, the Lascar started into a half-risen attitude, glared with his eyes, lashed about him fiercely with his arms, and drew a phantom knife. It then became apparent that the woman had taken possession of this knife, for safety's sake; for, she too starting up, and restraining and expostulating with him, the knife was visible in her dress, not in his, when they drowsily dropped back, side by side.

There had been chattering and clattering enough between them, but to no purpose. When any distinct word had been flung into the air, it had had no sense or sequence. Wherefore "unintelligible!" was again the comment of the watcher, made with some reassured nodding of his head, and a gloomy smile.

He then laid certain silver money on the table, found his hat, groped his way down the broken stairs, gave a good morning to some rat-ridden doorkeeper, in bed in a black hutch beneath the stairs, and passed out.

That same afternoon, the massive gray square tower of an old Cathedral rose before the sight of a jaded traveller. The bells were going for daily vesper service, and he must needs attend it, one would say, from his haste to reach the open Cathedral door. The choir were getting on their sullied white robes in a hurry when he arrived among them, got on his own robe, and fell into the procession filing in to service. Then, the Sacristan locked the iron-barred gates that divided the sanctuary from the chancel, and all of the procession having scuttled into their places, hid their faces; and then the intoned words, "WHEN THE WICKED MAN—" rose among groins of arches and beams of roof, awakening muttered thunder.
