The stranger arrived in Cloisterham with the deliberate silence of a ghost entering a house that had been waiting for him. He was a figure of striking, almost theatrical ordinariness: white hair, black eyebrows, dressed in a tight blue surtout that strained against a buff waistcoat and gray trousers. He possessed a military posture, though it was the rigid stance of a man who had long since surrendered his command to the weight of his own insignificance.

He checked into the Crozier, the town's orthodox hotel, depositing a portmanteau that seemed to contain nothing but the dust of his travels. In the coffee-room, standing with his back to an empty fireplace while he waited for a fried sole, a veal cutlet, and a pint of sherry, he announced himself to the universe. He declared himself an idle dog living upon his means, a man intending to settle permanently in this picturesque old city for a month or two. The waiter, whose business was chronically slack and whose attention was as porous as the cathedral walls, absorbed the entire declaration without registering a single syllable of consequence.

"This gentleman," the waiter noted mentally, "has a head disproportionately large for his shoulders, and a shock of white hair so thick and ample it defies gravity."

"I suppose," the stranger asked, shaking his hair with the mechanical rhythm of a Newfoundland preparing for a meal, "that a fair lodging for a single buffer might be found in these parts?"

"Something old," the stranger specified. "Take my hat down for a moment from that peg. Look inside. What do you see written there?"

"Datchery," the waiter read aloud.

"Now you know my name," the stranger said. "Dick Datchery. Hang it up again. I require something old. Something odd and out of the way. Something venerable, architectural, and inconvenient."

"We have a good choice of inconvenient lodgings," the waiter replied, displaying a modest confidence in the town's resources that bordered on arrogance. "Indeed, I have no doubt we could suit you, however particular you might be. But 'architectural'? That seems to trouble your head, sir."

"Anything Cathedral-y, now," Mr. Datchery suggested.

"Mr. Tope," the waiter said, brightening as he rubbed his chin. "He would be the likeliest party to inform in that line."

"Who is Mr. Tope?"

The waiter explained that he was the Verger, and that Mrs. Tope had once offered lodgings, though the venture had failed so completely that her window-bill—a Cloisterham institution for years—had simply vanished, presumably tumbling down one day and never being replaced.

"I'll call on Mrs. Tope after dinner," Mr. Datchery decided.

After his meal, he followed the waiter's fatally precise directions. The Crozier, an establishment of a most retiring disposition, ensured that the path was easily lost. Mr. Datchery soon found himself boggling about the Cathedral Tower, caught in a feverish oscillation between warmth and cold. He felt warm when he glimpsed the Tower; he felt cold when it receded. Like children playing a game involving hot boiled beans and very good butter, his emotional temperature depended entirely on the visibility of the spire.

He grew very cold indeed when he discovered a fragment of burial ground where an unhappy sheep grazed. The animal was unfortunate because a hideous small boy was stoning it through the railings. The boy had already lamed one leg and was enthusiastically working toward breaking the other three, driven by a benevolent, sportsmanlike purpose to bring the beast down.

"'T'im agin!" cried the boy as the sheep leaped, leaving a dint in its wool.

"Let him be!" Mr. Datchery interjected. "Don't you see you have lamed him?"

"Yer lie," the sportsman retorted. "'E went and lamed isself. I see 'im do it, and I giv' 'im a shy as a Widdy-warning to 'im not to go a-bruisin' 'is master's mutton any more."

"Come here."

"I won't; I'll come when yer can ketch me."

"Stay there then, and show me which is Mr. Tope's."

"How can I stay here and show you which is Topeseses, when Topeseses is t'other side the Kinfreederal, and over the crossings, and round ever so many comers? Stoo-pid! Ya-a-ah!"

"Show me where it is, and I'll give you something."

"Come on, then."

The brisk dialogue concluded with the boy leading the way until they reached an arched passage.

"Lookie yonder. You see that there winder and door?"

"That's Tope's?"

"Yer lie; it ain't. That's Jarsper's."

"Indeed?" Mr. Datchery observed with a second look of genuine interest.

"Yes, and I ain't a-goin' no nearer 'IM, I tell yer."

"Why not?"

"'Cos I ain't a-goin' to be lifted off my legs and 'ave my braces bust and be choked; not if I knows it, and not by 'Im. Wait till I set a jolly good flint a-flyin' at the back o' 'is jolly old 'ed some day! Now look t'other side the harch; not the side where Jarsper's door is; t'other side."

"A little way in, o' that side, there's a low door, down two steps. That's Topeseses with 'is name on a hoval plate."

"Good. See here," Mr. Datchery produced a shilling. "You owe me half of this."

"Yer lie! I don't owe yer nothing; I never seen yer."

"I tell you you owe me half of this, because I have no sixpence in my pocket. So the next time you meet me you shall do something else for me, to pay me."

"All right, give us 'old."

"What is your name, and where do you live?"

"Deputy. Travellers' Twopenny, 'cross the green."

The boy instantly darted off with the shilling, lest Mr. Datchery should repent, stopping only at a safe distance to goad him with a demon dance expressive of its irrevocability.

Mr. Datchery, removing his hat to shake his white hair once more, seemed quite resigned and proceeded whither he had been directed.

Mr. Tope's official dwelling communicated by an upper stair with Mr. Jasper's, hence Mrs. Tope's attendance on that gentleman. It was of very modest proportions and partook of the character of a cool dungeon. Its ancient walls were massive, and the rooms seemed to have been dug out of them rather than designed with any reference to them. The main door opened onto a chamber of no describable shape with a groined roof, which in turn opened onto another chamber of identical confusion. Their windows were small and embedded in the thickness of the walls. These two chambers, close in atmosphere and swarthy in illumination, were the apartments Mrs. Tope had long offered to an unappreciative city.

Mr. Datchery, however, was more appreciative. He calculated that if he sat with the main door open, he would enjoy the passing society of all comers to and fro by the gateway and possess sufficient light. He reasoned that if Mr. and Mrs. Tope, living overhead, used for their own egress and ingress a little side stair that came plump into the Precincts by a door opening outward—to the surprise and inconvenience of a limited public of pedestrians in a narrow way—he would be alone, as in a separate residence. He found the rent moderate, and everything as quaintly inconvenient as he could desire. He agreed, therefore, to take the lodging then and there, money down, possession to be had next evening, on condition that reference was permitted him to Mr. Jasper as occupying the gatehouse, of which on the other side of the gateway, the Verger's hole-in-the-wall was an appanage or subsidiary part.

"The poor dear gentleman was very solitary and very sad," Mrs. Tope said, "but she had no doubt he would 'speak for her.' Perhaps Mr. Datchery had heard something of what had occurred there last winter?"

Mr. Datchery possessed as confused a knowledge of the event in question, on trying to recall it, as he well could have. He begged Mrs. Tope's pardon when she found it incumbent on her to correct him in every detail of his summary of the facts, but pleaded that he was merely a single buffer getting through life upon his means as idly as he could, and that so many people were so constantly making away with so many other people, as to render it difficult for a buffer of an easy temper to preserve the circumstances of the several cases unmixed in his mind.

Mr. Jasper proving willing to speak for Mrs. Tope, Mr. Datchery, who had sent up his card, was invited to ascend the postern staircase. The Mayor was there, Mr. Tope said; but he was not to be regarded in the light of company, as he and Mr. Jasper were great friends.

"I beg pardon," said Mr. Datchery, making a leg with his hat under his arm as he addressed himself equally to both gentlemen. "A selfish precaution on my part, and not personally interesting to anybody but myself. But as a buffer living on his means
