CHAPTER LXVII. In which a Tragedy is acted, and two more are begun


James Wolfe, Harry's new Colonel, came back from America a few weeks
after our Virginian had joined his regiment. Wolfe had previously been
Lieutenant-Colonel of Kingsley's, and a second battalion of the regiment
had been formed and given to him in reward for his distinguished
gallantry and services at Cape Breton. Harry went with quite unfeigned
respect and cordiality to pay his duty to his new commander, on whom the
eyes of the world began to be turned now,--the common opinion being that
he was likely to become a great general. In the late affairs in France,
several officers of great previous repute had been tried and found
lamentably wanting. The Duke of Marlborough had shown himself no worthy
descendant of his great ancestor. About my Lord George Sackville's
military genius there were doubts, even before his unhappy behaviour at
Minden prevented a great victory. The nation was longing for military
glory, and the Minister was anxious to find a general who might gratify
the eager desire of the people. Mr. Wolfe's and Mr. Lambert's business
keeping them both in London, the friendly intercourse between those
officers was renewed, no one being more delighted than Lambert at his
younger friend's good fortune.

Harry, when he was away from his duty, was never tired of hearing Mr.
Wolfe's details of the military operations of the last year, about which
Wolfe talked very freely and openly. Whatever thought was in his
mind, he appears to have spoken it out generously. He had that heroic
simplicity which distinguished Nelson afterwards: he talked frankly of
his actions. Some of the fine gentlemen at St. James's might wonder and
sneer at him; but amongst our little circle of friends we may be sure he
found admiring listeners. The young General had the romance of a boy on
many matters. He delighted in music and poetry. On the last day of his
life he said he would rather have written Gray's Elegy than have won a
battle. We may be sure that with a gentleman of such literary tastes our
friend George would become familiar; and as they were both in love, and
both accepted lovers, and both eager for happiness, no doubt they must
have had many sentimental conversations together which would be very
interesting to report could we only have accurate accounts of them. In
one of his later letters, Warrington writes:

“I had the honour of knowing the famous General Wolfe, and seeing much
of him during his last stay in London. We had a subject of conversation
then which was of unfailing interest to both of us, and I could not but
admire Mr. Wolfe's simplicity, his frankness, and a sort of glorious
bravery which characterised him. He was much in love, and he wanted
heaps and heaps of laurels to take to his mistress. 'If it be a sin to
covet honour,' he used to say with Harry the Fifth (he was passionately
fond of plays and poetry), 'I am the most offending soul alive.' Surely
on his last day he had a feast which was enough to satisfy the greediest
appetite for glory. He hungered after it. He seemed to me not merely
like a soldier going resolutely to do his duty, but rather like a knight
in quest of dragons and giants. My own country has furnished of late a
chief of a very different order, and quite an opposite genius. I scarce
know which to admire most. The Briton's chivalrous ardour, or the more
than Roman constancy of our great Virginian.”

As Mr. Lambert's official duties detained him in London, his family
remained contentedly with him, and I suppose Mr. Warrington was so
satisfied with the rural quiet of Southampton Row and the beautiful
flowers and trees of Bedford Gardens, that he did not care to quit
London for any long period. He made his pilgrimage to Castlewood, and
passed a few days there, occupying the chamber of which he had often
heard his grandfather talk, and which Colonel Esmond had occupied as a
boy and he was received kindly enough by such members of the family as
happened to be at home. But no doubt he loved better to be in London by
the side of a young person in whose society he found greater pleasure
than any which my Lord Castlewood's circle could afford him, though all
the ladies were civil, and Lady Maria especially gracious, and enchanted
with the tragedy which George and Parson Sampson read out to the ladies.
The chaplain was enthusiastic in its praises, and indeed it was
through his interest and not through Mr. Johnson's after all, that Mr.
Warrington's piece ever came on the stage. Mr. Johnson, it is true,
pressed the play on his friend Mr. Garrick for Drury Lane, but Garrick
had just made an arrangement with the famous Mr. Home for a tragedy from
the pen of the author of Douglas. Accordingly, Carpezan was carried to
Mr. Rich at Covent Garden, and accepted by that manager.

On the night of the production of the piece, Mr. Warrington gave an
elegant entertainment to his friends at the Bedford Head, in Covent
Garden, whence they adjourned in a body to the theatre; leaving only one
or two with our young author, who remained at the coffee-house,
where friends from time to time came to him with an account of the
performance. The part of Carpezan was filled by Barry, Shuter was the
old nobleman, Reddish, I need scarcely say, made an excellent Ulric, and
the King of Bohemia was by a young actor from Dublin, Mr. Geoghegan, or
Hagan as he was called on the stage, and who looked and performed the
part to admiration. Mrs. Woffington looked too old in the first act as
the heroine, but her murder in the fourth act, about which great doubts
were expressed, went off to the terror and delight of the audience. Miss
Wayn sang the ballad which is supposed to be sung by the king's page,
just at the moment of the unhappy wife's execution, and all agreed that
Barry was very terrible and pathetic as Carpezan, especially in the
execution scene. The grace and elegance of the young actor, Hagan, won
general applause. The piece was put very elegantly on the stage by Mr.
Rich, though there was some doubt whether, in the march of Janissaries
in the last, the manager was correct in introducing a favourite
elephant, which had figured in various pantomimes, and by which one of
Mr. Warrington's black servants marched in a Turkish habit. The other
sate in the footman's gallery, and uproariously wept and applauded at
the proper intervals.

The execution of Sybilla was the turning-point of the piece. Her head
off, George's friends breathed freely, and one messenger after another
came to him at the coffee-house, to announce the complete success of
the tragedy. Mr. Barry, amidst general applause, announced the play for
repetition, and that it was the work of a young gentleman of Virginia,
his first attempt in the dramatic style.

We should like to have been in the box where all our friends were seated
during the performance, to have watched Theo's flutter and anxiety
whilst the success of the play seemed dubious, and have beheld the
blushes and the sparkles in her eyes, when the victory was assured.
Harry, during the little trouble in the fourth act, was deadly
pale--whiter, Mrs. Lambert said, than Barry, with all his chalk. But
if Briareus could have clapped hands, he could scarcely have made more
noise than Harry at the end of the piece. Mr. Wolfe and General Lambert
huzzayed enthusiastically. Mrs. Lambert, of course, cried: and though
Hetty said, “Why do you cry, mamma? I you don't want any of them alive
again; you know it serves them all right”--the girl was really as much
delighted as any person present, including little Charley from the
Chartreux, who had leave from Dr. Crusius for that evening, and Miss
Lucy, who had been brought from boarding-school on purpose to be present
on the great occasion. My Lord Castlewood and his sister, Lady Maria,
were present; and his lordship went from his box and complimented
Mr. Barry and the other actors on the stage; and Parson Sampson was
invaluable in the pit, where he led the applause, having, I believe,
given previous instructions to Gumbo to keep an eye upon him from the
gallery, and do as he did.

Be sure there was a very jolly supper of Mr. Warrington's friends that
night--much more jolly than Mr. Garrick's, for example, who made but a
very poor success with his Agis and its dreary choruses, and who must
have again felt that he had missed a good chance, in preferring Mr.
Home's tragedy to our young author's. A jolly supper, did we say?--Many
jolly suppers. Mr. Gumbo gave an entertainment to several gentlemen
of the shoulder-knot, who had concurred in supporting his master's
masterpiece: Mr. Henry Warrington gave a supper at the Star and Garter,
in Pall Mall, to ten officers of his new regiment, who had come up for
the express purpose of backing Carpezan; and finally, Mr. Warrington
received the three principal actors of the tragedy, our family party
from the side box, Mr. Johnson and his ingenious friend, Mr. Reynolds
the painter, my Lord Castlewood and his sister, and one or two more. My
Lady Maria happened to sit next to the young actor who had performed the
part of the King. Mr. Warrington somehow had Miss Theo for a neighbour,
and no doubt passed a pleasant evening beside her. The greatest
animation and cordiality prevailed, and when toasts were called, Lady
Maria gaily gave “The King of Hungary” for hers. That gentleman, who had
plenty of eloquence and fire, and excellent manners, on as well as off
the stage, protested that he had already suffered death in the course of
the evening, hoped that he should die a hundred times more on the same
field; but, dead or living, vowed he knew whose humble servant he ever
should be. Ah, if he had but a real crown in place of his diadem of
pasteboard and tinsel, with what joy would he lay it at her ladyship's
feet! Neither my lord nor Mr. Esmond were over well pleased with the
gentleman's exceeding gallantry--a part of which they attributed, no
doubt justly, to the wine and punch, of which he had been partaking very
freely. Theo and her sister, who were quite new to the world, were a
little frightened by the exceeding energy of Mr. Hagan's manner--but
Lady Maria, much more experienced, took it in perfectly good part. At
a late hour coaches were called, to which the gentlemen attended the
ladies, after whose departure some of them returned to the supper-room,
and the end was that Carpezan had to be carried away in a chair, and
that the King of Hungary had a severe headache; and that the Poet,
though he remembered making a great number of speeches, was quite
astounded when half a dozen of his guests appeared at his house the next
day, whom he had invited overnight to come and sup with him once more.

As he put Mrs. Lambert and her daughters into their coach on the night
previous, all the ladies were flurried, delighted, excited; and you may
be sure our gentleman was with them the next day, to talk of the play
and the audience, and the actors, and the beauties of the piece, over
and over again. Mrs. Lambert had heard that the ladies of the theatre
were dangerous company for young men. She hoped George would have a
care, and not frequent the greenroom too much.

George smiled, and said he had a preventive against all greenroom
temptations, of which he was not in the least afraid; and as he spoke he
looked in Theo's face, as if in those eyes lay the amulet which was to
preserve him from all danger.

“Why should he be afraid, mamma?” asks the maiden simply. She had no
idea of danger or of guile.

“No, my darling, I don't think he need be afraid,” says the mother,
kissing her.

“You don't suppose Mr. George would fall in love with that painted old
creature who performed the chief part?” asks Miss Hetty, with a toss of
her head. “She must be old enough to be his mother.”

“Pray, do you suppose that at our age nobody can care for us, or that we
have no hearts left?” asks mamma, very tartly. “I believe, or I may
say, I hope and trust, your father thinks otherwise. He is, I imagine,
perfectly satisfied, miss. He does not sneer at age, whatever little
girls out of the schoolroom may do. And they had much better be back
there, and they had much better remember what the fifth commandment
is--that they had, Hetty!”

“I didn't think I was breaking it by saying that an actress was as old
as George's mother,” pleaded Hetty.

“George's mother is as old as I am, miss!--at least she was when we were
at school. And Fanny Parker--Mrs. Mountain who now is--was seven months
older, and we were in the French class together; and I have no idea
that our age is to be made the subject of remarks and ridicule by
our children, and I will thank you to spare it, if you please! Do you
consider your mother too old, George?”

“I am glad my mother is of your age, Aunt Lambert,” says George, in the
most sentimental manner.

Strange infatuation of passion--singular perversity of reason! At some
period before his marriage, it not unfrequently happens that a man
actually is fond of his mother-in-law! At this time our good General
vowed, and with some reason, that he was jealous. Mrs. Lambert made much
more of George than of any other person in the family. She dressed up
Theo to the utmost advantage in order to meet him; she was for ever
caressing her, and appealing to her when he spoke. It was, “Don't
you think he looks well?”--“Don't you think he looks pale, Theo,
to-day?”--“Don't you think he has been sitting up over his books too
much at night?” and so forth. If he had a cold, she would have liked to
make gruel for him and see his feet in hot water. She sent him recipes
of her own for his health. When he was away, she never ceased talking
about him to her daughter. I dare say Miss Theo liked the subject well
enough. When he came, she was sure to be wanted in some other part of
the house, and would bid Theo take care of him till she returned. Why,
before she returned to the room, could you hear her talking outside the
door to her youngest innocent children, to her servants in the upper
regions, and so forth? When she reappeared, was not Mr. George always
standing or sitting at a considerable distance from Miss Theo--except,
to be sure, on that one day when she had just happened to drop her
scissors, and he had naturally stooped down to pick them up? Why was she
blushing? Were not youthful cheeks made to blush, and roses to bloom in
the spring? Not that mamma ever noted the blushes, but began quite an
artless conversation about this or that, as she sate down brimful of
happiness to her worktable.

And at last there came a letter from Virginia in Madam Esmond's neat,
well-known hand, and over which George trembled and blushed before he
broke the seal. It was in answer to the letter which he had sent home,
respecting his brother's commission and his own attachment to Miss
Lambert. Of his intentions respecting Harry, Madam Esmond fully
approved. As for his marriage, she was not against early marriages. She
would take his picture of Miss Lambert with the allowance that was to be
made for lovers' portraits, and hope, for his sake, that the young lady
was all he described her to be. With money, as Madam Esmond gathered
from her son's letter, she did not appear to be provided at all, which
was a pity, as, though wealthy in land, their family had but little
ready-money. However, by Heaven's blessing, there was plenty at home for
children and children's children, and the wives of her sons should share
all she had. When she heard more at length from Mr. and Mrs. Lambert,
she would reply for her part more fully. She did not pretend to say that
she had not greater hopes for her son, as a gentleman of his name and
prospects might pretend to the hand of the first lady of the land; but
as Heaven had willed that her son's choice should fall upon her old
friend's daughter, she acquiesced, and would welcome George's wife as
her own child. This letter was brought by Mr. Van den Bosch of Albany,
who had lately bought a very large estate in Virginia, and who was bound
for England to put his granddaughter to a boarding-school. She, Madam
Esmond, was not mercenary, nor was it because this young lady was
heiress of a very great fortune that she desired her sons to pay Mr. Van
d. B. every attention. Their properties lay close together, and could
Harry find in the young lady those qualities of person and mind suitable
for a companion for life, at least she would have the satisfaction of
seeing both her children near her in her declining years. Madam Esmond
concluded by sending her affectionate compliments to Mrs. Lambert, from
whom she begged to hear further, and her blessing to the young lady who
was to be her daughter-in-law.

The letter was not cordial, and the writer evidently but half satisfied;
but, such as it was, her consent was here formally announced. How
eagerly George ran away to Soho with the long-desired news in his
pocket! I suppose our worthy friends there must have read his news in
his countenance--else why should Mrs. Lambert take her daughter's hand
and kiss her with such uncommon warmth, when George announced that
he had received letters from home? Then, with a break in his voice, a
pallid face, and a considerable tremor, turning to Mr. Lambert, he said:
“Madam Esmond's letter, sir, is in reply to one of mine, in which I
acquainted her that I had formed an attachment in England, for which I
asked my mother's approval. She gives her consent, I am grateful to say,
and I have to pray my dear friends to be equally kind to me.”

“God bless thee, my dear boy!” says the good General, laying a hand on
the young man's head. “I am glad to have thee for a son, George. There,
there, don't go down on your knees, young folks! George may, to be sure,
and thank God for giving him the best little wife in all England. Yes,
my dear, except when you were ill, you never caused me a heartache--and
happy is the man, I say, who wins thee!”

I have no doubt the young people knelt before their parents, as was the
fashion in those days; and am perfectly certain that Mrs. Lambert kissed
both of them, and likewise bedewed her pocket-handkerchief in the most
plentiful manner. Hetty was not present at this sentimental scene, and
when she heard of it, spoke with considerable asperity, and a laugh that
was by no means pleasant, saying: “Is this all the news you have to give
me? Why, I have known it these months past. Do you think I have no eyes
to see, and no ears to hear, indeed?” But in private she was much
more gentle. She flung herself on her sister's neck, embracing her
passionately, and vowing that never, never would Theo find any one to
love her like her sister. With Theo she became entirely mild and humble.
She could not abstain from her jokes and satire with George, but he was
too happy to heed her much, and too generous not to see the cause of her
jealousy.

When all parties concerned came to read Madam Esmond's letter, that
document, it is true, appeared rather vague. It contained only a promise
that she would receive the young people at her house, and no sort
of proposal for a settlement. The General shook his head over the
letter--he did not think of examining it until some days after the
engagement had been made between George and his daughter: but now he
read Madam Esmond's words, they gave him but small encouragement.

“Bah!” says George. “I shall have three hundred pounds for my tragedy. I
can easily write a play a year; and if the worst comes to the worst, we
can live on that.”

“On that and your patrimony,” says Theo's father.

George now had to explain, with some hesitation, that what with paying
bills for his mother, and Harry's commission and debts, and his own
ransom--George's patrimony proper was well-nigh spent.

Mr. Lambert's countenance looked graver still at this announcement, but
he saw his girl's eyes turned towards him with an alarm so tender, that
he took her in his arms and vowed that, let the worst come to the worst,
his darling should not be balked of her wish.

About the going back to Virginia, George frankly owned that he little
liked the notion of returning to be entirely dependent on his mother.
He gave General Lambert an idea of his life at home, and explained how
little to his taste that slavery was. No. Why should he not stay in
England, write more tragedies, study for the bar, get a place, perhaps?
Why, indeed? He straightway began to form a plan for another tragedy.
He brought portions of his work, from time to time, to Miss Theo and her
sister: Hetty yawned over the work, but Theo pronounced it to be still
more beautiful and admirable than the last, which was perfect.

The engagement of our young friends was made known to the members of
their respective families, and announced to Sir Miles Warrington, in
a ceremonious letter from his nephew. For a while Sir Miles saw no
particular objection to the marriage; though, to be sure, considering
his name and prospects, Mr. Warrington might have looked higher. The
truth was, that Sir Miles imagined that Madam Esmond had made some
considerable settlement on her son, and that his circumstances were more
than easy. But when he heard that George was entirely dependent on his
mother, and that his own small patrimony was dissipated, as Harry's had
been before, Sir Miles's indignation at his nephew's imprudence knew no
bounds; he could not find words to express his horror and anger at the
want of principle exhibited by both these unhappy young men: he thought
it his duty to speak his mind about them, and wrote his opinion to his
sister Esmond in Virginia. As for General and Mrs. Lambert, who passed
for respectable persons, was it to be borne that such people should
inveigle a penniless young man into a marriage with their penniless
daughter? Regarding them, and George's behaviour, Sir Miles fully
explained his views to Madam Esmond, gave half a finger to George
whenever his nephew called on him in town, and did not even invite him
to partake of the famous family small-beer. Towards Harry his uncle
somewhat unbent; Harry had done his duty in the campaign, and was
mentioned with praise in high quarters. He had sown his wild oats,--he
at least was endeavouring to amend; but George was a young prodigal,
fast careering to ruin, and his name was only mentioned in the family
with a groan. Are there any poor fellows nowadays, I wonder, whose
polite families fall on them and persecute them; groan over them
and stone them, and hand stones to their neighbours that they may do
likewise? All the patrimony spent! Gracious heavens! Sir Miles turned
pale when he saw his nephew coming. Lady Warrington prayed for him as a
dangerous reprobate; and, in the meantime, George was walking the town,
quite unconscious that he was occasioning so much wrath and so much
devotion. He took little Miley to the play and brought him back again.
He sent tickets to his aunt and cousins which they could not refuse, you
know; it would look too marked were they to break altogether. So they
not only took the tickets, but whenever country constituents came to
town they asked for more, taking care to give the very worst motives
to George's intimacy with the theatre, and to suppose that he and the
actresses were on terms of the most disgraceful intimacy. An august
personage having been to the theatre, and expressed his approbation
of Mr. Warrington's drama to Sir Miles, when he attended his R-y-l
H-ghn-ss's levee at Saville House, Sir Miles, to be sure, modified his
opinion regarding the piece, and spoke henceforth more respectfully of
it. Meanwhile, as we have said, George was passing his life entirely
careless of the opinion of all the uncles, aunts, and cousins in the
world.

Most of the Esmond cousins were at least more polite and cordial than
George's kinsfolk of the Warrington side. In spite of his behaviour over
the cards, Lord Castlewood, George always maintained, had a liking for
our Virginians, and George was pleased enough to be in his company. He
was a far abler man than many who succeeded in life. He had a good name,
and somehow only stained it; a considerable wit, and nobody trusted it;
and a very shrewd experience and knowledge of mankind, which made him
mistrust them, and himself most of all, and which perhaps was the bar
to his own advancement. My Lady Castlewood, a woman of the world, wore
always a bland mask, and received Mr. George with perfect civility,
and welcomed him to lose as many guineas as he liked at her ladyship's
card-tables. Between Mr. William and the Virginian brothers there never
was any love lost; but, as for Lady Maria, though her love affair was
over, she had no rancour; she professed for her cousins a very
great regard and affection, a part of which the young gentlemen very
gratefully returned. She was charmed to hear of Harry's valour in the
campaign; she was delighted with George's success at the theatre; she
was for ever going to the play, and had all the favourite passages of
Carpezan by heart. One day, as Mr. George and Miss Theo were taking a
sentimental walk in Kensington Gardens, whom should they light upon
but their cousin Maria in company with a gentleman in a smart suit and
handsome laced hat, and who should the gentleman be but his Majesty
King Louis of Hungary, Mr. Hagan? He saluted the party, and left them
presently. Lady Maria had only just happened to meet him. Mr. Hagan came
sometimes, he said, for quiet, to study his parts in Kensington Gardens,
and George and the two ladies walked together to Lord Castlewood's door
in Kensington Square, Lady Maria uttering a thousand compliments to Theo
upon her good looks, upon her virtue, upon her future happiness, upon
her papa and mamma, upon her destined husband, upon her paduasoy cloak
and dear little feet and shoe-buckles.

Harry happened to come to London that evening, and slept at his
accustomed quarters. When George appeared at breakfast, the Captain
was already in the room (the custom of that day was to call all army
gentlemen Captains), and looking at the letters on the breakfast-table.

“Why, George,” he cries, “there is a letter from Maria!”

“Little boy bring it from Common Garden last night--Master George
asleep,” says Gumbo.

“What can it be about?” asks Harry, as George peruses his letter with a
queer expression of face.

“About my play, to be sure,” George answers, tearing up the paper, and
still wearing his queer look.

“What, she is not writing love-letters to you, is she, Georgy?”

“No, certainly not to me,” replies the other. But he spoke no word more
about the letter; and when at dinner in Dean Street Mrs. Lambert said,
“So you met somebody walking with the King of Hungary yesterday in
Kensington Gardens?”

“What little tell-tale told you? A mere casual rencontre--the King goes
there to study his parts, and Lady Maria happened to be crossing the
garden to visit some of the other King's servants at Kensington Palace.”
 And so there was an end to that matter for the time being.

Other events were at hand fraught with interest to our Virginians. One
evening after Christmas, the two gentlemen, with a few more friends,
were met round General Lambert's supper-table; and among the company was
Harry's new Colonel of the 67th, Major-General Wolfe. The young General
was more than ordinarily grave. The conversation all related to the war.
Events of great importance were pending. The great minister now in power
was determined to carry on the war on a much more extended scale than
had been attempted hitherto: an army was ordered to Germany to help
Prince Ferdinand, another great expedition was preparing for America,
and here, says Mr. Lambert, “I will give you the health of the
Commander--a glorious campaign, and a happy return to him!”

“Why do you not drink the toast, General James!” asked the hostess of
her guest.

“He must not drink his own toast,” says General Lambert; “it is we must
do that!”

What? was James appointed?--All the ladies must drink such a toast as
that, and they mingled their kind voices with the applause of the rest
of the company.

Why did he look so melancholy? the ladies asked of one another when they
withdrew. In after days they remembered his pale face.

“Perhaps he has been parting from his sweetheart,” suggests
tender-hearted Mrs. Lambert. And at this sentimental notion, no doubt
all the ladies looked sad.

The gentlemen, meanwhile, continued their talk about the war and its
chances. Mr. Wolfe did not contradict the speakers when they said that
the expedition was to be directed against Canada.

“Ah, sir,” says Harry, “I wish your regiment was going with you, and
that I might pay another visit to my old friends at Quebec.”

What, had Harry been there? Yes. He described his visit to the place
five years before, and knew the city, and the neighbourhood, well. He
lays a number of bits of biscuit on the table before him, and makes
a couple of rivulets of punch on each side. “This fork is the Isle
d'Orleans,” says he, “with the north and south branches of St. Lawrence
on each side. Here's the Low Town, with a battery--how many guns was
mounted there in our time, brother?--but at long shots from the St.
Joseph shore you might play the same game. Here's what they call the
little river, the St. Charles, and a bridge of boats with a tete du pont
over to the place of arms. Here's the citadel, and here's convents--ever
so many convents--and the cathedral; and here, outside the lines to the
west and south, is what they call the Plains of Abraham--where a certain
little affair took place, do you remember, brother? He and a young
officer of the Rousillon regiment ca ca'd at each other for twenty
minutes, and George pinked him, and then they jure'd each other an
amitie eternelle. Well it was for George: for his second saved his life
on that awful day of Braddock's defeat. He was a fine little fellow, and
I give his toast: Je bois a la sante du Chevalier de Florac!”

“What, can you speak French, too, Harry?” asks Mr. Wolfe. The young man
looked at the General with eager eyes.

“Yes,” says he, “I can speak, but not so well as George.”

“But he remembers the city, and can place the batteries, you see, and
knows the ground a thousand times better than I do!” cries the elder
brother.

The two elder officers exchanged looks with one another; Mr. Lambert
smiled and nodded, as if in reply to the mute queries of his comrade: on
which the other spoke. “Mr. Harry,” he said, “if you have had enough of
fine folks, and White's, and horse-racing----”

“Oh, sir!” says the young man, turning very red.

“And if you have a mind to a sea voyage at a short notice, come and see
me at my lodgings to-morrow.”

What was that sudden uproar of cheers which the ladies heard in their
drawing-room? It was the hurrah which Harry Warrington gave when he
leaped up at hearing the General's invitation.

The women saw no more of the gentlemen that night. General Lambert had
to be away upon his business early next morning, before seeing any
of his family; nor had he mentioned a word of Harry's outbreak on the
previous evening. But when he rejoined his folks at dinner, a look at
Miss Hetty's face informed the worthy gentleman that she knew what had
passed on the night previous, and what was about to happen to the young
Virginian. After dinner Mrs. Lambert sat demurely at her work, Miss
Theo took her book of Italian Poetry. Neither of the General's customary
guests happened to be present that evening.

He took little Hetty's hand in his, and began to talk with her. He
did not allude to the subject which he knew was uppermost in her mind,
except that by a more than ordinary gentleness and kindness he perhaps
caused her to understand that her thoughts were known to him.

“I have breakfasted,” says he, “with James Wolfe this morning, and our
friend Harry was of the party. When he and the other guests were gone, I
remained and talked with James about the great expedition on which he is
going to sail. Would that his brave father had lived a few months longer
to see him come back covered with honours from Louisbourg, and knowing
that all England was looking to him to achieve still greater glory!
James is dreadfully ill in body--so ill that I am frightened for
him--and not a little depressed in mind at having to part from the young
lady whom he has loved so long. A little rest, he thinks, might have set
his shattered frame up; and to call her his has been the object of his
life. But, great as his love is (and he is as romantic as one of you
young folks of seventeen), honour and duty are greater, and he leaves
home, and wife, and ease, and health, at their bidding. Every man of
honour would do the like; every woman who loves him truly would buckle
on his armour for him. James goes to take leave of his mother to-night;
and though she loves him devotedly, and is one of the tenderest women
in the world, I am sure she will show no sign of weakness at his going
away.”

“When does he sail, papa?” the girl asked.

“He will be on board in five days.” And Hetty knew quite well who sailed
with him.
