"Room to let for a single gentleman." Sometimes, in an idle hour, driven by sheer foolishness, I would knock on the door. It would swing open after a variable interval by the "slavey"—in the morning, looking like a drowned rat with her arms hidden beneath her apron; in the afternoon, sporting a dirty cap and apron with a smug, self-satisfied air. How well I knew her! Unchanged, not grown an inch—her round, bewildered eyes, her perpetually open mouth, her touzled hair, her scored red hands. With a Herculean effort, I refrained from muttering, "So sorry, forgot my key," and instead pushed past her, bounding up the narrow stairs two at a time. The carpet stopped at the first floor, giving way to bare, echoing steps beyond. "Oh, what rooms have you to let?" I would inquire, when, scuttling to the top of the kitchen stairs, she would call over the banisters: "A gentleman to see the rooms." There would come up, panting, a harassed-looking, elderly female, genteel in black. She would crush past the little "slavey" and approach, sizing me up with critical eyes.

"I have a very nice room on the first floor," she would inform me, "and one behind on the third."

I would agree to see them, explaining that I was seeking them for a young friend of mine. We would squeeze past the hat and umbrella stand: there was just room, but one had to keep close to the wall. The first floor was rather an imposing apartment, featuring a marble-topped sideboard measuring quite three feet by two, the doors of which would remain stubbornly closed if you tried to introduce a wad of paper between them. A green table-cloth, matching the curtains, covered the loo-table. The lamp was perfectly safe so long as it stood in the exact centre of the table, but should not be shifted. A paper fire-stove ornament bestowed upon the room an air of chastity. Above the mantelpiece hung a fly-blown mirror, between the once gilt frame and glass of which invitation cards could be inserted; indeed, one or two remained, proving that the tenants even of "bed-sitting-rooms" were not excluded from social delights. The wall opposite was adorned by an oleograph of the kind Cheap Jacks sell by auction on Saturday nights in the Pimlico Road, warranted as "hand-made." Generally speaking, it was a Swiss landscape. There appeared to be more "body" in a Swiss landscape than in scenes from less favoured localities. A dilapidated mill, a foaming torrent, a mountain, a maiden, and a cow could at least be relied upon. An easy chair (I disclaimed all responsibility for the adjective) awaited the uninitiated. It was stuffed with many coils of steel wire, each possessing a "business end" in admirable working order, and covered with horsehair, highly glazed. There was one way of sitting upon it, and only one: by using the extreme edge and planting your feet firmly on the floor. If you attempted to lean back, you inevitably slid out. When so treated, it seemed to say to you: "Excuse me, you are very heavy, and you would really be much more comfortable upon the floor. Thank you so much." The bed was behind the door, and the washstand behind the bed. If you sat facing the window, you could forget the bed existed. On the other hand, if more than one friend came to call, you were glad of it. As a matter of fact, experienced visitors preferred it—they would make straight for it, refusing with firmness to exchange it for the easy chair.

"And this room is?"

"Eight shillings a week, sir—with attendance, of course."

"Any extras?"

"The lamp, sir, is eighteenpence a week; and the kitchen fire, if the gentleman wishes to dine at home, two shillings."

"And fire?"

"Sixpence a scuttle, sir, I charge for coals."

"It's rather a small scuttle."

The landlady bridled a little. "The usual size, I think, sir." One presumes there is a special size in coal-scuttles made exclusively for lodging-house keepers.

I agreed that while I was about it, I might as well see the other room, the third floor back. The landlady opened the door for me but remained herself on the landing. She was a stout lady and did not wish to dwarf the apartment by comparison. Here, the arrangement did not allow of ignoring the bed. It was the life and soul of the room and declined to efface itself. Its only possible rival was the washstand, straw-coloured, with a staring white basin and jug, together with other appurtenances. It glared defiantly from its corner. "I know I'm small," it seemed to say; "but I'm very useful; and I won't be ignored." The remaining furniture consisted of a couple of chairs—there was no hypocrisy about them: they were not easy and they did not pretend to be easy; a small chest of light-painted drawers before the window, with white china handles, upon which sat a tiny looking-glass; and, occupying the entire remaining space, after allowing three square feet for the tenant when he arrived, an attenuated four-legged table apparently home-made. The only ornament in the room was suspended above the fireplace, a funeral card framed in beer corks. As the corpse introduced by the ancient Egyptians into their banquets, it was hung there perhaps to remind the occupant that the luxuries and allurements of life have their end; or maybe it consoled him in despondent moments with the reflection that after all, he might be worse off.

The rent of this room was three-and-sixpence a week, also including attendance; lamp, as for the first floor, eighteen-pence; but kitchen fire a shilling.

"But why should kitchen fire for the first floor be two shillings, and for this only one?"

"Well, as a rule, sir, the first floor wants more cooking done."

"You are quite right, my dear lady, I was forgetting. The gentleman in the third floor back! Cooking for him is not a great tax upon the kitchen fire. His breakfast is what, madam, we call plain, I think. His lunch he takes out. You may see him, walking round the quiet square, up and down the narrow street that, leading to nowhere in particular, is between twelve and two somewhat deserted. He carries a paper bag, into which, at intervals, when he is sure nobody is looking, his mouth disappears. From studying the neighbourhood, one can guess what it contains. Saveloys hereabouts are plentiful and only twopence each. There are pie shops, where meat pies are twopence and fruit pies a penny. The lady behind the counter, using deftly a broad, flat knife, lifts the little dainty with one twist clean from its tiny dish: it is marvellous, having regard to the thinness of the pastry, that she never breaks one. Roley-poley pudding, sweet and wonderfully satisfying, more especially when cold, is but a penny a slice. Peas pudding, though this is an awkward thing to eat out of a bag, is comforting upon cold days. Then with his tea he takes two eggs or a haddock, the fourpenny size; maybe on rare occasions, a chop or steak; and you fry it for him, madam, though every time he urges on you how much he would prefer it grilled, for fried in your one frying-pan its flavour becomes somewhat confused. But maybe this is the better for him, for, shutting his eyes and trusting only to smell and flavour, he can imagine himself enjoying variety. He can begin with herrings, pass on to liver and bacon, opening his eyes again for a moment to perceive that he has now arrived at the joint, and closing them again, wind up with a distinct suggestion of toasted cheese, thus avoiding monotony. For dinner he goes out again. Maybe he is not hungry, late meals are a mistake; or, maybe, putting his hand into his pocket and making calculations beneath a lamp-post, appetite may come to him. Then there are places cheerful with the sound of frizzling fat, where fried plaice brown and odorous may be had for three halfpence, and a handful of sliced potatoes for a penny; where for fourpence succulent stewed eels may be discussed; vinegar ad lib.; or for sevenpence—but these are red-letter evenings—half a sheep's head may be indulged in, which is a supper fit for any king who happened to be hungry."

I explained that I would discuss the matter with my young friend when he arrived. The landlady said, "Certainly, sir:" she was used to what she called the "wandering Christian;" and easing my conscience by slipping a shilling into the "slavey's" astonished, lukewarm hand, I passed out again into the long, dreary street, now echoing maybe to the sad cry of "Muffins!"

Or sometimes, in the evening, the lamp lighted, the remnants of the meat tea cleared away, the flickering firelight cosifying the dingy rooms, I would go a-visiting. There was no need for me to ring the bell or mount the stairs. Through the thin, transparent walls, I could see you plainly, old friends of mine, fashions a little changed, that is all. We wore bell-shaped trousers; eight-and-six to measure, seven-and-six if from stock; fastened our neckties in dashing style with a horseshoe pin. I think in the matter of waistcoats we had the advantage of you; ours were gayer, braver. Our cuffs and collars were of paper: sixpence-halfpenny the dozen, three-halfpence the pair. On Sunday they were white and glistening; on Monday less aggressively obvious; on Tuesday morning decidedly dappled. But on Tuesday evening, when with natty cane or umbrella neatly rolled in patent leather case, we took our promenade down Oxford Street—the fashionable hour nine to ten p.m.—we could shoot our arms and cock our chins with the best. Your india-rubber linen has its advantages. Storm does not wither it; it braves better the heat and turmoil of the day. The passing of a sponge! and your "Dicky" is itself again. We had to use bread-crumbs, and so sacrifice the glaze. Yet I cannot help thinking that for the first few hours, at all events, our paper was more dazzling.

For the rest, I see no change in you, old friends. I wave you greeting from the misty street. God rest you, gallant gentlemen, lonely and friendless and despised; making the best of joyless lives; keeping yourselves genteel on twelve, fifteen, or eighteen (ah, but you are plutocrats!) shillings a week; saving something even of that, maybe, to help the old mother in the country, so proud of her "gentleman" son who has book learning and who is "something in the City." May nothing dismay you. Bullied, badgered, and baited from nine to six though you may be, from then till bedtime you are rorty young dogs. The half-guinea topper, "as worn by the Prince of Wales" (ah, how many a meal has it not cost!), warmed before the fire, brushed and polished and coaxed, shines resplendent. The second pair of trousers are drawn from beneath the bed; in the gaslight, with a well-marked crease from top to toe, they will pass for new. A pleasant evening to you! May your cheap necktie make all the impression your soul can desire! May your penny cigar be mistaken for Havana! May the barmaid charm your simple heart by addressing you as "Baby!" May some sweet shop-girl throw a kindly glance at you, inviting you to walk with her! May she snigger at your humour; may other dogs cast envious looks at you, and may no harm come of it!

You dreamers of dreams, you who while your companions play and sleep will toil upward in the night! You have read Mr. Smiles' "Self-Help," Longfellow's "Psalm of Life," and so strengthened your attack with confidence in "French Without a Master," "Bookkeeping in Six Lessons." With a sigh to yourselves, you turn aside from the alluring streets, from the bright, bewitching eyes, into the stuffy air of Birkbeck Institutions, Polytechnic Schools. May success compensate you for your youth devoid of pleasure! May the partner's chair you saw in visions be yours before the end! May you live one day in Clapham in a twelve-roomed house!

And, after all, we have our moments, have we not? The Saturday night at the play. The hours of waiting are short. We converse with kindred souls of the British Drama, its past and future: we have our views. We dream of Florence This, Kate That; in a little while we shall see her. Ah, could she but know how we loved her! Her photo is on our mantelpiece, transforming the dismal little room into a shrine. The poem we have so often commenced! When it is finished, we will post it to her. At least she will acknowledge its receipt; we can kiss the paper her hand has rested on. The great doors groan, then quiver. Ah, the wild thrill of that moment! Now push for all you are worth: charge, wriggle, squirm! It is an epitome of life. We are through—collarless, panting, pummelled from top to toe: but what of that? Upward, still upward; then downward with leaps at risk of our neck, from bench to bench through the gloom. We have gained the front row! Would we exchange sensations with the stallite, strolling languidly to his seat? The extravagant dinner once a week! We banquet *à la Francais*, in Soho, for one-and-six, including wine. Does Tortoni ever give his customers a repast they enjoy more? I trow not.

My first lodging was an attic in a square the other side of Blackfriars Bridge. The
