"Don't let the nerves get the better of you," advised the O'Kelly, adjusting my collar with the air of a surgeon preparing a patient for a delicate operation. "And don't try to do too much. You've got a voice that's fair enough, but it lacks the oomph. Just keep cool and, for heaven's sake, open your mouth."

It was eleven o'clock, and we stood at the mouth of a narrow alleyway that served as the throat to the stage door. For the past two weeks, the O'Kelly had been drilling me, a process that had driven both of us to the brink of hysteria, though the O'Kelly seemed to be suffering the brunt of it. His wife, Mrs. O'Kelly—a slender, vinegar-faced matron whom I had glimpsed once or twice pacing Belsize Square like a sentinel awaiting a signal—was a woman of serious intent who harbored a conscientious objection to any music that didn't smell faintly of incense. In a desperate bid to convert her husband from one of his musical sins, the piano had been banished from the drawing-room and replaced by an American organ of such lugubrious tone that it sounded less like an instrument and more like a weeping ghost. We had made do with this mournful beast. Though the O'Kelly, a genuine musical genius, had managed to coax an accompaniment to "Sally in Our Alley" from it that was less confusing than it might have been, the result was a disaster. My rendition of the famous ballad had acquired a dolefulness that the composer surely hadn't intended. Sung as I sang it, the theme became, to use a definition that has since been worn threadbare in art criticism, a "problem ballad." One couldn't help wondering if the marriage in the song would turn out as happily as the young man seemed to expect. Was there not, upon reflection, a deep-seated melancholy, a grim pessimism, woven into the very fabric of the complainful hero that clashed horribly with the frivolous instincts one could not fail to detect in the charming, yet slightly shallow, character of Sally?

"Lighter! Lighter! Not so soulful!" the O'Kelly would cry, as the solemn notes rolled jerkily from the groaning organ beneath his fingers.

We were nearly caught once, when Mrs. O'Kelly returned from a district visitors' committee meeting earlier than anticipated. I was hastily concealed in a small conservatory adjoining the first-floor landing, where I crouched behind flower pots, listening in terror to the severe cross-examination of the O'Kelly.

"William, do not prevaricate. It was not a hymn."

"My dear, so much depends on the time. Let me give you an example of what I mean."

"William, pray do not play tricks with sacred melodies in my presence. If you have no respect for religion, please remember that I do. Besides, why should you be playing hymns at ten o'clock in the morning? It is not like you, William, and I do not credit your explanation. And you were singing. I distinctly heard the word 'Sally' as I opened the door."

"Salvation, my dear," corrected the O'Kelly.

"Your enunciation, William, is not usually so much at fault."

"A little hoarseness, my dear," explained the O'Kelly.

"Your voice did not sound hoarse. Perhaps it will be better if we do not pursue the subject further."

With this, the O'Kelly appeared to agree.

"She's a lady a little difficult to get on with when you're feeling well and strong," the O'Kelly would explain later. "But if you happen to be ill, she's one of the kindest, most devoted of women. When I was down with typhoid three years ago, a tenderer nurse no man could have had. I shall never forget it. And so she would be again tomorrow, if there was anything serious the matter with me."

I murmured the well-known quotation.

"Mrs. O'Kelly to a T," concurred the O'Kelly. "I sometimes wonder if Lady Scott may not have been the same sort of woman."

"The unfortunate part of it is," continued the O'Kelly, "that I'm such a healthy beggar; it don't give her a chance. If I were only a chronic invalid, now, there's nothing that woman would not do to make me happy. As it is—" The O'Kelly struck a chord. We resumed our studies.

But to return to our conversation at the stage door.

"Meet me at the Cheshire Cheese at one o'clock," said the O'Kelly, shaking my hand vigorously. "If you don't get on here, we'll try something else; but I've spoken to Hodgson, and I think you will. Good luck to you!"

He departed, and I followed in his wake. Inside a glass box just behind the door, a curved-nosed, round-eyed little man, looking like an angry bird trapped in a cage, demanded my business. I showed him my letter of appointment.

"Up the passage, across the stage, along the corridor, first floor, second door on the right," he instructed me in one breath, then snapped the window shut.

I proceeded up the passage. It somewhat surprised me to discover that I was not in the least excited at the thought of this, my first introduction to "behind the scenes."

I recall my father asking a young soldier on his return from the Crimea what his sensations had been at the commencement of his first charge.

"Well," replied the young fellow, "I was worrying all the time, remembering I had rushed out leaving the beer tap running in the canteen, and I could not forget it."

So far as the stage, I found my way in safety. Pausing for a moment and glancing round, my impression was not so much disillusionment concerning all things theatrical as the realization of my worst forebodings. In that one moment, all the glamour connected with the stage fell from me, nor has it since ever returned. From the tawdry decorations of the auditorium to the childish make-belief littered around on the stage, I saw the Theatre as a painted thing of shreds and patches—the grown child's doll's-house. The Drama may improve us, elevate us, interest and teach us. I am sure it does; long may it flourish! But so likewise does the dressing and undressing of dolls, the opening of the front of the house, and the tenderly putting of them away to bed in rooms they completely fill, train our little dears to the duties and the joys of motherhood. Toys! What wise child despises them? Art, fiction, the musical glasses: are they not preparing us for the time, however distant, when we shall at last be grown up?

In a maze of ways beyond the stage, I lost myself, but eventually, guided by voices, came to a large room furnished barely with many chairs and worn settees. Here I found some twenty to thirty ladies and gentlemen already seated. They were of varying ages, sizes, and appearance, but all of them alike in having about them that impossible-to-define but impossible-to-mistake suggestion of theatricality. The men were chiefly remarkable for having no hair on their faces, but a good deal upon their heads; the ladies, one and all, were blessed with remarkably pink and white complexions and exceptionally bright eyes. The conversation, carried on in subdued but penetrating voices, was chiefly of "him" and "her." Everybody appeared to be on an affectionate footing with everybody else, the terms of address being "My dear," "My love," "Old girl," "Old chappie," Christian names—when name of any sort was needful—alone being employed. I hesitated for a minute with the door in my hand, fearing I had stumbled upon a family gathering. As, however, nobody seemed disconcerted at my entry, I ventured to take a vacant seat next to an extremely small and boyish-looking gentleman and to ask him if this was the room in which I, an applicant for a place in the chorus of the forthcoming comic opera, ought to be waiting.

He had large, fishy eyes, with which he looked me up and down. For such a length of time he remained thus regarding me in silence that a massive gentleman sitting near, who had overheard, took it upon himself to reply in the affirmative, adding that from what he knew of Butterworth we would all of us be waiting here a damned sight longer than any gentleman should keep other ladies and gentlemen waiting for no reason at all.

"I think it exceedingly bad form," observed the fishy-eyed gentleman, in deep contralto tones, "for any gentleman to take it upon himself to reply to a remark addressed to quite another gentleman."

"I beg your pardon," retorted the large gentleman. "I thought you were asleep."

"I think it very ill manners," remarked the small gentleman in the same slow and impressive tones, "for any gentleman to tell another gentleman, who happens to be wide awake, that he thought he was asleep."

"Sir," returned the massive gentleman, assuming with the help of a large umbrella a quite Johnsonian attitude, "I decline to alter my manners to suit your taste."

"If you are satisfied with them," replied the small gentleman, "I cannot help it. But I think you are making a mistake."

"Does anybody know what the opera is about?" asked a bright little woman at the other end of the room.

"Does anybody ever know what a comic opera is about?" asked another lady, whose appearance suggested experience.

"I once asked the author," observed a weary-looking gentleman, speaking from a corner. "His reply was: 'Well, if you had asked me at the beginning of the rehearsals I might have been able to tell you, but damned if I could now!'"

"It wouldn't surprise me," observed a good-looking gentleman in a velvet coat, "if there occurred somewhere in the proceedings a drinking chorus for male voices."

"Possibly, if we are good," added a thin lady with golden hair, "the heroine will confide to us her love troubles, which will interest us and excite us."

The door at the further end of the room opened and a name was called. An elderly lady rose and went out.

"Poor old Gertie!" remarked sympathetically the thin lady with the golden hair. "I'm told that she really had a voice once."

"When poor young Bond first came to London," said the massive gentleman who was sitting on my left, "I remember his telling me he applied to Lord Barrymore's 'tiger,' Alexander Lee, I mean, of course, who was then running the Strand Theatre, for a place in the chorus. Lee heard him sing two lines, and then jumped up. 'Thanks, that'll do; good morning,' says Lee. Bond knew he had got a good voice, so he asked Lee what was wrong. 'What's wrong?' shouts Lee. 'Do you think I hire a chorus to show up my principals?'"

"Having regard to the company present," commented the fish-eyed young man, "I consider that anecdote as distinctly lacking in tact."

The feeling of the company appeared to be with the fish-eyed young man.

For the next half hour the door at the further end of the room continued to open and close, devouring, ogre-fashion, each time some dainty human morsel, now chorus gentleman, now chorus lady. Conversation among our thinning ranks became more fitful, a growing anxiety making for silence.

At length, "Mr. Horace Moncrieff" called the voice of the unseen Charon. In common with the rest, I glanced round languidly to see what sort of man "Mr. Horace Moncrieff" might be. The door was pushed open further. Charon, now revealed as a pale-faced young man with a drooping moustache, put his head into the room and repeated impatiently his invitation to the apparently coy Moncrieff. It suddenly occurred to me that I was Mr. Horace Moncrieff.

"So glad you've found yourself," said the pale-faced young man, as I joined him at the door. "Please don't lose yourself again; we're rather pressed for time."

I crossed with him through a deserted refreshment bar—one of the saddest of sights—into a room beyond. A melancholy-looking gentleman was seated at the piano. Beside him stood a tall, handsome man, who was opening and reading rapidly from a bundle of letters he held in his hand. A big, burly, bored-looking gentleman was making desperate efforts to be amused at the staccato conversation of a sharp-faced, restless-eyed gentleman, whose peculiarity was that he never by any chance looked at the person to whom he was talking, but always at something or somebody else.

"Moncrieff?" enquired the tall, handsome man—whom I later discovered to be Mr. Hodgson, the manager—without raising his eyes from his letters.

The pale-faced gentleman responded for me.

"Fire away," said Mr. Hodgson.

"What is it?" asked of me wearily the melancholy gentleman at the piano.

"'Sally in Our Alley,'" I replied.

"What are you?" interrupted Mr. Hodgson. He had never once looked at me, and did not now.

"A tenor," I replied. "Not a full tenor," I added, remembering the O'Kelly's instructions.

"Utterly impossible to fill a tenor," remarked the restless-eyed gentleman, looking at me and speaking to the worried-looking gentleman. "Ever tried?"

Everybody laughed, with the exception of the melancholy gentleman at the piano, Mr. Hodgson throwing in his contribution without raising his eyes from his letters. Throughout the proceedings the restless-eyed gentleman continued to make humorous observations of this nature, at which everybody laughed, excepting always the melancholy pianist—a short, sharp, mechanical laugh, devoid of the least suggestion of amusement. The restless-eyed gentleman, it appeared, was the leading low comedian of the theatre.

"Go on," said the melancholy gentleman, and commenced the accompaniment.

"Tell me when he's going to begin," remarked Mr. Hodgson at the conclusion of the first verse.

"He has a fair voice," said my accompanist. "He's evidently nervous."

"There is a prejudice throughout theatrical audiences,"
