The exhaustion of nerves and body had decreed otherwise, and sleep came over me with a welcome blanket of oblivion. My companion's rapid descent into slumber only quickened its approach. At first, he fidgeted, constantly sitting up to ask if I "heard this" or "heard that," tossing on his cork mattress and claiming the tent moved and the river had risen over the island's point. Each time I ventured out to check, I returned with the report that all was well, until finally he grew calmer and lay still. Soon, his breathing became regular, and I heard unmistakable sounds of snoring—the first and only time in my life that such a sound had been a welcome and calming influence.

This was the last thought in my mind before dozing off.

A difficulty in breathing woke me, and I found the blanket pulled over my face. But something else, besides the heavy fabric, was pressing upon me. My first thought was that my companion had rolled off his mattress onto mine in his sleep. I called to him and sat up, and at that exact moment, a terrible realization struck me: the tent was *surrounded*. The sound of multitudinous soft pattering was again audible outside, filling the night with a primal horror.

I called again, louder this time. He did not answer. The comforting rhythm of his snoring was gone, and I noticed the tent flap was down. This was the unpardonable sin. Crawling out into the darkness to hook it back securely, I realized with a jolt of icy dread that the Swede was not here. He had gone.

Seized by a dreadful agitation, I dashed out in a mad run. The moment I emerged, I plunged into a torrent of humming that surrounded me completely, issuing from every quarter of the heavens at once. It was that same familiar humming, but gone mad! It was as if a swarm of great, invisible bees had taken possession of the air around me. The sound seemed to thicken the very atmosphere, making my lungs work with agonizing difficulty.

But my friend was in danger, and I could not hesitate.

Dawn was just breaking, a faint whitish light spreading upwards over the clouds from a thin strip of clear horizon. There was no wind. I could barely make out the bushes and the river beyond, along with the pale sandy patches. In my excitement, I ran frantically to and fro about the island, calling his name, shouting at the top of my voice the first words that came into my head. But the willows smothered my voice, and the humming muffled it so that the sound traveled only a few feet around me. I plunged among the bushes, tripping headlong, tumbling over roots, and scraping my face as I tore this way and that among the preventing branches.

Then, quite unexpectedly, I came out upon the island's point and saw a dark figure outlined between the water and the sky. It was the Swede. Already, he had one foot in the river! A moment more and he would have taken the plunge.

I threw myself upon him, flinging my arms about his waist and dragging him shorewards with all my strength. Of course, he struggled furiously, making a noise all the time just like that cursed humming, and using the most outlandish phrases in his anger about "going *inside* to Them" and "taking the way of the water and the wind," and God only knows what more besides. I tried in vain to recall them afterwards, but listening to them then turned me sick with horror and amazement. In the end, I managed to get him into the comparative safety of the tent, flinging him breathless and cursing upon the mattress where I held him until the fit had passed.

I think the suddenness with which it all went, and how he grew calm coinciding with the equally abrupt cessation of the humming and pattering outside, was almost the strangest part of the whole business. For he had just opened his eyes and turned his tired face up to me so that the dawn threw a pale light upon it through the doorway. He said, for all the world just like a frightened child: "My life, old man—it's my life I owe you. But it's all over now anyhow. They've found a victim in our place!"

Then he dropped back upon his blankets and went to sleep literally under my eyes. He simply collapsed, beginning to snore again as healthily as though nothing had happened and he had never tried to offer his own life as a sacrifice by drowning. When the sunlight woke him three hours later—hours of ceaseless vigil for me—it became so clear to me that he remembered absolutely nothing of what he had attempted to do, that I deemed it wise to hold my peace and ask no dangerous questions.

He woke naturally and easily, as I have said, when the sun was already high in a windless, hot sky. He at once got up and set about preparing the fire for breakfast. I followed him anxiously as he bathed, but he did not attempt to plunge in, merely dipping his head and making some remark about the extra coldness of the water.

"The river's falling at last," he said, "and I'm glad of it."

"The humming has stopped too," I said.

He looked up at me quietly with his normal expression. Evidently, he remembered everything except his own attempt at suicide.

"Everything has stopped," he said, "because—"

He hesitated. But I knew some reference to that remark he had made just before he fainted was in his mind, and I was determined to know it.

"Because 'They've found another victim'?" I said, forcing a little laugh.

"Exactly," he answered, "exactly! I feel as positive of it as though—as though—I feel quite safe again, I mean," he finished.

He began to look curiously about him. The sunlight lay in hot patches on the sand. There was no wind. The willows were motionless. He slowly rose to his feet.

"Come," he said; "I think if we look, we shall find it."

He started off on a run, and I followed him. He kept to the banks, poking with a stick among the sandy bays, caves, and little back-waters, myself always close on his heels.

"Ah!" he exclaimed presently, "ah!"

The tone of his voice somehow brought back to me a vivid sense of the horror of the last twenty-four hours, and I hurried up to join him. He was pointing with his stick at a large black object that lay half in the water and half on the sand. It appeared to be caught by some twisted willow roots so that the river could not sweep it away. A few hours before, the spot must have been under water.

"See," he said quietly, "the victim that made our escape possible!"

And when I peered across his shoulder, I saw that his stick rested on the body of a man. He turned it over. It was the corpse of a peasant, and the face was hidden in the sand. Clearly the man had been drowned, but a few hours before, and his body must have been swept down upon our island somewhere about the hour of dawn—at the very time the fit had passed.

"We must give it a decent burial, you know."

"I suppose so," I replied. I shuddered a little in spite of myself, for there was something about the appearance of that poor drowned man that turned me cold.

The Swede glanced up sharply at me, an undecipherable expression on his face, and began clambering down the bank. I followed him more leisurely. The current, I noticed, had torn away much of the clothing from the body, so that the neck and part of the chest lay bare.

Halfway down the bank, my companion suddenly stopped and held up his hand in warning; but either my foot slipped, or I had gained too much momentum to bring myself quickly to a halt, for I bumped into him and sent him forward with a sort of leap to save himself. We tumbled together onto the hard sand so that our feet splashed into the water. And, before anything could be done, we had collided a little heavily against the corpse.

The Swede uttered a sharp cry. And I sprang back as if I had been shot.

At the moment we touched the body, there rose from its surface the loud sound of humming—the sound of several hummings—which passed with a vast commotion as of winged things in the air about us and disappeared upwards into the sky, growing fainter and fainter till they finally ceased in the distance. It was exactly as though we had disturbed some living yet invisible creatures at work.

My companion clutched me, and I think I clutched him, but before either of us had time properly to recover from the unexpected shock, we saw that a movement of the current was turning the corpse round so that it became released from the grip of the willow roots. A moment later, it had turned completely over, the dead face uppermost, staring at the sky. It lay on the edge of the main stream. In another moment, it would be swept away.

The Swede started to save it, shouting again something I did not catch about a "proper burial"—and then abruptly dropped upon his knees on the sand and covered his eyes with his hands. I was beside him in an instant.

I saw what he had seen.

For just as the body swung round to the current, the face and the exposed chest turned full towards us, and showed plainly how the skin and flesh were indented with small hollows, beautifully formed, and exactly similar in shape and kind to the sand-funnels that we had found all over the island.

"Their mark!" I heard my companion mutter under his breath. "Their awful mark!"

And when I turned my eyes again from his ghastly face to the river, the current had done its work. The body had been swept away into mid-stream and was already beyond our reach and almost out of sight, turning over and over on the waves like an otter.
