There exists in certain men, and Bruce Carmyle was one of them, a specific architecture of resilience—a sturdy refusal to acknowledge defeat—that serves them as effectively in the theater of the heart as in the arena of commerce. As a wooer, Bruce resembled that durable breed of pugilist who reserves his finest blows for the moment he has absorbed a substantial wallop to a tender spot. Though Sally had rejected his proposal of marriage with definitive clarity at Monk's Crofton, the episode had never registered in his consciousness as closed. All his life he had been conditioned to acquire what he desired, and he intended to secure it now. He was convinced he wanted Sally. Doubts had surfaced momentarily, but in the sharp pain of temporary loss, they evaporated. That streak of Bohemianism in her, which occasionally jarred against his orderly mind since their first encounter, was expunged from memory. What remained for Mr. Carmyle was the brilliance of her eyes, the jaunty elevation of her chin, and the gallant trimness of her figure. Her gay prettiness seemed to flick at him like a whip in the darkness of wakeful nights, driving him relentlessly forward. Quietly and methodically, like a respectable wolf settling upon the trail of Little Red Riding Hood, he prepared to pursue. Delicacy and imagination might have held him back, but he possessed neither strength in those faculties. One cannot possess everything.

His preparations for departure, though executed with his best efforts toward speed and secrecy, failed to escape the notice of the Family. In many English households, a system of communication and news distribution exists, akin to that of savage African tribes passing the latest item of interest from point to point across miles of jungle via a telepathic method never properly explained. On his final night in London, the Family's chosen representative—the man to whom the Family pointed with pride—entered Bruce Carmyle's apartment in South Audley Street. It was Uncle Donald, in the flesh. There were two hundred and forty pounds of flesh Uncle Donald comprised, and the chair in which he deposited it creaked violently beneath the burden. Once, at Monk's Crofton, Sally had spoiled a whole morning for her brother Fillmore by identifying Uncle Donald as the exact image of what he would become when grown. A superstition, cherished from early schooldays, that he possessed a weak heart had caused the Family's managing director to abstain from every form of exercise for nearly fifty years. Combining this aversion to exertion with one of the three heartiest appetites in the southwestern postal division of London, Uncle Donald, at sixty-two, was not a man one would willingly have seen lounging in armchairs. Bruce Carmyle's customary respectfulness was tinged with something approaching disdain as he regarded him. Uncle Donald's walrus moustache heaved gently upon his labored breath, resembling seaweed riding a ground-swell. There had been stairs to climb.

"What's this? What's this?" he managed to ejaculate finally.

"You packing?"

"Yes," said Mr. Carmyle, shortly.

For the first time in his life, he became conscious of that sensation of furtive guilt which was habitual with his cousin Ginger in the presence of this large, mackerel-eyed man.

"You going away?"

"Yes."

"Where you going?"

"America."

"When you going?"

"To-morrow morning."

"Why you going?"

This dialogue has been recorded as though it had been as brisk and snappy as any cross-talk between vaudeville comedians, but in reality, Uncle Donald's peculiar conversational methods had stretched it over a period of nearly three minutes. After each reply and before each question, he puffed and sighed and inhaled his moustache with such painful deliberation that his companion's nerves found it difficult to endure the strain.

"You're going after that girl," said Uncle Donald, accusingly.

Bruce Carmyle flushed darkly. And it is interesting to record that at this moment there flitted through his mind the thought that Ginger's behavior at Bleke's Coffee House, on a certain notable occasion, had not been so utterly inexcusable as he had supposed. There was no doubt that the Family's Chosen One could be trying.

"Will you have a whisky and soda, Uncle Donald?" he said, by way of changing the conversation.

"Yes," said his relative, in pursuance of a vow he had made in the early eighties never to refuse an offer of this kind.

"Gimme!"

One would have thought that this would have placed matters on a pleasanter footing. But no. Having lapped up the restorative, Uncle Donald returned to the attack quite un-softened.

"Never thought you were a fool before," he said severely.

Bruce Carmyle's proud spirit chafed. This sort of interview, which had become a commonplace with his cousin Ginger, was new to him. Hitherto, his actions had received neither criticism nor subjectivity.

"I'm not a fool."

"You are a fool. A damn fool," continued Uncle Donald, specifying more exactly. "Don't like the girl. Never did. Not a nice girl. Didn't like her. Right from the first."

"Need we discuss this?" said Bruce Carmyle, dropping, as he was apt to do, into the grand manner.

The Head of the Family drank in a layer of moustache and blew it out again.

"Need we discuss it?" he said with asperity. "We're going to discuss it! Whatch think I climbed all these blasted stairs for with my weak heart? Gimme another!"

Mr. Carmyle gave him another.

"'S a bad business," moaned Uncle Donald, having gone through the movements once more. "Shocking bad business. If your poor father were alive, whatch think he'd say to your tearing across the world after this girl? I'll tell you what he'd say. He'd say... What kind of whisky's this?"

"O'Rafferty Special."

"New to me. Not bad. Quite good. Sound. Mellow. Wherej get it?"

"Bilby's in Oxford Street."

"Must order some. Mellow. He'd say... well, God knows what he'd say. Whatch doing it for? Whatch doing it for? That's what I can't see. None of us can see. Puzzles your uncle George. Baffles your aunt Geraldine. Nobody can understand it. Girl's simply after your money. Anyone can see that."

"Pardon me, Uncle Donald," said Mr. Carmyle, stiffly, "but that is surely rather absurd. If that were the case, why should she have refused me at Monk's Crofton?"

"Drawing you on," said Uncle Donald, promptly. "Luring you on. Well-known trick. Girl in 1881, when I was at Oxford, tried to lure me on. If I hadn't had some sense and a weak heart..."

"Whatch know of this girl? Whatch know of her? That's the point. Who is she? Wherej meet her?"

"I met her at Roville, in France."

"Travelling with her family?"

"Travelling alone," said Bruce Carmyle, reluctantly.

"Not even with that brother of hers? Bad!" said Uncle Donald. "Bad, bad!"

"American girls are accustomed to more independence than English girls."

"That young man," said Uncle Donald, pursuing a train of thought, "is going to be fat one of these days, if he doesn't look out. Travelling alone, was she? What did you do? Catch her eye on the pier?"

"Really, Uncle Donald!"

"Well, must have got to know her somehow."

"I was introduced to her by Lancelot. She was a friend of his."

"Lancelot!" exploded Uncle Donald, quivering all over like a smitten jelly at the loathed name. "Well, that shows you what sort of a girl she is. Any girl that would be a friend of... Unpack!"

"I beg your pardon?"

"Unpack! Mustn't go on with this foolery. Out of the question. Find some girl make you a good wife. Your aunt Mary's been meeting some people name of Bassington-Bassington, related Kent Bassington-Bassingtons... eldest daughter charming girl, just do for you."

Outside the pages of the more old-fashioned type of fiction, nobody ever really ground his teeth, but Bruce Carmyle came nearer to it at that moment than anyone had ever come before. He scowled blackly, and the last trace of suavity left him.

"I shall do nothing of the kind," he said briefly. "I sail to-morrow."

Uncle Donald had had a previous experience of being defied by a nephew, but it had not accustomed him to the sensation. He was aware of an unpleasant feeling of impotence. Nothing is harder than to know what to do next when defied.

"Eh?" he said.

Mr. Carmyle, having started to defy, evidently decided to make a good job of it.

"I am over twenty-one," said he. "I am financially independent. I shall do as I please."

"But, consider!" pleaded Uncle Donald, painfully conscious of the weakness of his words. "Reflect!"

"I have reflected."

"Your position in the county..."

"I've thought of that."

"You could marry anyone you pleased."

"I'm going to."

"You are determined to go running off to God-knows-where after this Miss I-can't-even-remember-her-dam-name?"

"Yes."

"Have you considered
