CHAPTER LVIII. “Fairoaks to let” Our poor widow (with the assistance of her faithful Martha of Fairoaks, who laughed and wondered at the German ways, and superintended the affairs of the simple household) had made a little feast in honour of Major Pendennis’s arrival, of which, however, only the Major and his two younger friends partook, for Helen sent to say that she was too unwell to dine at their table, and Laura bore her company. The Major talked for the party, and did not perceive, or choose to perceive, what a gloom and silence pervaded the other two sharers of the modest dinner. It was evening before Helen and Laura came into the sitting-room to join the company there. She came in leaning on Laura, with her back to the waning light, so that Arthur could not see how pallid and woe-stricken her face was, and as she went up to Pen, whom she had not seen during the day, and placed her fond arms on his shoulders and kissed him tenderly, Laura left her, and moved away to another part of the room.

the appeal of her look was hard and cruel. “She persecutes me,” he thought within himself, “and she comes to me with the air of a martyr!” “You look very ill, my child,” she said. “I don’t like to see you look in that way.” And she tottered to a sofa, still holding one of his passive hands in her thin cold clinging fingers. “I have had much to annoy me, mother,” Pen said, with a throbbing breast: and as he spoke Helen’s heart began to beat so, that she sate almost dead and speechless with terror. Warrington, Laura, and Major Pendennis, all remained breathless, aware that the storm was about to break. “I have had letters from London,” Arthur continued, “and one that has given me more pain than I ever had in my life. It tells me that former letters of mine have been intercepted and purloined away from me;—that—that a young creature who has shown the greatest love and care for me, has been most cruelly used by—by you, mother.” “For God’s sake stop,” cried out Warrington.

Shall I tell you what I will do,—what I am resolved to do, now that I know what your conduct has been?—I will go back to this poor girl whom you turned out of my doors, and ask her to come back and share my home with me. I’ll defy the pride which persecutes her, and the pitiless suspicion which insults her and me.” “Do you mean, Pen, that you——” here the widow, with eager eyes and outstretched hands, was breaking out, but Laura stopped her: “Silence, hush, dear mother,” she cried, and the widow hushed. Savagely as Pen spoke, she was only too eager to hear what more he had to say. “Go on, Arthur, go on, Arthur,” was all she said, almost swooning away as she spoke. “By Gad, I say he shan’t go on, or I won’t hear him, by Gad,” the Major said, trembling too in his wrath.

dammy, I say, amen. By G—, both my father and my brother Jack were the proudest men in England, and I never would have thought that there would come this disgrace to my name,—never—and—and I’m ashamed that it’s Arthur Pendennis.” The old fellow’s voice here broke off into a sob: it was the second time that Arthur had brought tears from those wrinkled lids. The sound of his breaking voice stayed Pen’s anger instantly, and he stopped pacing the room, as he had been doing until that moment. Laura was by Helen’s sofa; and Warrington had remained hitherto an almost silent, but not uninterested spectator of the family storm. As the parties were talking, it had grown almost dark; and after the lull which succeeded the passionate outbreak of the Major, George’s deep voice, as it here broke trembling into the twilight room, was heard with no small emotion by all.

misconception, has caused a great deal of pain to all of you. May I please tell you, Mrs. Pendennis?” “Pray speak,” was all Helen said; and indeed she was not much heeding; her mind was full of another idea with which Pen’s words had supplied her, and she was in a terror of hope that what he had hinted might be as she wished. George filled himself a bumper of wine and emptied it, and began to speak. “You all of you know how you see me,” he said, “a man without a desire to make an advance in the world: careless about reputation; and living in a garret and from hand to mouth, though I have friends and a name, and I daresay capabilities of my own, that would serve me if I had a mind. But mind I have none.

Major Pendennis, I dare say, laughs as he ought to do—for he won. What would have been Arthur’s lot now had he been tied at nineteen to an illiterate woman older than himself, with no qualities in common between them to make one a companion for the other, no equality, no confidence, and no love speedily? What could he have been but most miserable? And when he spoke just now and threatened a similar union, be sure it was but a threat occasioned by anger, which you must give me leave to say, ma’am, was very natural on his part, for after a generous and manly conduct—let me say who know the circumstances well—most generous and manly and self-denying (which is rare with him),—he has met from some friends of his with a most unkind suspicion, and has had to complain of the unfair treatment of another innocent person, towards whom he and you all are under much obligation.” The widow was going to get up here, and Warrington, seeing her attempt to rise, said, “Do I tire you, ma’am?” “Oh no—go on—go on,” said Helen, delighted, and he continued.

like a man, if you will pardon me for saying so, Miss Laura, who shows that he can have a great unreasonable attachment for a woman. That was why we became friends—and are all friends here—for always, aren’t we?” he added, in a lower voice, leaning over to her, “and Pen has been a great comfort and companion to a lonely and unfortunate man. “I am not complaining of my lot, you see; for no man’s is what he would have it; and up in my garret, where you left the flowers, and with my old books and my pipe for a wife, I am pretty contented, and only occasionally envy other men, whose careers in life are more brilliant, or who can solace their ill fortune by what Fate and my own fault has deprived me of—the affection of a woman or a child.” Here there came a sigh from somewhere near Warrington in the dark, and a hand was held out in his direction, which, however, was instantly, withdrawn, for the prudery of our females is such, that before all expression of feeling, or natural kindness and regard, a woman is ‘taught to think of herself and the proprieties, and to be ready to blush at the very slightest notice;’ and checking, as, of course, it ought, this spontaneous motion, modesty drew up again, kindly friendship shrank back ashamed of itself, and Warrington resumed his history.

this story before you. It is as well that you all of you should hear my confession. Before I went to college, as a boy of eighteen, I was at a private tutor’s, and there, like Arthur, I became attached, or fancied I was attached, to a woman of a much lower degree and a greater age than my own. You shrink from me——” “No, I don’t,” Laura said, and here the hand went out resolutely, and laid itself in Warrington’s. She had divined his story from some previous hints let fall by him, and his first words at its commencement. “She was a yeoman’s daughter in the neighbourhood,” Warrington said, with rather a faltering voice, “and I fancied—what all young men fancy. Her parents knew who my father was, and encouraged me, with all sorts of coarse artifices and scoundrel flatteries, which I see now, about their house.

not comprehend one subject that interested me. Her dulness palled upon me till I grew to loathe it. And after some time of a wretched, furtive union—I must tell you all—I found letters somewhere (and such letters they were!) which showed me that her heart, such as it was, had never been mine, but had always belonged to a person of her own degree. “At my father’s death, I paid what debts I had contracted at college, and settled every shilling which remained to me in an annuity upon—upon those who bore my name, on condition that they should hide themselves away, and not assume it. They have kept that condition, as they would break it, for more money. If I had earned fame or reputation, that woman would have come to claim it: if I had made a name for myself those who had no right to it would have borne it; and I entered life at twenty, God help me—hopeless and ruined beyond remission.

she started up, and said, “God bless you—God for ever bless you, Mr. Warrington;” and kissed both his hands, and ran up to Pen, and fell into his arms. “Yes, dearest mother,” he said as he held her to him, and with a noble tenderness and emotion, embraced and forgave her. “I am innocent, and my dear, dear mother has done me a wrong.” “Oh yes, my child, I have wronged you, thank God, I have wronged you!” Helen whispered. “Come away, Arthur—not here—I want to ask my child to forgive me—and—and my God, to forgive me; and to bless you, and love you, my son.” He led her, tottering, into her room, and closed the door, as the three touched spectators of the reconciliation looked on in pleased silence. Ever after, ever after, the tender accents of that voice faltering sweetly at his ear—the look of the sacred eyes beaming with an affection unutterable—the quiver of the fond lips smiling mournfully—were remembered by the young man.

upon him, and blessed him with its gaze of pity and purity, as he saw it in that night when she yet lingered with him; and when she seemed, ere she quite left him, an angel, transfigured and glorified with love—for which love, as for the greatest of the bounties and wonders of God’s provision for us, let us kneel and thank Our Father. The moon had risen by this time; Arthur recollected well afterwards how it lighted up his mother’s sweet pale face. Their talk, or his rather, for she scarcely could speak, was more tender and confidential than it had been for years before. He was the frank and generous boy of her early days and love. He told her the story, the mistake regarding which had caused her so much pain—his struggles to fly from temptation, and his thankfulness that he had been able to overcome it.

and sobbed out the prayer which the Divine Tenderness uttered for us, and which has been echoed by twenty ages since by millions of sinful and humbled men. And as he spoke the last words of the supplication, the mother’s head fell down on her boy’s, and her arms closed round him, and together they repeated the words “for ever and ever” and “Amen.” A little time after, it might have been a quarter of an hour, Laura heard Arthur’s voice call from within, “Laura! Laura!” She rushed into the room instantly and found the young man still on his knees, and holding his mother’s hand. Helen’s head had sunk back and was quite pale in the room. Pen looked round, scared with a ghastly terror. “Help, Laura, help!” he said, “she’s fainted—she’s——” Laura screamed, and fell by the side of Helen.

brought Warrington and Major Pendennis and the servants to the room. The sainted woman was dead. The last emotion of her soul here was joy to be henceforth unchequered and eternal. The tender heart beat no more; it was to have no more pangs, no more doubts, no more griefs and trials. Its last throb was love; and Helen’s last breath was a benediction. The melancholy party bent their way speedily homewards, and Helen was laid by her husband’s side at Clavering, in the old church where she had prayed so often. For a while Laura went to stay with Dr. Portman, who read the service over his dear departed sister, amidst his own sobs and those of the little congregation which assembled round Helen’s tomb. There were not many who cared for her, or who spoke of her when gone.

“go down into silence,” are echoing on this side of the grave yet for a little while, and human voices are still talking about us? She was gone, the pure soul, whom only two or three loved and knew. The great blank she left was in Laura’s heart, to whom her love had been everything, and who had now but to worship her memory. “I am glad that she gave me her blessing before she went away,” Warrington said to Pen; and as for Arthur, with a humble acknowledgment and wonder at so much affection, he hardly dared to ask of Heaven to make him worthy of it, though he felt that a saint there was interceding for him. All the lady’s affairs were found in perfect order, and her little property ready for transmission to her son, in trust for whom she held it.

persons she would have liked to relieve; what legacies or remembrances she would have wished to transmit. They packed up the vase which Helen in her gratitude had destined to Dr. Goodenough, and duly sent it to the kind Doctor; a silver coffee-pot, which she used, was sent off to Portman: a diamond ring, with her hair, was given with affectionate greeting to Warrington. It must have been a hard day for poor Laura when she went over to Fairoaks first and to the little room which she had occupied, and which was hers no more, and to the widow’s own blank chamber in which those two had passed so many beloved hours. There, of course, were the clothes in the wardrobe, the cushion on which she prayed, the chair at the toilette: the glass that was no more to reflect her dear sad face.

grief healed now whose bitterness they chronicled: the friends doubtless united whose parting on earth had caused to both pangs so cruel. And Laura learned fully now for the first time what the tie was which had bound her so tenderly to Helen: how faithfully her more than mother had cherished her father’s memory, how truly she had loved him, how meekly resigned him. One legacy of his mother’s Pen remembered, of which Laura could have no cognisance. It was that wish of Helen’s to make some present to Fanny Bolton; and Pen wrote to her, putting his letter under an envelope to Mr. Bows, and requesting that gentleman to read it before he delivered it to Fanny. “Dear Fanny,” Pen said, “I have to acknowledge two letters from you, one of which was delayed in my illness” (Pen found the first letter in his mother’s desk after her decease and the reading it gave him a strange pang), “and to thank you, my kind nurse and friend, who watched me so tenderly during my fever.

sum was in truth but small, although enough to make a little heiress of Fanny Bolton, whose parents were appeased, and whose father said Mr. P. had acted quite as the gentleman—though Bows growled out that to plaster a wounded heart with a banknote was an easy kind of sympathy; and poor Fanny felt only too clearly that Pen’s letter was one of farewell. “Sending hundred-pound notes to porters’ daughters is all dev’lish well,” old Major Pendennis said to his nephew (whom, as the proprietor of Fairoaks and the head of the family, he now treated with marked deference and civility), “and as there was a little ready money at the bank, and your poor mother wished it, there’s perhaps no harm done. But, my good lad, I’d have you to remember that you’ve not above five hundred a year, though, thanks to me the world gives you credit for being a doosid deal better off; and, on my knees, I beg you, my boy, don’t break into your capital: Stick to it, sir; don’t speculate with it, sir; keep your land, and don’t borrow on it.

place in society, and you can’t afford to cut a poor figure in the world. What are you going to do in the winter? You don’t intend to stay down here, or, I suppose, to go on writing for that—what-d’ye-call-’em—that newspaper?” “Warrington and I are going abroad again, sir, for a little, and then we shall see what is to be done,” Arthur replied. “And you’ll let Fairoaks, of course? Good school in the neighbourhood; cheap country: dev’lish nice place for East India Colonels, or families wanting to retire. I’ll speak about it at the club; there are lots of fellows at the club want a place of that sort.” “I hope Laura will live in it for the winter, at least, and will make it her home,” Arthur replied: at which the Major pish’d and psha’d, and said that there ought to be convents, begad, for English ladies, and wished that Miss Bell had not been there to interfere with the arrangements of the family, and that she would mope herself to death alone in that place.

vulgar, my dear, but he seems to have a good heart,” little Lady Rockminster said, who said her say about everybody—“but I like Bluebeard best. Tell me, is he touche au coeur?” “Mr. Warrington has been long—engaged,” Laura said, dropping her eyes. “Nonsense, child! And good heavens, my dear! that’s a pretty diamond cross. What do you mean by wearing it in the morning?” “Arthur—my brother, gave it me just now. It was—it was——” She could not finish the sentence. The carriage passed over the bridge, and by the dear, dear gate of Fairoaks—home no more.
