CHAPTER LXXVI. Exeunt Omnes Our characters are all a month older than they were when the last-described adventures and conversations occurred, and a great number of the personages of our story have chanced to reassemble at the little country town where we were first introduced to them. Frederic Lightfoot, formerly maitre d’hotel in the service of Sir Francis Clavering, of Clavering Park, Bart., has begged leave to inform the nobility and gentry of ———shire that he has taken that well-known and comfortable hotel, the Clavering Arms, in Clavering, where he hopes for the continued patronage of the gentlemen and families of the county. “This ancient and well-established house,” Mr. Lightfoot’s manifesto states, “has been repaired and decorated in a style of the greatest comfort. Gentlemen hunting with the Dumplingbeare hounds will find excellent stabling and loose-boxes for horses at the Clavering Arms.

Arms. A commodious billiard-room has been attached to the hotel, and the cellars have been furnished with the choicest wines and spirits, selected, without regard to expense, by C. L. Commercial gentlemen will find the Clavering Arms a most comfortable place of resort: and the scale of charges has been regulated for all, so as to meet the economical spirit of the present times.” Indeed, there is a considerable air of liveliness about the old inn. The Clavering arms have been splendidly repainted over the gateway. The coffee-room windows are bright and fresh, and decorated with Christmas holly; the magistrates have met in petty sessions in the card-room of the old Assembly. The farmers’ ordinary is held as of old, and frequented by increased numbers, who are pleased with Mrs. Lightfoot’s cuisine. Her Indian curries and Mulligatawny soup are especially popular: Major Stokes, the respected tenant of Fairoaks Cottage, Captain Glanders, H.P., and other resident gentry, have pronounced in their favour, and have partaken of them more than once both in private and at the dinner of the Clavering Institute, attendant on the incorporation of the reading-room, and when the chief inhabitants of that flourishing little town met together and did justice to the hostess’s excellent cheer.

the vice chair being ably filled by Barker, Esq. (supported by the Rev. J. Simcoe and the Rev. S. Jowls), the enterprising head of the ribbon factory in Clavering, and chief director of the Clavering and Chatteris Branch of the Great Western Railway, which will be opened in another year, and upon the works of which the engineers and workmen are now busily engaged. “An interesting event, which is likely to take place in the life of our talented townsman, Arthur Pendennis, Esq., has, we understand, caused him to relinquish the intentions which he had of offering himself as a candidate for our borough: and rumour whispers” (says the Chatteris Champion, Clavering Agriculturist, and Baymouth Fisherman,—that independent county paper, so distinguished for its unswerving principles and loyalty to the British oak, and so eligible a medium for advertisements)—rumour states, says the C.

alliance with an accomplished and lovely lady, connected by the nearest ties with the respected family at Clavering Park. Lady Clavering and Miss Amory have arrived at the Park for the Christmas holidays; and we understand that a large number of the aristocracy are expected, and that festivities of a peculiarly interesting nature will take place there at the commencement of the new year.” The ingenious reader will be enabled, by the help of the above announcement, to understand what has taken place during the little break which has occurred in our narrative. Although Lady Rockminster grumbled a little at Laura’s preference for Pendennis over Bluebeard, those who are aware of the latter’s secret will understand that the young girl could make no other choice, and the kind old lady who had constituted herself Miss Bell’s guardian was not ill pleased that she was to fulfil the great purpose in life of young ladies and marry.

George Pynsent, who is now chief secretary of the Tape and Sealing Wax Office, and have Mr. Pendennis made something. And, Beck, in the morning you will carry down my compliments to Major Pendennis, and say that I shall pay him a visit at one o’clock.”—“Yes,” muttered the old lady, “the Major must be reconciled, and he must leave his fortune to Laura’s children.” Accordingly, at one o’clock, the Dowager Lady Rockminster appeared at Major Pendennis’s, who was delighted, as may be imagined, to receive so noble a visitor. The Major had been prepared, if not for the news which her Ladyship was about to give him, at least with the intelligence that Pen’s marriage with Miss Amory was broken off. The young gentleman bethinking him of his uncle, for the first time that day it must be owned, and meeting his new servant in the hall of the hotel, asked after the Major’s health from Mr.

tell me,” the Major said, with a most courtly smile and bow to Pen’s ambassadress. “It was a very great kindness of your Ladyship to think of bringing me the news. How well you look! How very good you are! How very kind you have always been to that young man!” “It was for the sake of his uncle,” said Lady Rockminster, most politely. “He has informed me of the state of affairs, and written me a nice note,—yes, a nice note,” continued the old gentleman; “and I find he has had an increase to his fortune,—yes; and, all things considered, I don’t much regret that this affair with Miss Amory is manquee, though I wished for it once, in fact, all things considered, I am very glad of it.” “We must console him, Major Pendennis,” continued the lady; “we must get him a wife.” The truth then came across the Major’s mind, and he saw for what purpose Lady Rockminster had chosen to assume the office of ambassadress.

It is not necessary to enter into the conversation which ensued, or to tell at any length how her Ladyship concluded a negotiation which, in truth, was tolerably easy. There could be no reason why Pen should not marry according to his own and his mother’s wish; and as for Lady Rockminster, she supported the marriage by intimations which had very great weight with the Major, but of which we shall say nothing, as her ladyship (now, of course, much advanced in years) is still alive, and the family might be angry; and, in fine, the old gentleman was quite overcome by the determined graciousness of the lady, and her fondness for Laura.

his friends acknowledge very humbly, that Laura was a thousand times too good for him. Laura was fit to be the wife of a king,—Laura was a paragon of virtue and excellence. And it must be said, that when Major Pendennis found that a lady of the rank of the Countess of Rockminster seriously admired Miss Bell, he instantly began to admire her himself. So that when Herr Frosch was requested to walk upstairs to Lady Rockminster’s apartments, and inform Miss Bell and Mr. Arthur Pendennis that the Major would receive them, and Laura appeared blushing and happy as she hung on Pen’s arm, the Major gave a shaky hand to one and the other, with unaffected emotion and cordiality, and then went through another salutation to Laura, which caused her to blush still more. Happy blushes! bright eyes beaming with the light of love!

The story-teller turns from this group to his young audience, and hopes that one day their eyes may all shine so. Pen having retreated in the most friendly manner, and the lovely Blanche having bestowed her young affections upon a blushing bridegroom with fifteen thousand a year, there was such an outbreak of happiness in Lady Clavering’s heart and family as the good Begum had not known for many a year, and she and Blanche were on the most delightful terms of cordiality and affection. The ardent Foker pressed onwards the happy day, and was as anxious as might be expected to abridge the period of mourning which had put him in possession of so many charms and amiable qualities, of which he had been only, as it were, the heir-apparent, not the actual owner, until then.

Place, they found an old acquaintance established in the quality of major-domo, and the gentleman in black, who, with perfect politeness and gravity, offered them their choice of sweet or dry champagne, was no other than Mr. James Morgan. The Chevalier Strong was one of the party; he was in high spirits and condition, and entertained the company with accounts of his amusements abroad. “It was my Lady who invited me,” said Strong to Arthur, under his voice—“that fellow Morgan looked as black as thunder when I came in. He is about no good here. I will go away first, and wait for you and Major Pendennis at Hyde Park Gate.” Mr. Morgan helped Major Pendennis to his great-coat when he was quitting the house; and muttered something about having accepted a temporary engagement with the Clavering family. “I have got a paper of yours, Mr.

know that villain Morgan knows all?” “I know it,” she said. “Have you told Harry?” “No, no,” she said. “You won’t betray me?” “Morgan will,” said Pen. “No, he won’t,” said Blanche. “I have promised him—n’importe. Wait until after our marriage—Oh, until after our marriage—Oh, how wretched I am,” said the girl, who had been all smiles, and grace, and gaiety during the evening. Arthur said, “I beg and implore you to tell Harry. Tell him now. It is no fault of yours. He will pardon you anything. Tell him to-night.” “And give her this—Il est la—with my love, please; and I beg your pardon for calling you back; and if she will be at Madame Crinoline’s at half-past three, and if Lady Rockminster can spare her, I should so like to drive with her in the park;” and she went in, singing and kissing her little hand, as Morgan the velvet-footed came up the carpeted stair.

him,” said Pen. “Begad, she’ll take her own course,” said the old man. “Miss Amory is a dev’lish wide-awake girl, sir, and must play her own cards; and I’m doosid glad you are out of it—doosid glad, begad. Who’s this smoking? Oh, it’s Mr. Strong again. He wants to put in his oar, I suppose. I tell you, don’t meddle in the business, Arthur.” Strong began once or twice, as if to converse upon the subject, but the Major would not hear a word. He remarked on the moonlight on Apsley House, the weather, the cabstands—anything but that subject. He bowed stiffly to Strong, and clung to his nephew’s arm, as he turned down St. James’s Street, and again cautioned Pen to leave the affair alone. “It had like to have cost you so much, sir, that you may take my advice,” he said.

is as arrant a little—well—well, never mind what. You acted like a man and a trump, and are well out of it.” “I have no reason to complain,” said Pen. “I went back to beg and entreat poor Blanche to tell Foker all: I hope, for her sake, she will; but I fear not. There is but one policy, Strong, there is but one.” “And lucky he that can stick to it,” said the Chevalier. “That rascal Morgan means mischief. He has been lurking about our chambers for the last two months: he has found out that poor mad devil Amory’s secret. He has been trying to discover where he was: he has been pumping Mr. Bolton, and making old Costigan drunk several times. He bribed the Inn porter to tell him when we came back: and he has got into Clavering’s service on the strength of his information.

gathered about him a society of all sorts of sharpers, male and female, Russians, Germans, French, English. Amory got so insolent, that I was obliged to thrash him one day within an inch of his life. I couldn’t help myself; the fellow has plenty of pluck, and I had nothing for it but to hit out.” “And did he call you out?” said Pen. “You think if I had shot him I should have done nobody any harm? No, sir; I waited for his challenge, but it never came and the next time I met him he begged my pardon, and said, ‘Strong, I beg your pardon; you whopped me and you served me right.’ I shook hands: but I couldn’t live with him after that. I paid him what I owed him the night before,” said Strong with a blush, “I pawned everything to pay him, and then I went with my last ten florins, and had a shy at the roulette.

Company, Shepherd’s Inn, were sole agents of the celebrated Diamond Manzanilla of the Duke of Garbanzos, Grandee of Spain of the First Class; and of the famous Toboso hams, fed on acorns only in the country of Don Quixote. “Come and taste ’em, sir,—come and try ’em at my chambers. You see, I’ve an eye to business, and by Jove this time I’ll succeed.” Pen laughed as he took the card. “I don’t know whether I shall be allowed to go to bachelors’ parties,” he said. “You know I’m going to——” “But you must have sherry, sir. You must have sherry.” “I will have it from you, depend on it,” said the other. “And I think you are very well out of your other partnership. That worthy Altamont and his daughter correspond, I hear,” Pen added after a pause. “Yes; she wrote him the longest rigmarole letters, that I used to read: the sly little devil; and he answered under cover to Mrs.

whom the scoundrel wanted to marry; and would, but that I told her he was married already. I don’t think that she was much better than he was. I saw her on the pier at Boulogne the day I came to England.” And now we have brought up our narrative to the point, whither the announcement in the Chatteris Champion had already conducted us. It wanted but very, very few days before that blissful one when Foker should call Blanche his own; the Clavering folks had all pressed to see the most splendid new carriage in the whole world, which was standing in the coach-house at the Clavering Arms; and shown, in grateful return for drink, commonly, by Mr. Foker’s head-coachman. Madame Fribsby was occupied in making some lovely dresses for the tenants’ daughters, who were to figure as a sort of bridesmaids’ chorus at the breakfast and marriage ceremony.

your lovely bride by her husband’s side; and what will you please to drink, sir? Mrs. Lightfoot, madam, you will give to my excellent friend and body-surgeon, Mr. Huxter, Mr. Samuel Huxter, M.R.C.S., every refreshment that your hostel affords, and place the festive amount to my account; and Mr. Lightfoot, sir, what will you take? though you’ve had enough already, I think; yes, ha.” So spoke Harry Foker in the bar of the Clavering Arms. He had apartments at that hotel, and had gathered a circle of friends round him there. He treated all to drink who came. He was hail-fellow with every man. He was so happy! He danced round Madame Fribsby, Mrs. Lightfoot’s great ally, as she sate pensive in the bar. He consoled Mrs. Lightfoot, who had already begun to have causes of matrimonial disquiet; for the truth must be told, that young Lightfoot, having now the full command of the cellar, had none over his own unbridled desires, and was tippling and tipsy from morning till night.

men every bit as bad. She had had her own woes too, and her sad experience of men. So it is that nobody seems happy altogether; and that there’s bitters, as Mr. Foker remarked, in the cup of every man’s life. And yet there did not seem to be any in his, the honest young fellow! It was brimming over with happiness and good-humour. Mr. Morgan was constant in his attentions to Foker. “And yet I don’t like him somehow,” said the candid young man to Mrs. Lightfoot. “He always seems as if he was measuring me for my coffin somehow. Pa-in-law’s afraid of him; pa-in-law’s, ahem! never mind, but ma-in-law’s a trump, Mrs. Lightfoot.” “Indeed my Lady was,” and Mrs. Lightfoot owned, with a sigh, that perhaps it had been better for her had she never left her mistress.

and his wife were quarrelling over the letter. What was that letter from abroad? Why was she always having letters from abroad? Who wrote ’em?—he would know. He didn’t believe it was her brother. It was no business of his? It was a business of his; and, with a curse, he seized hold of his wife, and dashed at her pocket for the letter. The poor woman gave a scream; and said, “Well, take it.” Just as her husband seized on the letter, and Mr. Foker entered at the door, she gave another scream at seeing him, and once more tried to seize the paper. Lightfoot opened it, shaking her away, and an enclosure dropped down on the breakfast-table. “Hands off, man alive!” cried little Harry, springing in. “Don’t lay hands on a woman, sir. The man that lays his hand upon a woman, save in the way of kindness, is a—hallo! it’s a letter for Miss Amory.

“it’s a family affair, sir. Will you take anything, sir?” “I will take this letter to Miss Amory, as I am going to the Park,” said Foker, turning very pale; and taking it up from the table, which was arranged for the poor landlady’s breakfast, he went away. “He’s comin’—dammy, who’s a-comin’? Who’s J. A., Mrs. Lightfoot—curse me, who’s J. A.?” cried the husband. Mrs. Lightfoot cried out, “Be quiet, you tipsy brute, do,” and running to her bonnet and shawl, threw them on, saw Mr. Foker walking down the street, took the by-lane which skirts it, and ran as quickly as she could to the lodge-gate, Clavering Park. Foker saw a running figure before him, but it was lost when he got to the lodge-gate. He stopped and asked, “Who was that who had just come in? Mrs. Bonner, was it?” He reeled almost in his walk: the trees swam before him.

with her very best smiles on when she greeted Harry. “How do you do, sir?” she said, and put out both her hands. “I’m ill,” answered Harry. “I—I’ve brought a letter for you, Blanche.” “A letter, and from whom is it, pray? Voyons,” she said. “I don’t know—I should like to know,” said Foker. “How can I tell until I see it?” asked Blanche. “Has Mrs. Bonner not told you?” he said, with a shaking voice;—“there’s some secret. You give her the letter, Lady Clavering.” Lady Clavering, wondering, took the letter from poor Foker’s shaking hand, and looked at the superscription. As she looked at it, she too began to shake in every limb, and with a scared face she dropped the letter, and running up to Frank, clutched the boy to her, and burst out with a sob—“Take that away—it’s impossible, it’s impossible.” “What is the matter?” cried Blanche, with rather a ghastly smile; “the letter is only from—from a poor pensioner and relative of ours.” “It’s not true, it’s not true,” screamed Lady Clavering.

her arm—“I must see that letter,” he said; “give it me. You shan’t burn it.” “You—you shall not treat Miss Amory so in my house,” cried the Baronet; “give back the letter, by Jove!” “Read it—and look at her,” Blanche cried, pointing to her mother; “it—it was for her I kept the secret! Read it, cruel man!” And Foker opened and read the letter:— “I have not wrote, my darling Betsy, this three weeks; but this is to give her a father’s blessing, and I shall come down pretty soon as quick as my note, and intend to see the ceremony, and my son-in-law. I shall put up at Bonner’s. I have had a pleasant autumn, and am staying here at an hotel where there is good company, and which is kep’ in good style. I don’t know whether I quite approve of your throwing over Mr.

Mr. Foker; indeed, indeed, I didn’t.” “I’m sure you didn’t,” said Foker, going up and kissing her hand. “Generous, generous Harry!” cried out Blanche, in an ecstasy. But he withdrew his hand, which was upon her side, and turned from her with a quivering lip. “That’s different,” he says. “It was for her sake—for her sake, Harry.” Again Miss Amory is in an attitude. “There was something to be done for mine,” said Foker. “I would have taken you, whatever you were. Everything’s talked about in London. I knew that your father had come to—to grief. You don’t think it was—it was for your connexion I married you? D—— it all! I’ve loved you with all my heart and soul for two years, and you’ve been playing with me, and cheating me,” broke out the young man, with a cry.

me from him.” Clavering started up at this proposal. “You ain’t serious, Jemima? You don’t mean that?” he said. “You won’t throw me and Frank over? I didn’t know it, so help me ——. Foker, I’d no more idea of it than the dead—until the fellow came and found me out, the d——d escaped convict scoundrel.” “The what?” said Foker. Blanche gave a scream. “Yes,” screamed out the Baronet in his turn, “yes, a d——d runaway convict—a fellow that forged his father-in-law’s name—a d——d attorney, and killed a fellow in Botany Bay, hang him—and ran into the Bush, curse him; I wish he’d died there. And he came to me, a good six years ago, and robbed me; and I’ve been ruining myself to keep him, the infernal scoundrel! And Pendennis knows it, and Strong knows it, and that d——d Morgan knows it, and she knows it, ever so long; and I never would tell it, never: and I kept it from my wife.” “And you saw him, and you didn’t kill him, Clavering, you coward?” said the wife of Amory.

We’ll hide ourselves; but we’re honest, yes, we are honest.” All this while a strange feeling of exultation had taken possession of Blanche’s mind. That month with poor Harry had been a weary month to her. All his fortune and splendour scarcely sufficed to make the idea of himself supportable. She was wearied of his simple ways, and sick of coaxing and cajoling him. “Stay, mamma; stay, madam!” she cried out, with a gesture which was always appropriate, though rather theatrical; “I have no heart, have I? I keep the secret of my mother’s shame. I give up my rights to my half-brother and my bastard brother, yes, my rights and my fortune. I don’t betray my father, and for this I have no heart. I’ll have my rights now, and the laws of my country shall give them to me.

at that moment to see Altamont arrive. The door opened, and Mr. Morgan announced Major Pendennis and Mr. Pendennis, who entered, and found all parties engaged in this fierce quarrel. A large screen fenced the breakfast-room from the hall; and it is probable that, according to his custom, Mr. Morgan had taken advantage of the screen to make himself acquainted with all that occurred. It had been arranged on the previous day that the young people should ride; and at the appointed hour in the afternoon, Mr. Foker’s horses arrived from the Clavering Arms. But Miss Blanche did not accompany him on this occasion. Pen came out and shook hands with him on the door-steps; and Harry Foker rode away, followed by his groom in mourning. The whole transactions which have occupied the most active part of our history were debated by the parties concerned during those two or three hours.

sitting-room. He went up to her, and there found the poor lady in a piteous state of tears and agitation. “It is I,—Arthur,” he said, looking in; and entering, he took her hand very affectionately and kissed it. “You were always the kindest of friends to me, dear Lady Clavering,” he said. “I love you very much. I have got some news for you.” “Don’t call me by that name,” she said, pressing his hand. “You were always a good boy, Arthur; and it’s kind of you to come now,—very kind. You sometimes look very like your ma, my dear.” “Dear good Lady Clavering,” Arthur repeated, with particular emphasis, “something very strange has happened.” “Has anything happened to him?” gasped Lady Clavering. “Oh, it’s horrid to think I should be glad of it—horrid!” “He is well. He has been and is gone, my dear lady.

who was nothing loth, to a share of his wine. Having extracted from Mr. Lightfoot all the news regarding the family at the Park, and found, from examining his host, that Mrs. Lightfoot, as she said, had kept his counsel, he called for more wine of Mr. Lightfoot; and at the end of this symposium, both, being greatly excited, went into Mrs. Lightfoot’s bar. She was there taking tea with her friend, Madame Fribsby; and Lightfoot was by this time in such a happy state as not to be surprised at anything which might occur, so that, when Altamont shook hands with Mrs. Lightfoot as an old acquaintance, the recognition did not appear to him to be in the least strange, but only a reasonable cause for further drinking. The gentlemen partook then of brandy-and-water, which they offered to the ladies, not heeding the terrified looks of one or the other.

paper on which she had privily written the words, “He knows you. Go.” There may have been something suspicious in her manner of handing, or in her guest’s of reading, the paper; for when he got up a short time afterwards, and said he would go to bed, Morgan rose too, with a laugh, and said it was too early to go to bed. The stranger then said he would go to his bedroom. Morgan said he would show him the way. At this the guest said, “Come up. I’ve got a brace of pistols up there to blow out the brains of any traitor or skulking spy,” and glared so fiercely upon Morgan, that the latter, seizing hold of Lightfoot by the collar, and waking him, said, “John Amory, I arrest you in the Queen’s name. Stand by me, Lightfoot.

Church, mate on board an Indiaman, and he left me two months after, the wicked wretch. This is John Armstrong—here’s the mark on his arm which he made for me.” The stranger said, “I am John Armstrong, sure enough, Polly. I’m John Armstrong, Amory, Altamont—and let ’em all come on, and try what they can do against a British sailor. Hurray, who’s for it?” Morgan still called out, “Arrest him!” But Mrs. Lightfoot said, “Arrest him! arrest you, you mean spy! What! stop the marriage and ruin my lady, and take away the Clavering Arms from us?” “Did he say he’d take away the Clavering Arms from us?” asked Mr. Lightfoot, turning round. “Hang him, I’ll throttle him.” “Keep him, darling, till the coach passes to the up train. It’ll be here now directly.” “D—— him, I’ll choke him if he stirs,” said Lightfoot.

Countess Dowager of Rockminster), made his appearance at a solitary breakfast-table, in Clavering Park, where he could scarce eat a single morsel of food. Two letters were laid by his worship’s plate; and he chose to open the first, which was in a round clerk-like hand, in preference to the second more familiar superscription. Note 1 ran as follows:— “Garbanzos Wine Company, Shepherd’s Inn.—Monday. “My Dear Pendennis,—In congratulating you heartily upon the event which is to make you happy for life, I send my very kindest remembrances to Mrs. Pendennis, whom I hope to know even longer than I have already known her. And when I call her attention to the fact, that one of the most necessary articles to her husband’s comfort is pure sherry, I know I shall have her for a customer for your worship’s sake. “But I have to speak to you of other than my own concerns.

have not a bill out in the world, and besides, those gentry do not come in that way. I found that it was your uncle’s late valet, Morgan, and a policeman (I think a sham policeman), and they said they had a warrant to take the person of John Armstrong, alias Amory, alias Altamont, a runaway convict, and threatened to break in the oak. “Now, sir, in my own days of captivity I had discovered a little passage along the gutter into Bows and Costigan’s window, and I sent Jack Alias along this covered way, not without terror of his life, for it had grown very cranky; and then, after a parley, let in Mons. Morgan and friend. “The rascal had been instructed about that covered way, for he made for the room instantly, telling the policeman to go downstairs and keep the gate; and he charged up my little staircase as if he had known the premises.

to send some to our poor friend the milliner; but the scoundrel laughed, and said he had no more than he wanted, but offered to give anybody a lock of his hair. Farewell—be happy! and believe me always truly yours, E. Strong.” “And now for the other letter,” said Pen. “Dear old fellow!” and he kissed the seal before he broke it. “Warrington, Tuesday. “I must not let the day pass over without saying a God bless you, to both of you. May Heaven make you happy, dear Arthur, and dear Laura. I think, Pen, that you have the best wife in the world; and pray that, as such, you will cherish her and tend her. The chambers will be lonely without you, dear Pen; but if I am tired, I shall have a new home to go to in the house of my brother and sister.

her husband, and justly argued that she would deceive him again. He went to the Pyramids and Syria, and there left his malady behind him, and returned with a fine beard, and a supply of tarbooshes and nargillies, with which he regales all his friends. He lives splendidly, and, through Pen’s mediation, gets his wine from the celebrated vintages of the Duke of Garbanzos. As for poor Cos, his fate has been mentioned in an early part of this story. No very glorious end could be expected to such a career. Morgan is one of the most respectable men in the parish of St. James’s, and in the present political movement has pronounced himself like a man and a Briton. And Bows,—on the demise of Mr. Piper, who played the organ at Clavering, little Mrs. Sam Hunter, who has the entire command of Doctor Portman, brought Bows down from London to contest the organ-loft, and her candidate carried the chair.

them, with the Countess’s coronet emblazoned on the Countess’s work. Major Pendennis became very serious in his last days, and was never so happy as when Laura was reading to him with her sweet voice, or listening to his stories. For this sweet lady is the friend of the young and the old: and her life is always passed in making other lives happy. “And what sort of a husband would this Pendennis be?” many a reader will ask, doubting the happiness of such a marriage and the fortune of Laura. The querists, if they meet her, are referred to that lady herself, who, seeing his faults and wayward moods—seeing and owning that there are men better than he—loves him always with the most constant affection. His children or their mother have never heard a harsh word from him; and when his fits of moodiness and solitude are over, welcome him back with a never-failing regard and confidence.
