Two Gentlemen of Wales, and How They Hunted with the Hounds, and Yet Ran with the Deer

"I know that Deformed; he has been a vile thief this seven years; he goes up and down like a gentleman: I remember his name."—Much Ado About Nothing.

Amyas slept that night a wearied and troubled slumber. To his mother and to Frank, who leaned over his pillow, his countenance betrayed a mind busy with visions. And truly, why should it not be? Beyond the sheer excitement of the day, the memory of John Oxenham had seized hold of his spirit with a strangeness that refused to loosen its grip. Throughout the evening, sitting in the bay-windowed room where he had last beheld the lost adventurer, Amyas had recalled every glance and gesture of the fugitive, puzzling at himself for such fixation until sleep claimed him, only to renew the fantasy in dreams.

In his dream, he found himself sailing westward, chasing the wake of the setting sun, pursuing a tiny sail that was John Oxenham's. A heavy dread weighed upon him: if he did not catch her in time, something terrible would unfold. Yet his ship would not move. Around him drifted the Sargasso Sea, its long, snake-like coils of weeds choking his bow. Still, he strained at the oars, imagining motion where there was none, until the sun sank and darkness fell absolute. Then the moon rose, and suddenly John Oxenham's vessel drew close. Her sails were rent and flapping; tar streamed from her sides; her bulwarks rotted away. What hung along the mainyard, a line of dark shapes? Men hanged! And overhead, from the yard-arm, John Oxenham's corpse gazed down with grave, light-filled eyes, beckoning and pointing as if to guide his path, striving to speak but silent, pointing not forward but backward along their course. When Amyas turned back, lo! behind him stood the snow-range of the Andes, glittering in the moonlight. He realized he was in the South Seas again, with all of America separating him from home. The corpse continued to point back, eyes burning with agony, lips longing to whisper some awful secret, until Amyas sprang awake with a cry of terror. He found himself lying in the little coved chamber at Burrough, the gray light of autumn morning already seeping in.

Fevershot and agitated, he failed to return to sleep. An hour later, tossing and turning, he rose, dressed, and made his way to bathe on his beloved pebble ridge. Passing his mother's door, he could not resist a glance within. The dim morning light revealed the bed; its pillow had not been disturbed since last night. His mother, clad in a long white nightdress, knelt at the far end of the chamber at her prie-dieu, lost in devotion. Gently, he slipped in without a word and knelt beside her. She turned, smiling, passing an arm around him, continuing her silent prayers. Why not? They were for him, and he knew it, praying also—for her, for the lost John Oxenham, and for all his vanished crew.

At last she rose, standing above him, parting the golden locks from his brow, gazing long and tenderly into his face. There was nothing to speak, for there was nothing to conceal between these two souls as transparent as glass. Each knew the depths of the other's meaning; each knew that their thoughts were fully shared. Finally, the mutual gaze ended; she stooped to kiss him on the brow, and as she moved to turn away, a tear fell onto his forehead. Her small, bare feet peeked out from beneath her dress. He bent down, kissing them again and again, then looking up as if to offer an apology,

"You have such pretty feet, mother!"

Instantly, guided by a woman's instinct, she had hidden them. Once a beauty, as I have said, she remained beautiful to all eyes that saw deeper than mere outward color, though her hair was now gray and her roses long faded.

"Your dear father used to say so thirty years ago."

"And I say so still: you were always beautiful; you are beautiful now."

"What is that to you, silly boy? Will you play the lover with an old mother? Go take your walk, and think of younger ladies, if you can find any worthy of you."

Thus the son departed, and the mother returned to her prayers.

He walked down to the pebble ridge, where the ocean's fury had been defeated over ages, rolling up a rampart of gray boulders, two miles long, cunningly curved, smoothed, and fitted as if wrought by human hands. This barrier protected a fertile sheet of smooth, alluvial turf from the high tides of spring and autumn. Sniffing the keen salt air like a young sea-dog, he stripped and plunged into the breakers, diving, rolling, and tossing about the foam with stalwart arms. Then he heard himself hailed from the shore and, looking up, saw standing atop the rampart the tall figure of his cousin, Eustace.

Amyas was half-disappointed at his arrival; love-lorn as he was, he had been dreaming all the way there of Rose Salterne, and harbored no desire for a companion who might interrupt his reveries on the return journey. Nevertheless, having not seen Eustace for three years, it was merely polite to scramble out and dress, while his cousin paced up and down on the inner turf.

Eustace Leigh was the son of a younger brother of Leigh of Burrough, who had effectively severed ties with his family and countrymen by remaining a Papist. Though born a Catholic, he had not always been one; like many gentry, he became a Protestant under Edward VI, then reverted to Catholicism under Mary. But honor be to him, he stopped there, possessing too much honesty to turn Protestant a second time when Elizabeth ascended the throne. Thus, a Papist he remained, living apart from the world in a great, rambling, dark house still called "Chapel," situated on the Atlantic cliffs of Moorwinstow parish, not far from Sir Richard Grenville's estate at Stow. The penal laws never troubled him. First, they never troubled anyone who did not make conspiracy and rebellion an integral doctrine of his faith; second, they seldom troubled even such individuals unless, fired by the glory of martyrdom, they bullied the long-suffering of Elizabeth and her council into granting them their due, insisting on being hanged regardless of Burleigh's wishes. Moreover, in such a no-man's-land, an end-to-all-the-earth, that ancient house at Moorwinstow stood, that a dozen conspiracies might have been hatched there unheard of. Jesuits and seminary priests skulked in and out all year, unquestioned though unblest, finding a sort of piquant pleasure, like naughty boys in a store-closet, in inhabiting mysterious little dens in a lonely turret, ascending a trapdoor to celebrate Mass in a secret chamber in the roof, where they were permitted by the authorities to play as much as they chose at persecuted saints and preach about hiding in dens and caves of the earth. On one occasion, when the zealous parson of Moorwinstow, having discovered (what everyone already knew) the existence of "mass priests and their idolatry" at Chapel House, made formal complaint to Sir Richard, calling upon him, as the nearest justice of the peace, to enforce the Act of the Fourteenth of Elizabeth, that worthy knight soundly rated him for fantastical Puritanism and bade him mind his own business if he wished not to make the place too hot for them. Whereupon (for the temporal authorities, happily for the peace of England, kept a somewhat tight hand upon the spiritual ones in those days) the worthy parson subsided—for, after all, Mr. Thomas Leigh paid his tithes regularly enough—and was content, as he expressed it, to bow his head in the house of Rimmon like Naaman of old, by eating Mr. Leigh's dinners as often as invited, ignoring the vocation of old Father Francis, who sat opposite, dressed as a layman, calling himself the young gentleman's pedagogue.

But the said birds of ill-omen held a very considerable lien on the conscience of poor Mr. Thomas Leigh, Eustace's father, in the form of certain lands once belonging to the Abbey of Hartland. He more than half believed he should be lost for holding them, yet he did not believe it wholly, and therefore did not give them up—a situation wherein poor Mary Tudor found to her sorrow that most of her "Catholic" subjects operated. Their consciences, while compelling them to return to the only safe fold of Mother Church (*extra quam nulla salus*), by no means compelled them to disgorge the wealth plundered from that sole hope of salvation. Most, however, like poor Tom Leigh, felt the abbey rents burn in their purses. And, as John Bull generally does in difficulty, they compromised the matter by a second folly (as if two wrong things made one right), petting foreign priests, listening—or pretending not to listen—to their plottings and practices, giving up sons here and there as a sort of sin-offering and scapegoat to be carried off to Douay, Rheims, or Rome, trained as seminary priests; in plain English, to be taught the science of villainy on the motive of superstition. One of such hapless scapegoats, a child cast into the fire to Moloch, was Eustace Leigh, whom his
