"I could not love thee, dear, so much,
Loved I not honor more."—LOVELACE.

And what, amidst all this turmoil, has become of the fair breaker of so many hearts, whom I have not yet introduced to my readers?

She sat in the little farmhouse beside the mill, nestled in the green depths of the Combe valley, halfway between Stow and Chapel. Here, cut off from the grand festivities of Bideford, she spent a Martinmas Lent in this far western glen, sulking as much as her sweet nature would permit. So utterly lonely was she that, despite regarding Eustace Leigh with a mixture of aversion and Protestant suspicion, she could not bear to avoid chatting with him whenever he descended to the farm and its mill. He contrived to find some "would-be errand" to bring him down almost daily. Her uncle and aunt initially appeared stiff at these visits, with the aunt carefully inserting herself as a third party in every conversation. Yet, Mr. Leigh was a gentleman's son, a neighboring squire and a valued customer; it would not do to be rude to him. Conversely, Rose was the rich man's daughter, and it would not do to quarrel with her. Moreover, the pretty maid, aided by both wilfulness and sweet winning tricks, generally contrived to get her own way wherever she went. Rose herself had wisely begged her aunt never to leave them alone, for she "could not a-bear the sight of Mr. Eustace, only she must have some one to talk with down here." Her aunt, considering herself but a simple country-woman compared to townsfolk, decided that people knew their own business best and let matters slide. Meanwhile, Eustace, acutely aware that the difference in creed between them was likely the hardest obstacle to his love, kept his private opinions strictly in the background. Instead of attempting conversion, he daily purchased milk or flour, giving it away to the old women of Moorwinstow, who agreed that, for a Papist, he was a godly young man enough. Finally, after consulting with Campian and Parsons regarding certain political plots, the three resolved to attend church together the following Sunday. Messrs. Evan Morgans and Morgan Evans, having crammed the rubrics beforehand, behaved in a most orthodox and unexceptionable manner, as did poor Eustace, to the great wonder of all good folks. Upon leaving, Eustace flattered himself that he had taken in the parson, the clerk, and the people alike, unaware, in his simple unsimplicity and cunning foolishness, that every good wife in the parish was whispering to her neighbor, "He turned Protestant? The devil turned monk! He's only after Mistress Salterne, the young hypocrite."

Though the two Jesuits found it expedient, for the holy cause in which they were embarked, to reconcile themselves outwardly to the powers that be, they remained busy in private plotting their overthrow. Ever since April, they had played at hide-and-seek through the length and breadth of England, now lying quiet awaiting news from Ireland that would give them their cue. A great "rising of the West" was expected to sweep from her throne that stiff-necked, persecuting, excommunicate, reprobate, illegitimate, and profligate usurper who falsely called herself the Queen of England. For they had as stoutly persuaded themselves in those days—as they have in these, with a real Baconian contempt for the results of sensible experience—that the heart of England was truly with them, and that the British nation was on the point of returning to the bosom of the Catholic Church, giving up Elizabeth to be led in chains to the feet of the rightful Lord of Creation, the Old Man of the Seven Hills. This fair hope, which had skipped just in front of them for centuries, always a step farther off like the place where the rainbow touches the ground, they announced at times in language that terrified old Mr. Leigh.

One day, indeed, as Eustace entered his father's private room after his usual visit to the mill, he could hear voices raised in dispute. Parsons usually blustered; Mr. Leigh peevishly deprecated; and Campian, who was really the sweetest-natured of men, tried to pour oil on the troubled waters. Hearing this, Eustace (for the good of the cause, of course) stopped outside and listened.

"My excellent sir," said Mr. Leigh, "does not your very presence here show how I am affected toward the holy cause of the Catholic faith? But I cannot in the meanwhile forget that I am an Englishman."

"And what is England?" said Parsons. "A heretic and schismatic Babylon, whereof it is written, 'Come out of her, my people, lest you be partaker of her plagues.' Yea, what is a country? An arbitrary division of territory by the princes of this world, who are naught, and come to naught. They are created by the people's will; their existence depends on the sanction of him to whom all power is given in heaven and earth—our Holy Father the Pope. Take away the latter, and what is a king?—the people who have made him may unmake him."

"My dear sir, recollect that I have sworn allegiance to Queen Elizabeth!"

"Yes, sir, you have, sir; and, as I have shown at large in my writings, you were absolved from that allegiance from the moment that the bull of Pius the Fifth declared her a heretic and excommunicate, and thereby to have forfeited all dominion whatsoever. I tell you, sir, what I thought you should have known already, that since the year 1569, England has had no queen, no magistrates, no laws, no lawful authority whatsoever; and that to own allegiance to any English magistrate, sir, or to plead in an English court of law, is to disobey the apostolic precept, 'How dare you go to law before the unbelievers?' I tell you, sir, rebellion is now not merely permitted, it is a duty."

"Take care, sir; for God's sake, take care!" said Mr. Leigh. "Right or wrong, I cannot have such language used in my house. For the sake of my wife and children, I cannot!"

"My dear brother Parsons, deal more gently with the flock," interposed Campian. "Your opinion, though probable, as I well know, in the eyes of most of our order, is hardly safe enough here; the opposite is at least so safe that Mr. Leigh may well excuse his conscience for accepting it. After all, are we not sent hither to proclaim this very thing, and to relieve the souls of good Catholics from a burden which has seemed to them too heavy?"

"Yes," said Parsons, half-sulkily, "to allow all Balaams who will to sacrifice to Baal, while they call themselves by the name of the Lord."

"My dear brother, have I not often reminded you that Naaman was allowed to bow himself in the house of Rimmon? And can we therefore complain of the office to which the Holy Father has appointed us, to declare to such as Mr. Leigh his especial grace, by which the bull of Pius the Fifth (on whose soul God have mercy!) shall henceforth bind the queen and the heretics only; but in no ways the Catholics, at least as long as the present tyranny prevents the pious purposes of the bull?"

"Be it so, sir; be it so. Only observe this, Mr. Leigh, that our brother Campian confesses this to be a tyranny. Observe, sir, that the bull does still bind the so-called queen, and that she and her magistrates are still none the less usurpers, nonentities, and shadows of a shade. And observe this, sir, that when that which is lawful is excused to the weak, it remains no less lawful to the strong. The seven thousand who had not bowed the knee to Baal did not slay his priests; but Elijah did, and won to himself a good reward. And if the rest of the children of Israel sinned not in not slaying Eglon, yet Ehud's deed was none the less justified by all laws human and divine."

"For Heaven's sake, do not talk so, sir! or I must leave the room. What have I to do with Ehud and Eglon, and slaughters, and tyrannies? Our queen is a very good queen, if Heaven would but grant her repentance, and turn her to the true faith. I have never been troubled about religion, nor any one else that I know of in the West country."

"You forget Mr. Trudgeon of Launceston, father, and poor Father Mayne," interposed Eustace, who had by this time slipped in; and Campian added softly—"Yes, your West of England also has been honored by its martyrs, as well as my London by the precious blood of Story."

"What, young malapert?" cried poor Leigh, facing round upon his son, glad to find any one on whom he might vent his ill-humor; "are you too against me, with a murrain on you? And pray, what the devil brought Cuthbert Mayne to the gallows, and turned Mr. Trudgeon (he was always a foolish hot-head) out of house and home, but just such treasonable talk as Mr. Parsons must needs hold in my house, to make a beggar of me and my children, as he will before he has done."

"The Blessed Virgin forbid!" said Campian.

"The
