Clovelly Court in Olden Time

"It was among the ways of good Queen Bess,
Who ruled as well as ever mortal can, sir,
When she was stogg'd, and the country in a mess,
She was wont to send for a Devon man, sir."

A West Country Ballad.

Next morning Amyas Leigh was nowhere to be found. Nor had he fled to drown his spirit in despair by the Torridge, nor to lament his fate "down by the side." Frank discovered that he had simply ridden off to Sir Richard Grenville at Stow. Amyas's mother immediately divined the truth: her son had gone to seek a commission in the Irish army. She dispatched Frank after him to bring him home and urge reflection.

So Frank took horse and rode ten miles or more. Finding no inns on the road—such establishments were rare then—he turned downhill toward Clovelly Court, seeking hospitality from Mr. Cary the squire, a gesture customary for travelers and their steeds in those days.

Upon entering the long, dark, wainscoted hall, self-invited like the legendary Menelaus, Frank's first sight was Amyas's towering figure. Seated at the long table, Amyas alternately buried his face in a savory pastry and the pastry in his face. His sorrows, it seemed, had only sharpened his appetite. Opposite him, kneeling on the bench with elbows on the table, sat young Will Cary, laying down the law fiercely in a low voice.

"Hillo! lad," cried Amyas. "Come hither and deliver me from this fire-eater, who I verily believe will kill me if I do not let him kill someone else."

"Ah! Mr. Frank," said Will Cary. Like all young gentlemen of the region, he held Frank in high honor, regarding him as an oracle of fashion and chivalry. "Welcome. I was just longing for your advice on half-a-dozen matters. Sit down, and eat. There is the ale."

"None so early, thank you."

"Ah no!" Amyas retorted, burying his head in the tankard before mimicking Frank. "Avoid strong ale in the morning. It heats the blood, thickens the animal spirits, and clouds the pure light of reason with frenzied idols. Eh? Young Plato, young Daniel, render judgment! Yet, though I cannot see through the bottom of the tankard, I plainly see this: Will shall not fight."

"Shall I not, eh? Who says so? Mr. Frank, I appeal to you; only listen."

"We are in the judgment-seat," Frank declared, settling to the pastry. "Proceed, appellant."

"Well, I told Amyas that Tom Coffin of Portledge—I will tolerate him no longer."

"Let him be," said Amyas. "He could stand very well by himself when I last saw him."

"Plague on you, hold your tongue. Does he have any right to look at me as he does whenever I pass?"

"That depends on how he looks. A cat may look at a king, provided she doesn't mistake him for a mouse."

"Oh, I know how he looks, and what he means! And the other day, when I spoke of Rose Salterne—" "Ah!" groaned Frank, "Here comes the apple again!" "(never mind what I said)"—"he burst out laughing in my face. Is that not a fair quarrel? And what is more, I know he wrote a sonnet and sent it to her at Stow via a market woman. What right has he to write sonnets when I cannot? It's not fair play, Mr. Frank, or I am a Jew, a Spaniard, and a Papist; it's not!" With that, Will smote the table until the plates danced.

"My dear knight of the burning pestle," Frank interjected, shifting from banter to a tone of winning sweetness, "do not fancy I cannot feel for you, or that I, like you, have not known the stings of love and the bitterer stings of jealousy. But oh, Mr. Cary, does it not seem to you an awful thing to waste selfishly upon your own quarrel that divine wrath, as Plato says, is the very root of all virtues? Which has been given you, like everything else, to spend in the service of Her whom all bad souls fear and all virtuous souls adore—our peerless Queen? Who dares, while she rules England, call his sword or his courage his own, or anyone's but Hers? Are there no Spaniards to conquer, no wild Irish to deliver from oppression, that two gentlemen of Devon can find no better place to flesh their blades than in each other's valiant hearts?"

"By heaven!" cried Amyas. "Frank speaks like a book. For me, I truly think Christian gentlemen may leave love-quarrels to bulls and rams."

"And that the heir of Clovelly," Frank smiled, "may find nobler examples than the stags in his own deer-park."

"Well," said Will, penitently, "you are a great scholar, Mr. Frank, and you speak like one. But gentlemen must fight sometimes, or where would be their honor?"

"I speak," Frank said, a little proudly, "not merely as a scholar, but as a gentleman, and one who has fought ere now. To whom it has happened, Mr. Cary, to kill his man (on whose soul may God have mercy). But it is my pride to remember that I have never yet fought in my own quarrel, and my trust in God that I never shall. For as there is nothing more noble and blessed than to fight in behalf of those whom we love, so to fight in our own private behalf is a thing not to be allowed to a Christian man, unless refusal imports utter loss of life or honor; and even then, it may be (though I would not lay a burden on any man's conscience), it is better not to resist evil, but to overcome it with good."

"And I can tell you, Will," said Amyas, "I am not troubled with fear of ghosts; but when I cut off the Frenchman's head, I said to myself, 'If that braggart had been slandering me instead of her gracious majesty, I should expect to see that head lying on my pillow every time I went to bed.'"

"God forbid!" said Will, shuddering. "But what shall I do? For to the market tomorrow I will go, if it were choke-full of Coffins, and a ghost in each coffin."

"Leave the matter to me," said Amyas. "I have my device, as well as Scholar Frank here. And if there be, as I suppose there must be, a quarrel in the market tomorrow, see if I do not..."

"Well, you are two good fellows," said Will. "Let us have another tankard."

"And drink the health of Mr. Coffin, and all gallant lads of the North," Frank added. "And now to my business. I have to take this runaway youth home to his mother; and if he will not go quietly, I have orders to carry him across my saddle."

"I hope your nag has a strong back," said Amyas. "But I must go on and see Sir Richard, Frank. It is all very well to jest, but my mind is made up."

"Stop," said Cary. "You must stay here tonight; first, for fellowship's sake; and next, because I want the advice of our Phoenix here, our oracle, our paragon." Turning to Frank, he whispered, "Can you construe that for me? Speak low, gentlemen; there comes my father. Better give me the letter again."

Mr. Cary entered, his manner boisterous. "Company here? Young men, you are always welcome. Would there were more of your sort in these dirty times! How is your good mother, Frank? Where have I been, Will? Round the house-farm, to look at the beeves. That sheeted heifer of Prowse's is all wrong; her coat stares like a hedgehog's. Tell Jewell to bring her in before night. Then up the forty acres; sprang two coveys, and picked a leash. The Irish hawk flies as wild as any haggard and will never make a bird. I had to hand her to Tom, and take the little peregrine. Give me a Clovelly hawk against the world, after all! And—heigh ho, I am very hungry! Half-past twelve, and dinner not served? What, Master Amyas, spoiling your appetite with strong ale? Better have tried sack, lad; have some now with me."

Having finished his oration, the old gentleman settled himself on a great bench inside the chimney, placing his hawk on a perch over his head, while his cockers coiled close to the warm peat-ashes. His son began to pull off his father's boots amid sundry warnings to take care of his corns.

"Come, Master Amyas, a pint of white wine and sugar, and a bit of a shoeing-horn to it ere we dine. Some pickled prawns, now, or a rasher off the coals, to whet you?"

"Thank you," quoth Amyas. "I have drunk a mort of outlandish liquors, better and worse, in the last three years, and yet never found aught to come up to good ale, which needs neither shoeing-horn before nor after, but takes care
