"The fair breeze blew, the white foam flew;
The furrow follow'd free;
We were the first that ever burst
Into that silent sea."

Thus sang the Ancient Mariner, a fitting prelude to the stormy tales that await us. It was too late and too dark last night to spy the old house at Stow. Instead, let us look around us on this bright October day, while Sir Richard and Amyas pace the terraced gardens to the south. Amyas has slept until luncheon—an hour ago—but Sir Richard, undeterred by last night's bustle, has been awake since six, recreating his valiant soul and those of two terriers by chasing badgers through the valley.

Old Stow House stands, or rather stood, some four miles beyond the Cornish border, nestled on the northern slope of the grandestcombe of the region. Eighty years hence, a massive Palladian pile would rise there, bedizened with every monstrosity of bad taste, allegedly built by Charles the Second for Sir Richard's great-grandson—the heir of that famous Sir Bevil who defeated Parliament at Stratton and fell heroically at Lansdowne. Yet, like so many creations of the Stuarts, it rose only to fall again. An old man who saw the foundation laid as a boy lived to witness its demolition, the bricks and timber sold upon the spot. Since then, stables have become farmhouses, tennis courts sheep-cotes, and the great quadrangle a rick-yard. Civilization surges back from that lonely corner, perhaps for a while only.

But I write not of that new Stow House, nor of the past glories whereof quaint pictures still hang in neighboring homes, nor of that famed Sir Bevil, most beautiful and gallant of his generation. Old Prince has his pompous epigram: "Where next shall famous Grenvil's ashes stand? / Thy grandsire fills the sea, and thou the land."

I deal instead with a simpler age and a sterner generation, and with the old house that stood there from gray, mythic times. From the first Sir Richard, son of Hamon Dentatus, Lord of Carboyle, grandson of Duke Robert, son of Rou, who settled at Bideford after slaying the Prince of South-Galis and the Lord of Glamorgan, and gave all his conquests in South Wales to the Cistercian monks of Neath. It was a huge rambling building, half castle, half dwelling-house, akin to Compton Castle near Torquay, the home of Humphrey Gilbert and Richard Grenville's bosom friend. On three sides, the lofty walls of the old ballium still stood, with machicolated turrets and loopholes for raining stones and fire upon besiegers—relics of a unsettled age. But the southern court had become a flower-garden, with quaint terraces, statues, knots of flowers, clipped yews, and pedantry of the topiarian art. Toward the east, where the valley opened, the old walls were gone, and the ruined Norman keep had yielded to the rich, stately architecture of the Tudors. Altogether, the house, like the time, was in a transitional state, faithfully representing the passage of old Middle Age into the new life blossoming throughout Europe.

From the house, the hill sloped steeply down. The garden where Sir Richard and Amyas walked afforded a truly English prospect. Over the western walls, a glimpse of the blue ocean flecked with sailing vessels; then, far below, range on range of fertile park, stately avenues, yellow autumn woodland, and purple heather moors lapping over one another up the valley to the old British earthwork, black and furze-grown on its conical peak. Standing against the sky on the highest bank closing the valley to the east, the lofty tower of Kilkhampton church rose, rich with the monuments of five centuries of Grenvilles. A yellow eastern haze hung soft over park, wood, and moor; red cattle lowed, brushing away flies in the rivulet below; colts in the horse-park whinnied as they played, answered by their sires from the Queen's Park on the opposite hill. A rutting stag rattled the still woodland with hoarse thunder, and a rival far up the valley trumpeted defiance, answered from heathery brows quivering above, half-seen through the veil of eastern mist. Close at home, upon the terrace before the house, amid romping spaniels and golden-haired children, sat Lady Grenville herself—the beautiful St. Leger of Annery, the central jewel of all that glorious place. She looked down at her noble children, then up at her more noble husband, and round at that broad paradise of the West, till life seemed too full of happiness, and heaven too full of light.

And all the while, Amyas and Sir Richard paced up and down, talking long, earnestly, and slowly, for they both knew that the turning point of the boy's life had arrived.

"Yes," said Sir Richard, after Amyas, in his blunt, simple way, had told him the whole story about Rose Salterne and his brother, "yes, sweet lad, thou hast chosen the better part, thou and thy brother also, and it shall not be taken from you. Only be strong, lad, and trust in God that He will make a man of you."

"I do trust," said Amyas.

"Thank God," said Sir Richard, "that you have yourself taken from my heart that which was my great anxiety for you, from the day that your good father, who sleeps in peace, committed you to my hands. For all best things, Amyas, become, when misused, the very worst; and the love of woman, because it is able to lift man's soul to the heavens, is also able to drag him down to hell. But you have learnt better, Amyas; and know, with our old German forefathers, that, as Tacitus saith, *Sera juvenum Venus, ideoque inexhausta pubertas*. And not only that, Amyas; but trust me, that silly fashion of the French and Italians, to be hanging ever at some woman's apron-string, so that no boy shall count himself a man unless he can *vagghezziare le donne*, whether maids or wives, alas! matters little; that fashion, I say, is little less hurtful to the soul than open sin; for by it are bred vanity and expense, envy and heart-burning, yea, hatred and murder often; and even if that be escaped, yet the rich treasure of a manly worship, which should be kept for one alone, is squandered and parted upon many, and the bride at last comes in for nothing but the very last leavings and *caput mortuum* of her bridegroom's heart, and becomes a mere ornament for his table, and a means whereby he may obtain a progeny. May God, who has saved me from that death in life, save you also!" And as he spoke, he looked down toward his wife upon the terrace below; and she, as if guessing instinctively that he was talking of her, looked up with so sweet a smile that Sir Richard's stern face melted into a very glory of spiritual sunshine.

Amyas looked at them both and sighed; and then, turning the conversation suddenly—

"And I may go to Ireland to-morrow?"

"You shall sail in the 'Mary' for Milford Haven, with these letters to Winter. If the wind serves, you may bid the master drop down the river tonight, and be off; for we must lose no time."

"Winter?" said Amyas. "He is no friend of mine, since he left Drake and us so cowardly at the Straits of Magellan."

"Duty must not wait for private quarrels, even though they be just ones, lad: but he will not be your general. When you come to the marshal, or the Lord Deputy, give either of them this letter, and they will set you work,—and hard work too, I warrant."

"I want nothing better."

"Right, lad; the best reward for having wrought well already, is to have more to do; and he that has been faithful over a few things, must find his account in being made ruler over many things. That is the true and heroic rest, which only is worthy of gentlemen and sons of God. As for those who, either in this world or the world to come, look for idleness, and hope that God shall feed them with pleasant things, as it were with a spoon, Amyas, I count them cowards and base, even though they call themselves saints and elect."

"I wish you could persuade my poor cousin of that."

"He has yet to learn what losing his life to save it means, Amyas. Bad men have taught him (and I fear these Anabaptists and Puritans at home teach little else), that it is the one great business of every one to save his own soul after he dies; every one for himself; and that that, and not divine self-sacrifice, is the one thing needful, and the better part which Mary chose."

"I think men are inclined enough already to be selfish, without being taught that."

"Right, lad. For me, if I could hang up such a teacher on high as an enemy of mankind, and a corrupter of youth, I would do it gladly. Is there not cowardice and self-seeking enough about the hearts of us fallen sons of Adam, that
