"How misguided, how rash, how intrusive a fool!" cried the bard, bidding farewell to a world where busyness breeds peril. "Farewell!" echoed the wind, sweeping a grey, curdling mist over the jagged peaks of the western mountains.

It was the spring of 1582–83. The air bit with a dry, harsh chill, scouring a dreary expanse of bog that still bore the bruised stains of winter frost—reds and yellows clinging to the mud like dying flowers. From a solitary brown knoll rising from this waste, a few leafless oaks stretched their moss-grown, spider-like arms toward a desolate pool. The water crisped and shivered under the biting breeze, and from its brink rose a mournful cry, faint and fitful, battling the howling gale.

Amidst the crumbling rocks and green, spongy springs, a company of English soldiers pressed forward. Clad in helmets and quilted jerkins, armed with arquebuses on their shoulders and pikes trailing behind, they were stern, steadfast men. Two years prior, they had manned the guns at Smerwick Fort; since then, they had witnessed countless bloody frays, and more awaited them before the end.

Two captains rode ahead on shaggy ponies. The taller wore armor stained and rusted by storms and battle, a testament to his experience. Beside him rode a younger man in a brilliant, inlaid cuirass, a gaudy sash, and a helmet topped with a plume. His sword hilt glittered with gold, a stark, quaint contrast to the meager beast bearing his finery. Tethered by a cord fastened to a pikeman's wrist trotted a bare-legged Irish kern. His only garment was a ragged yellow mantle, and atop his unkempt, "glib" hair, his eyes darted left and right in a mixture of fear and sullen defiance. He was the guide for their hunt for the rebel Baltinglas, and woe betide him if he played them false.

"A pleasant country, truly, Captain Raleigh," remarked the older, dingier officer to the gay one. "I marvel how, having once escaped this hell to Whitehall, you possess the courage to return and soil that fine suit with bog-water and mud."

"A very pleasant country, my friend Amyas," replied the younger captain, his tone serious despite the jest. "What you say in jest, I say in earnest."

"Hillo! Our tastes have changed places," Amyas countered, wiping sweat from his brow. "I am sick of it already, as you foretold. Would Heaven I could hear of some adventure Westward-ho! and swing in a hammock once more. Pray, what has suddenly made you in love with bog and rock, that you come back to tramp them with us? I thought you had spied out the nakedness of the land long ago."

"Bog and rock?" Raleigh laughed, a sound that seemed to echo off the barren hills. "Nakedness of the land? What is needed here but prudence and skill, justice and law? Look at this soil—it is fat enough if men were here to till it. These rocks... who knows what minerals they may hold? I have heard of gold and jewels found in divers parts. My brother Humphrey's German assayer, Daniel, assures me these rocks are of the same kind as those yielding silver in Peru. Tut, man! If Her Gracious Majesty would but bestow on me a few square miles of this wilderness, in seven years' time, by God's good help, I would make it blossom like the rose."

"Humph! I should be more inclined to stay, then."

"So you shall, and be my agent, if you will, to collect my mine-rents, corn-rents, and fishery-rents. Eh? Could you keep accounts, old knight of the bear's-paw?"

"Well enough for such short reckonings as yours would be, on the profit-side at least. No, no—I'd sooner carry lime all my days from Cauldy to Bideford than pass another twelvemonth in the land of Ire among the children of wrath. There is a curse upon the face of the earth, I believe."

"There is no curse upon it, save the old one of man's sin—" Thorns and thistles it shall bring forth to thee.' But if you root up the thorns and thistles, Amyas, I know no fiend who can prevent your growing wheat instead. If you till the ground like a man, you plough and barrow away nature's curse, and other fables of the schoolmen besides," Raleigh added, speaking with that daring fashion which would later earn him the imputation of atheism.

"It is sword and bullet, I think, that are needed here, before plough and harrow, to clear away some of the curse. Until a few more of these Irish lords are gone where the Desmonds are, there is no peace for Ireland."

"Humph! Not so far wrong, I fear. And yet... Irish lords? These very traitors are better English blood than we who hunt them down." Raleigh gestured to the kern walking beside them. "When Yeo here slew the Desmond the other day, he no more let out a drop of Irish blood than if he had slain the Lord Deputy himself."

"His blood be on his own head," said Yeo, his voice grim. "He looked as wild a savage as the worst of them; more shame to him. And the ancient here had nearly cut off his arm before he told us who he was. And then, your worship, having a price upon his head..."

"Enough, enough, good fellow," said Raleigh, cutting him off. "Thou hast done what was given thee to do. Strange, Amyas, is it not? Noble Normans sunk into savages—*Hibernis ipsis hiberniores!* Is there some uncivilizing venom in the air?"

"Some venom, at least, which makes English men traitors. But the Irish themselves are well enough, if their tyrants would let them be. See now, what more faithful liege-man has Her Majesty than the Inchiquin, who, they say, is Prince of Thomond, and should be king of all Ireland if every man had his right?"

"Don't talk of rights in the land of wrongs, man. But the Inchiquin knows well that the true Irish Esau has no worse enemy than his supplanter, the Norman Jacob." Raleigh fell silent for a moment, staring out at the grey landscape. "And yet, Amyas, are even these men worse than we might be, if we had been bred up masters over the bodies and souls of men in some remote land where law and order had never come? Look at this Desmond, brought up a savage among savages, a Papist among Papists, a despot among slaves. A thousand easy maidens deem it honor to serve his pleasure, a thousand wild ruffians deem it piety to fulfil his revenge: and let him that is without sin among us cast the first stone."

Amyas nodded slowly. "Ay," he murmured, echoing Raleigh's internal thoughts as the conversation dropped. "What hadst thou been, Raleigh, hadst thou been that Desmond whose lands thou now desirest? What wilt thou be when thou hast them? Will thy children sink downwards, as these noble barons sank? Will the genius of tyranny and falsehood find soil within thy heart to grow and ripen fruit? What guarantee hast thou for doing better here than those who went before thee? And yet, cannot I do justice and love mercy? Can I not establish plantations, build and sow, and make the desert valleys laugh with corn? Shall I not have my Spenser with me, to fill me with all noble thoughts, and raise my soul to his heroic pitch? Is not this true knight-errantry, to redeem to peace and use, and to the glory of that glorious queen whom God has given to me, a generous soil and a more generous race? Trustful and tenderhearted they are—none more; and if they be fickle and passionate, will not that very softness of temper, which makes them so easily led to evil, make them as easy to be led towards good? Yes—here, away from courts, among a people who should bless me as their benefactor and deliverer... what golden days might be mine!"

"And yet—" Raleigh stopped himself, his gaze distant. "Is this but another angel's mask from that same cunning fiend, Ambition's stage? And will my house be indeed the House of God, the foundations of which are loyalty, and its bulwarks righteousness, and not the House of Fame, whose walls are of the soap-bubble, and its floor a sea of glass mingled with fire? I would be good and great... When will the day come when I shall be content to be good, and yet not great, like this same simple Leigh, toiling on by my side to do his duty, with no more thought for the morrow than the birds of God? Greatness? I have tasted that cup within the last twelve months; do I not know that it is sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the belly? Greatness? And was not Essex great, and John of Austria great, and Desmond great, whose race, but three short years ago, had stood for ages higher than I shall ever hope to climb—castles, and lands, and slaves by thousands, and five hundred gentlemen of his name, who had vowed to forswear God before they forswore Him,
