"He is brass within, and steel without,
With beams on his topcastle strong;
And eighteen pieces of ordinance
He carries on either side along."

Sir Andrew Barton.

We took boat at Whitehall-stairs, following Amyas's lead, slipping silently past the shadow of Old London Bridge until we reached Deptford Creek. There, preserved like a relic in amber, lay the *Pelican*, the vessel that had carried Drake around the globe. She sat high and dry on the grassy bank of the Thames, resembling an ancient warrior resting after a lifetime of toil. Epigrams and verses honoring her and her captain were nailed to her mainmast; three of these, penned by the scholar Camden, survive in history. Elizabeth herself had consecrated the ship, feasted upon her decks, and there knighthooded Drake. "At which time a bridge of planks," the legend ran, "broke under the press of people, falling with a hundred men upon it, who, notwithstanding, had none of them any harm. So as that ship may seem to have been built under a lucky planet."

She had remained a show, and a dining-hall for jolly gatherings from the city, for some time. Today, however, the air was thick with the scent of savory steams issuing from windows that were once portholes, and the sounds of revelry mingled with the rush of white-aproned waiters from the neighboring Pelican Inn. Flags bedizened the masts. A great feast was in progress: the Lord Mayor entertained certain gentlemen of the Leicester house party, men deeply interested in foreign discoveries. What place so fit for such a feast as the *Pelican* itself?

Look at the men surrounding the table; a nobler company you will seldom see. Especially, if you be American, look at their faces and reverence them, for to them and their wisdom you owe the existence of your mighty fatherland.

At the head of the table sat the Lord Mayor, Sir Edward Osborne, clothworker, and ancestor of the dukes of Leeds. His romance now-a-days is in everyone's hands. He was aged, yet unchanged since he leaped from the window upon London Bridge into the roaring tide below to rescue the infant who was now his wife. The chivalry and promptitude of the prentice boy had hardened into the thoughtful daring of the wealthy merchant adventurer. There he sat, a right kingly man, with the Earl of Cumberland on his right hand and Walter Raleigh on his left. The three talked together in a low voice of the chances of vast and rich countries remaining undiscovered between Florida and the River of Canada. Raleigh's half-scientific declamation, laced with quotations from Doctor Dee the conjuror, had less effect on Osborne than on Cumberland—who had tried many adventures to foreign parts and failed in all of them, apparently for the simple reason that, instead of going himself, he sent other people. Raleigh was fain to call to his help the quiet student sitting on his left, Richard Hakluyt, of Oxford. Yet he was deep in talk with a reverend elder, whose long white beard flowed almost to his waist and whose face was furrowed by a thousand storms. This was Anthony Jenkinson, the great Asiatic traveler, discoursing to the Christ-church virtuoso of reindeer sledges, Siberian steppes, and the fossil ivory—plain proof of Noah's flood—which the Tungusoos dug from the ice-cliffs of the Arctic sea. Next to him sat Christopher Carlile, Walsingham's son-in-law (as Sidney also was now), a valiant captain who would afterward serve as general of the soldiery in Drake's triumphant West Indian raid of 1585. He was busy talking with Alderman Hart the grocer, Sheriff Spencer the clothworker, Charles Leigh (Amyas's merchant-cousin), Aldworth the mayor of Bristol, William Salterne, alderman thereof, and cousin of our friend at Bideford. For Carlile and Secretary Walsingham had been helping them heart and soul for the last two years to collect money for Humphrey and Adrian Gilbert's great adventures to the North-West. On one of these expeditions Carlile was indeed to have sailed himself, but did not go after all; I never could discover for what reason.

On the opposite side of the table sat a group scarcely less interesting. Martin Frobisher and John Davis, the pioneers of the North-West passage, talked with Alderman Sanderson, the great geographer and "setter forth of globes," alongside Mr. Towerson, Sir Gilbert Peckham, our old acquaintance Captain John Winter, and last, but not least, Philip Sidney himself. Sidney, with his accustomed courtesy, had given up his rightful place toward the head of the table that he might have a knot of virtuosi all to himself, and had brought with him his two especial intimates, Mr. Edward Dyer and Mr. Francis Leigh. They too were talking of the North-West passage, and Sidney lamented that he was tied to diplomacy and courts, expressing his envy of old Martin Frobisher in all sorts of pretty compliments. To which the other replied, "It's all very fine to talk of here, a sailing on dry land with a good glass of wine before you; but you'd find it another guess sort of business, knocking about among the icebergs with your beard frozen fast to your ruff, Sir Philip, specially if you were a bit squeamish about the stomach."

"That were a slight matter to endure, my dear sir, if by it I could win the honor which her majesty bestowed on you, when her own ivory hand waved a farewell kerchief to your ship from the windows of Greenwich Palace."

"Well, sir, folks say you have no reason to complain of lack of favors, as you have no reason to deserve lack; and if you can get them by staying ashore, don't you go to sea to look for more, say I. Eh, Master Towerson?"

Towerson's gray beard, which had stood many a foreign voyage, both fair and foul, wagged grim assent. But at this moment a waiter entered.

"Please my lord mayor's worship, there is a tall gentleman outside, would speak with the Right Honorable Sir Walter Raleigh."

"Show him in, man. Sir Walter's friends are ours."

Amyas entered and stood hesitating in the doorway.

"Captain Leigh!" cried half a dozen voices.

"Why did you not walk in, sir?" said Osborne. "You should know your way well enough between these decks."

"Well enough, my lords and gentlemen. But, Sir Walter—you will excuse me"—and he gave Raleigh a look which was enough for his quick wit. Turning pale as death, he rose and followed Amyas into an adjoining cabin. They were five minutes together, and then Amyas came out alone.

In few words he told the company the sad story which we already know. Ere it was ended, noble tears were glistening on some of those stern faces.

"The old Egyptians," said Sir Edward Osborne, "when they banqueted, set a corpse among their guests, for a memorial of human vanity. Have we forgotten God and our own weakness in this our feast, that He Himself has sent us thus a message from the dead?"

"Nay, my lord mayor," said Sidney, "not from the dead, but from the realm of everlasting life."

"Amen!" answered Osborne. "But, gentlemen, our feast is at an end. There are those here who would drink on merrily, as brave men should, in spite of the private losses of which they have just had news; but none here who can drink with the loss of so great a man still ringing in his ears."

It was true. Though many of the guests had suffered severely by the failure of the expedition, they had utterly forgotten that fact in the awful news of Sir Humphrey's death. The feast broke up sadly and hurriedly, while each man asked his neighbor, "What will the queen say?"

Raleigh re-entered in a few minutes, but was silent. Pressing many an honest hand as he passed, he went out to call a wherry, beckoning Amyas to follow him. Sidney, Cumberland, and Frank went with them in another boat, leaving the two brothers to talk over the sad details.

They disembarked at Whitehall-stairs; Raleigh, Sidney, and Cumberland went to the palace, and the two brothers to their mother's lodgings.

Amyas had prepared his speech to Frank about Rose Salterne, but now that it was come to the point, he had not the courage to begin, and longed that Frank would open the matter. Frank, too, shrank from what he knew must come, and all the more because he was ignorant that Amyas had been to Bideford, or knew aught of the *Rose*'s disappearance.

So they went upstairs; and it was a relief to both of them to find that their mother was at the Abbey, for it was for her sake that both dreaded what was coming. They stood in the bay-window which looked out upon the river and talked of things indifferent, looking earnestly at each other's faces by the fading light, for it was now three years since they had met.

Years and events had deepened the contrast between the two brothers. Frank smiled with affectionate pride as he looked up in Amyas's face and saw that he was no longer merely the rollicking handy sailor-lad, but the self-confident and stately warrior, showing in every look and gesture:

"The reason firm, the temperate will,
Endurance,
