"When captains courageous, whom death could not daunt,
Did march to the siege of the city of Gaunt,
They muster'd their soldiers by two and by three,
But the foremost in battle was Mary Ambree.
When brave Sir John Major was slain in her sight,
Who was her true lover, her joy and delight,
Because he was murther'd most treacherouslie,
Then vow'd to avenge him fair Mary Ambree."

Old Ballad, A. D. 1584.

With one final gaze upon the golden tropic sea and the golden evenings of the New Granada coast, the scene shifted to the bay of Santa Marta. Before the land-breeze, the waters rippled like a single sheet of living flame. The vast forests sparkled with the myriad fireflies of the twilight, while a lazy, golden mist lounged around the inner hills, illuminated by the dying rays of the sun. High above, nineteen thousand feet aloft, the majestic peak of Horqueta pierced the abyss of air, standing rose-red against the dark-blue vault of heaven. As the rosy cone of the mountain faded to a dull leaden hue, the first stars flashed out one by one, and Venus, shining like a second moon, tinged the eastern snows with gold, casting a long, rippling line of yellow light across the bay. Everywhere, glory and richness reigned. It was no wonder that the earth in this enchanted land was rich to its inmost depths as it was upon the surface; the heavens, hills, and sea formed one sparkling garland of jewels—it was natural that the soil should be jewelled as well, spangled with emeralds, rubies, grains of gold, and wreaths of native silver.

Thus thought the Bishop of Cartagena, seated in the state cabin of the great galleon *City of the True Cross*, looking pensively out toward the shore. The good man sat in a state of holy calm, his stout figure resting in an easy-chair, his ankles propped on another, beside a table laden with oranges, limes, guavas, and pineapples—the fruits of India. An Indian girl, bedizened with scarfs and gold chains, fanned away the flies with a feather fan. Beside her, a pail of ice from the Horqueta—brought down by some pious Spanish lady who had "spent" an Indian to deliver the offering—cooled several flasks of virtuous wine from Alicant. Yet the Bishop, though surrounded by luxury, was not so selfish as to enjoy the ice or wine alone. Don Pedro, colonel of the soldiers; Don Alvarez, intendant of the customs at Santa Marta; and Don Paul, captain of the mariners, had come at his special request, accompanied by two friars seated at the lower end of the table. Together, they endeavored to prevent the prelate from taking too bitterly to heart the unsatisfactory state of his cathedral town, which had just been sacked and burned by an old friend of theirs, Sir Francis Drake.

"We have been great sufferers, señores,—ah, great sufferers," sniffled the Bishop, quoting Scripture with the glibness fashionable in those days, though often with an irreverence too bold for repetition. "Great suffers, truly; but there shall be a remnant,—ah, a remnant like the shaking of the olive tree and the gleaning grapes when the vintage is done.—Ah! Gold? Yes, I trust Our Lady's mercies are not shut up, nor her arms shortened.—Look, señores!" He pointed majestically out the window. "It looks gold! It smells of gold, as I may say, by a poetical license. Yea, the very waves, as they ripple past us, sing of gold, gold, gold!"

"It is a great privilege," said the Intendant, "to have comfort so gracefully administered at once by a churchman and a scholar."

"A poet, too," said Don Pedro. "You have no notion what sweet sonnets—"

"Hush, Don Pedro—hush!" interrupted the Bishop. "If I, a mateless bird, have spent an idle hour in teaching lovers how to sing, why, what of that? I am a churchman, señores; but I am a man, and I can feel, señores; I can sympathize; I can palliate; I can excuse. Who knows better than I how much human nature lurks in us, fallen sons of Adam?" He turned to the trembling Indian girl. "Tita!"

"Um?" she said, with a true Indian grunt.

"Fill his excellency the Intendant's glass. Does much more treasure come down, illustrious señor? May the poor of Mary hope for a few more crumbs from their Mistress's table?"

"Not a peso, I fear," said the Intendant, pointing to the Horqueta. "The big white cow up there has been milked dry for this year."

"Ah!" He looked up at the magnificent snow peak. "Only good to cool wine with, eh? And as safe for the time being as Solomon's birds."

"Solomon's birds? Explain your recondite allusion, my lord."

"Enlighten us, your excellency, enlighten us."

"Ah! thereby hangs a tale. You know the holy birds who run up and down on the Prado at Seville among the ladies' pretty feet, with hooked noses and cinnamon crests? Eh? Hoopoes—*Upupa*, as the classics have it. Well, señores, once on a time, the story goes, these hoopoes all had golden crowns on their heads. And what took the consequences? Eh? It befell on a day that all the birds and beasts came to do homage at the court of His Most Catholic Majesty, King Solomon, and among them came these same hoopoes. They had a little request to make, the poor rogues. And what do you think it was? Why, that King Solomon would pray for them that they might wear any sort of crowns but these same golden ones; for—listen, Tita, and see the snare of riches—mankind so hunted, shot, trapped, and snared them for the sake of these same golden crowns, that life was a burden to bear. So Solomon prayed, and instead of golden crowns, they all received crowns of feathers. And ever since, señores, they live as merrily as crickets in an oven, and also have the honor of bearing the name of His Most Catholic Majesty, King Solomon."

"Tita! Fill the señor Commandant's glass."

"Fray Gerundio, what are you whispering about down there, sir?"

Fray Gerundio had merely commented to his brother friar on the Bishop's story of Solomon's birds with a sigh.

"Oh, *si sic omnia*!—Would that all gold would turn to feathers in like wise!"

"Then, friend," replied the other, a Dominican like Gerundio but of a darker and sterner complexion, "corrupt human nature would within a week discover some fresh bauble, for which to kill and be killed in vain."

"What is that, Fray Gerundio?" asked the Bishop again.

"I merely remarked, that it were well for the world if all mankind were to put up the same prayer as the hoopoes."

"World, sir? What do you know about the world?" the Bishop retorted, turning to the *Dons*. "Convert your Indians, sir, if you please, and leave affairs of state to your superiors. You will excuse him, señores"—speaking in a lower tone—"A very worthy and pious man, but a poor peasant's son; and besides—you understand. A little wrong here; too much fasting and watching, I fear, good man." The Bishop touched his forehead knowingly, signifying that Fray Gerundio's wits were in an unsatisfactory state.

The Friar heard and saw with a quiet smile. He was one of those excellent men whom the cruelties of his countrymen had stirred up—as darkness, by mere contrast, makes the light brighter—as they had Las Casas, Gasca, and many another noble name written in the book of life, to deeds of love and pious daring worthy of any creed or age. True Protestants, they protested, even before kings, against the evil which lay nearest them; true liberals, they did not disdain to call the dark-skinned heathen their brothers; asserting in terms which astonish us, when we recollect the age, the inherent freedom of every being who wore the flesh and blood which their Lord wore; true martyrs, they bore witness of Christ, and received too often the rewards of such, in slander and contempt. Such an one was Fray Gerundio; a poor, mean, clumsy-tongued peasant's son, who never could put three sentences together, save when he waxed eloquent, crucifix in hand, amid some group of Indians or negroes. He was accustomed to such rebuffs as the Bishop's; he took them for what they were worth, and sipped his wine in silence while the talk went on.

"They say," observed the Commandant, "that a very small Plate-fleet will go to Spain this year."

"What else?" said the Intendant. "What have we to send, in the name of all saints, since these accursed English Lutherans have swept us out clean?"

"And if we had anything to send," said the Sea-Captain, "what have we to send it in? That fiend
