"Full fathom deep thy father lies;
Of his bones are corals made;
Those are pearls which were his eyes;
Nothing of him that doth fade,
But doth suffer a sea-change
Into something rich and strange;
Fairies hourly ring his knell,
Hark! I hear them. Ding dong bell."

Thus spake the sorcerer in the tempest, and the verse holds true for the great Armada. Yes, it is over; the great phantom vanquished, lulled for awhile in the everlasting warfare of heaven, that ancient battle of Iran and Turan, of light against darkness, of Michael and his angels against Satan and his fiends. This struggle, slow and seldom culminating in a day of judgment, has now become palpable and incarnate—no longer a spiritual fight, but one of flesh and blood, wherein simple men may choose their sides without mistake, aiding God's cause not merely with prayer and pen, but with sharp shot and cold steel.

A day of judgment hath come, dividing the light from the darkness, the sheep from the goats, and trying each man's work by the fire. Behold, the devil's work, like its maker, proved to have been a lie and a sham, a windy boast, a bladder collapsing at the merest pinprick. Byzanine empires, Spanish Armadas, triple-crowned papacies, Russian despotisms—this is the way of them, and will be to the end of the world. One brave blow at the big bullying phantom, and it vanishes in sulphur-stench. While the children of Israel, as of old, see the Egyptians dead on the sea-shore, scarce knowing how, save that God hath done it, singing the song of Moses and of the Lamb.

From England and the Netherlands, from Germany and Geneva, and those poor Vaudois shepherd-saints, whose bones for generations past "Lie scattered on the Alpine mountains cold," to be, indeed, the seed of the Church and a germ of new life, liberty, and civilization—even in these very days returning good for evil to that Piedmont which hath hunted them down like partridges on the mountains—from all of Europe, from all of mankind, I had almost said, arose a shout of holy joy, such as the world had not heard for many a weary and bloody century. A shout which was the prophetic birth-paean of North America, Australia, New Zealand, the Pacific Islands, of free commerce and free colonization over the whole earth.

"There was in England, by the commandment of her majesty," saith Van Meteran, "and likewise in the United Provinces, by the direction of the States, a solemn festival day publicly appointed... observed upon the 29th of November: which day was wholly spent in fasting, prayer, and giving of thanks." Likewise the Queen's Majesty herself, imitating the ancient Romans, rode into London in triumph, in robes of triumph, carried through the City in a triumphant Chariot from her Palace unto the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, where the Ensigns and Colours of the vanquished Spaniards hung displayed. All the Citizens of London, in their liveries, stood on either side the street, with their ensigns and banners, and the streets were hanged with blue cloth, yielding a stately and gallant prospect. Her Majestie gave thanks unto God, causing a public Sermon to be preached before her at Paul's Cross, wherein none other argument was handled than that praise, honour, and glory might be rendered unto God. With her own princely voice she exhorted the people thereto; whereunto the people, with a loud acclamation, wished her a most long and happy life to the confusion of her foes.

Yes, as the medals struck on the occasion said, "It came, it saw, and it fled!" Whither? Away and northward, like a herd of frightened deer, past the Orkneys and Shetlands, catching up a few hapless fishermen as guides; past the coast of Norway, there too refused water and food by the brave descendants of the Vikings; and on northward ever towards the lonely Faroes, and the everlasting dawn which heralds round the Pole the midnight sun. Their water faileth; the cattle must go overboard; and the wild northern sea echoes to the shrieks of drowning horses. They must homeward at least, somehow, each as best he can. Let them meet again at Cape Finisterre, if indeed they ever meet. Medina Sidonia, with some five-and-twenty of the soundest and best victualled ships, will lead the way, leaving the rest to their fate. He is soon out of sight; and forty more, the only remnant of that mighty host, come wandering wearily behind, hoping to make the south-west coast of Ireland, and have help, or at least fresh water there, from their fellow Romanists. Alas for them!--

"Make Thou their way dark and slippery,
And follow them up ever with Thy storm."

For now cometh up from the Atlantic, gale on gale; and few of that hapless remnant reached the shores of Spain.

And where are Amyas and the *Vengeance* all this while?

At the fifty-seventh degree of latitude, the English fleet, finding themselves growing short of provision, and having been long since out of powder and ball, turn southward toward home, "thinking it best to leave the Spaniard to those uncouth and boisterous northern seas." A few pinnaces are still sent onward to watch their course; and the English fleet, caught in the same storms which scattered the Spaniards, "with great danger and industry reached Harwich port," to provide themselves of victuals and ammunition, in case the Spaniards should return. But there is no need for that caution. Parma, indeed, who cannot believe that the idol at Halle, after all his compliments to it, will play him so scurvy a trick, will watch for weeks on the Dunkirk dunes, hoping against hope for the Armada's return, casting anchors, and spinning rigging to repair their losses.

"But lang, lang may his ladies sit,
With their fans intill their hand,
Before they see Sir Patrick Spens
Come sailing to the land."

The Armada is away on the other side of Scotland, and Amyas is following in its wake.

For when the lord high admiral determined to return, Amyas asked leave to follow the Spaniard; and asked, too, of Sir John Hawkins, who happened to be at hand, such ammunition and provision as could be afforded him, promising to repay the same like an honest man, out of his plunder if he lived, out of his estate if he died; lodging for that purpose bills in the hands of Sir John, who, as a man of business, took them, and put them in his pocket among the thimbles, string, and tobacco. After which Amyas, calling his men together, reminded them once more of the story of the Rose of Torridge and Don Guzman de Soto, and then asked:

"Men of Bideford, will you follow me? There will be plunder for those who love plunder; revenge for those who love revenge; and for all of us (for we all love honor) the honor of having never left the chase as long as there was a Spanish flag in English seas."

And every soul on board replied, that they would follow Sir Amyas Leigh around the world.

There is no need for me to detail every incident of that long and weary chase; how they found the *Sta. Catharina*, attacked her, and had to sheer off, she being rescued by the rest; how when Medina's squadron left the crippled ships behind, they were all but taken or sunk, by thrusting into the midst of the Spanish fleet to prevent her escaping with Medina; how they crippled her, so that she could not beat to windward out into the ocean, but was fain to run south, past the Orkneys, and down through the Minch, between Cape Wrath and Lewis; how the younger hands were ready to mutiny, because Amyas, in his stubborn haste, ran past two or three noble prizes which were all but disabled, among others one of the great galliasses, and the two great Venetians, *La Ratta* and *La Belanzara*--which were afterwards, with more than thirty other vessels, wrecked on the west coast of Ireland; how he got fresh water, in spite of certain "Hebridean Scots" of Skye, who, after reviling him in an unknown tongue, fought with him awhile, and then embraced him and his men with howls of affection, and were not much more decently clad, nor more civilized, than his old friends of California; how he pacified his men by letting them pick the bones of a great Venetian which was going on shore upon Islay (by which they got booty enough to repay them for the whole voyage), and offended them again by refusing to land and plunder two great Spanish wrecks on the Mull of Cantire (whose crews, by the by, James tried to smuggle off secretly into Spain in ships of his own, wishing to play, as usual, both sides of the game at once; but the Spaniards were stopped at Yarmouth till the council's pleasure was known--which was, of course, to let the poor wretches go on their way, and be hanged elsewhere); how they passed a strange island, half black, half white, which the wild people called Raghary,
