As Lady Castlewood, her son, and her daughter filed past the saloon door where they had sat, Lord Castlewood slipped quietly out by another exit. Behind them, the demure eyes lifted from the tambour-frame, having exhausted their examination of innocent violets and jonquils, to fix upon Harry Warrington. He stood beneath an ancestral portrait by the great fireplace, his honest countenance adorned with a great heap of blushes—flowers that bloom so rarely after a gentleman's springtime—that they decorated his cheeks, his forehead, and even his youthful ears.

"Why did you refuse to go with our aunt, cousin?" asked the lady of the tambour-frame.

"Because your ladyship bade me stay," answered the lad.

"I bid you stay! La! child! What one says in fun, you take in earnest!" cried the spinster, feigning indignation. "Are all you Virginian gentlemen so obsequious as to fancy every idle word a lady says is a command? Virginia must be a pleasant country for our sex if it be so!"

"You said—" Harry stammered, his voice trembling with sudden emotion, "—when we walked in the terrace two nights since..."

"Oh, that sweet night, cousin!" interrupted the Tambour-frame eagerly.

"When you gave me this rose from your own neck," roared Harry, producing a crumpled and decaying vegetable from his waistcoat with surprising force, "which I will never part with—not by heavens, whilst this heart continues to beat! You said, 'Harry, if your aunt asks you to go away, you will go, and if you go, you will forget me.' Didn't you say so?"

"All men forget!" sighed the Virginian.

"In this cold, selfish country they may, cousin—but not in ours," Harry continued, his spirit soaring again. "I had rather have lost an arm almost than refused the old lady. It went to my heart to say no to her; she is so kind, and she was the means of introducing me to..." He paused, overwhelmed. "O heaven!"

(A kick sent an intervening spaniel yelping from before the fire, followed by a rapid advance toward the tambour-frame.) "Look here, cousin!" cried Harry, seizing her hand. "If you were to bid me jump out of yonder window, I should do it; or murder—I should do it."

"La! but you need not squeeze one's hand so, you silly child!" remarked Maria.

"I can't help it—we are so in the South," Harry protested, his grip unyielding. "Where my heart is, I can't help speaking my mind out, cousin—and you know where that heart is! Ever since that evening—that O heaven! I tell you I have hardly slept since. I want to do something—to distinguish myself—to be ever so great. I wish there were giants, Maria, as I have read of in books, that I could go and fight 'em. I wish you were in distress, that I might help you, somehow. I wish you wanted my blood, that I might spend every drop of it for you. And when you told me not to go with Madame Bernstein..."

"I tell thee, child, *never*."

"I thought you told me," Harry insisted, his eyes shining with feverish devotion. "You said you knew I preferred my aunt to my cousin. And I said then what I say now: 'Incomparable Maria! I prefer thee to all the women in the world and all the angels in Paradise—and I would go anywhere, were it to dungeons, if you ordered me!' And do you think I would not stay anywhere, when you only desired that I should be near you?" he added after a moment's pause.

"Men always talk in that way—that is, that is what I have heard so," said the spinster, correcting herself quickly. "For what should a country-bred woman know about you creatures? When you are near us, they say you are all raptures and flames and promises and I don't know what; when you are away, you forget all about us."

"But I think I never want to go away as long as I live," groaned the young man. "I have tired of many things; not books and that, I never cared for study much, but games and sports which I used to be fond of when I was a boy. Before I saw you, it was to be a soldier I most desired; I tore my hair with rage when my poor dear brother went away instead of me on that expedition in which we lost him. But now, I only care for one thing in the world, and you know what that is."

"You silly child! don't you know I am almost old enough to be..."

"I know—I know!" Harry interrupted, ignoring the implication. "But what is that to me? Haven't your brothers—or well, never mind who—told me stories against you? Didn't they show me the Family Bible, where all your names are down, and the dates of your birth?"

"The cowards! Who did that?" cried out Lady Maria, her composure cracking. "Dear Harry, tell me who did that? Was it my mother-in-law, the grasping, odious, abandoned, brazen harpy? Do you know all about her? How she married my father in his cups—the horrid hussey!--and..."

"It wasn't Lady Castlewood," interposed the wondering Harry.

"Then it was my aunt," continued the infuriate lady, her anger rising again. "A pretty moralist, indeed! A bishop's widow, forsooth, and I should like to know whose widow before and afterwards. Why, Harry, she intrigued with the Pretender, and with the Court of Hanover, and, I dare say, would with the Court of Rome and the Sultan of Turkey if she had had the means. Do you know who her second husband was? A creature who..."

"But our aunt never spoke a word against you," broke in Harry, growing more and more amazed at the nymph's vehemence.

She checked her anger. In the inquisitive countenance opposite to her, she thought she read some alarm regarding the temper she was exhibiting.

"Well, well! I am a fool," she said, smoothing her dress. "I want thee to think well of me, Harry!"

A hand was put out and seized, and no doubt kissed by the rapturous youth. "Angel!" he cried, looking into her face with his eager, honest eyes.

Two fish-pools irradiated by a pair of stars would not kindle to greater warmth than did those elderly orbs into which Harry poured his gaze. Nevertheless, he plunged into their blue depths, and fancied he saw heaven in their calm brightness. So that silly dog (of whom Aesop or the Spelling-book used to tell us in youth) beheld a beef-bone in the pond, and snapped at it, and lost the beef-bone he was carrying. O absurd cur! He saw the beefbone in his own mouth reflected in the treacherous pool, which dimpled, I dare say, with ever so many smiles, coolly sucked up the meat, and returned to its usual placidity. Ah! what a heap of wreck lie beneath some of those quiet surfaces! What treasures we have dropped into them! What chased golden dishes, what precious jewels of love, what bones after bones, and sweetest heart's flesh! Do not some very faithful and unlucky dogs jump in bodily, when they are swallowed up heads and tails entirely? When some women come to be dragged, it is a marvel what will be found in the depths of them. *Cavete, canes!* Have a care how ye lap that water. What do they want with us, the mischievous siren sluts? A green-eyed Naiad never rests until she has inveigled a fellow under the water; she sings after him, she dances after him; she winds round him, glittering tortuously; she warbles and whispers dainty secrets at his cheek, she kisses his feet, she leers at him from out of her rushes: all her beds sigh out, "Come, sweet youth! Hither, hither, rosy Hylas!" *Pop* goes Hylas. (Surely the fable is renewed for ever and ever?) Has his captivator any pleasure? Doth she take any account of him? No more than a fisherman landing at Brighton does of one out of a hundred thousand herrings.... The last time. Ulysses rowed by the Sirens' bank, he and his men did not care though a whole shoal of them were singing and combing their longest locks. Young Telemachus was for jumping overboard: but the tough old crew held the silly, bawling lad. They were deaf, and could not hear his bawling nor the sea-nymphs' singing. They were dim of sight, and did not see how lovely the witches were. The stale, old, leering witches! Away with ye! I dare say you have painted your cheeks by this time; your wretched old songs are as out of fashion as Mozart, and it is all false hair you are combing!

In the last sentence you see Lector Benevolus and Scriptor Doctissimus figure as tough old Ulysses and his tough old Boatswain, who do not care a quid of tobacco for any Siren at Sirens' Point; but Harry Warrington is green Telemachus, who, be sure, was very unlike the soft youth in the good Bishop of Cambray's tw
