At the following meal, when the household gathered, there was not a shadow of displeasure upon Madame de Bernstein's countenance. Her behavior toward the entire company, Harry included, was marked by a kindness and cordiality that seemed almost unnatural given the morning's storm. She lavished praise upon the cook, declaring the fricassee exquisite and noting that no eels in the world could compare to those swimming in the Castlewood moats. She staunchly defended the vintage, refusing to accept the notion that the wine was corked or that it would be an extravagance to open a fresh bottle for an "useless old woman" like herself.

When the new wine was served, she raised a toast to Madam Esmond Warrington of Virginia, expressing a hope that Harry had secured his mother's permission to bring back an English wife with him. Harry did not recall his grandmother, yet the Baroness spoke of her with boundless affection—describing her beauty, her goodness, and her profound happiness despite the significant age difference between her and the elderly Colonel Esmond. She recounted tales of their union, describing it as a model of devotion celebrated throughout the countryside, rendering any discussion of marital disparity utterly vain. While Lady Castlewood and her two children sat in respectful silence, Madame Bernstein prattled on, her spirits infectious. Lord Castlewood, though puzzled by this sudden metamorphosis in his aunt's demeanor, carefully concealed any sign of solicitude or doubt, wearing instead the mask of perfect satisfaction.

The Baroness's good humor permeated the entire gathering; no one at table escaped a gracious word from her. When the artless Mr. Will expressed his surprise at her transformation, she frankly admitted her fault. "Complimentary, my dear!" she exclaimed. "Of course I am. I wish to make amends for having been exceedingly rude to everyone this morning." She recalled her childhood in this very room, at this very table, centuries prior. "If I had been naughty in the morning, I used to try to coax my parents at night," she confessed, her eyes twinkling. "I remember in this place, oh, ever so many hundred years ago, how I coaxed my father, my mother, and your grandfather, Harry Warrington. It was that same dish of collared eels which brought the memory back to me. I was as wayward then at seven years old as I am today at seventy. So I confess my sins and ask forgiveness, like a good girl."

"I absolve your ladyship!" cried the chaplain, joining the festivities.

"But your reverence knows not how cross and ill-tempered I truly was," she continued, her voice softening. "I scolded my sister, Castlewood; I scolded her children; I boxed Harry Warrington's ears—all because he would not go with me to Tunbridge Wells."

"But I will go, madam!" cried Mr. Warrington eagerly. "I will ride with you with all the pleasure in life."

"You see, Mr. Chaplain, what good, dutiful children they all are," the Baroness observed, turning her gaze to the others. "'Twas I alone who was cross and peevish. Oh, it was cruel of me to treat them so! Maria, I ask your pardon, my dear."

"Sure, madam, you have done me no wrong," Maria replied humbly to her humble suppliant.

"Indeed I have, a very great wrong, child!" the Baroness insisted. "Because I was weary of myself, I told you that your company would be wearisome to me. Yet you offered to accompany me to Tunbridge, and I rudely refused you."

"Nay, ma'am, if you were sick..." Maria began timidly.

"But it will not annoy me!" interrupted the Baroness, her hands clasped imploringly. "You were most kind to say you would come. I do, of all things, beg, pray, entreat, implore, command that you will come."

Lord Castlewood filled a glass and sipped it slowly, his expression utterly unconscious of the comedy that had unfolded. This, then, was the meaning of the previous farce.

"Anything which can give my aunt pleasure, I am sure, will delight me," Maria said, striving to look as happy as possible.

"You must come and stay with me, my dear," the Baroness promised, vowing to be good-humoured. "And you, my dear lord, will spare your sister to me?"

"Lady Maria Esmond is quite of age to judge for herself regarding such matters," Lord Castlewood replied with a formal bow, though the sentence, when interpreted, likely carried a subtext of, "Plague take the old woman! She is taking Maria away to separate her from this young Virginian."

"Oh, Tunbridge will be delightful!" sighed Lady Maria.

"And Mr. Sampson will go to see Goody Jones for you," Lord Castlewood noted.

While the adults arranged the itinerary, Harry Warrington traced patterns on the tablecloth with his finger. His mind raced with fantasies of delights: endless walks, spirited rides, interminable conversations, delicious shrubberies, and sweet summer houses. He imagined poring over music books, bathed in moonlight, engaged in billing and cooing. The day was approaching. Everyone else was departing—Lady Castlewood to her friends, Madame Bernstein to her waters—and he was to be left alone with his divine charmer. Alone with her and unutterable rapture! The thought of the impending pleasure was maddening. These people were leaving, and he was to be left to enjoy this heaven, to sit at the feet of that angel and kiss the hem of her white robe. *O Gods!* It was a bliss too great to be real. "I knew it couldn't be," thought poor Harry. "I knew something would happen to take her from me."

"But you will ride with us to Tunbridge, Nephew Warrington, and keep us from the highwaymen?" Madame de Bernstein asked.

Harry hoped the company did not see how red his cheeks grew. He forced his voice to remain calm and free of tremor. "Yes," he assured them, "I will ride with your ladyships. I am sure there is no danger." Indeed, Harry felt he would prefer danger to anything else. He vowed mentally that he would slay ten thousand highwaymen if they dared approach his mistress's coach. At the very least, he would ride beside it, catching glimpses of her eyes at the window. He might not speak to her, but he would be near. He would press her blessed hand at the inn at night and feel it resting on his as he led her to the carriage at dawn. With two whole days' journey ahead, perhaps he could stay at Tunbridge for a day or two. Was not the wretch condemned to Newgate grateful for even a brief respite?

One need not choose to describe in length the condition of Mr. Harry Warrington, nor the utter depth of imbecility into which the poor young man had now fallen. Some boys suffer from love gently and favorably; others, when struck by the fever, become sick unto death, carrying the scars of the malady to their graves or into remotest old age. It is not fair to transcribe a young fellow's ravings when he is raging in such a delirium. Suppose he loves a woman twice his age; have we not all read of the young gentleman who committed suicide due to his fatal passion for Mademoiselle Ninon de l'Enclos, who turned out to be his grandmother? Perhaps you, young Harry Warrington of Virginia, are making an ass of yourself. Are there not people in England who bray too loudly? Kick and abuse him, you who have never brayed yourselves; but bear with him, all honest fellow-cardophagi, long-eared messmates, for we recognize a brother-donkey!

"You will stay with us for a day or two at the Wells," Madame Bernstein continued. "You will see us settle into our lodgings. Then you may return to Castlewood and the partridge-shooting, and all the fine pursuits you and my lord are to study together."

Harry bowed in acquiescence. A whole week of heaven! Life was not altogether a blank, then.

"As there is surely to be plenty of company at the Wells," the lady added graciously, "I shall be able to present you."

"Company! Ah! I shan't need company," Harry sighed, though his tone betrayed his eagerness. "I mean that I shall be quite contented in the company of you two ladies." No doubt Mr. Will wondered at his cousin's peculiar tastes.

Since this was to be the last night of cousin Harry's visit to Castlewood, cousin Will suggested that he, the chaplain, and Warrington meet at Harry's quarters to settle accounts. Harry, having emerged as a considerable winner in his recent play transactions with the two gentlemen, had no objection. Accordingly, when the ladies retired for the night and Lord Castlewood withdrew, as was his custom, to his own apartments, the three gentlemen found themselves assembled in Mr. Harry's small chamber before the punch-bowl, which was Will's usual midnight companion.

However, Will's method of settling accounts involved producing a couple of fresh packs of cards and offering to subject Harry's debt to the process of being doubled or acquitted. The poor chaplain possessed no more ready cash than Lord Castlewood's younger brother, and Harry Warrington wished to win the money of neither. Would he cause pain to the brother of his ad
