Let no gentle soul tremble for Mr. Harry Warrington's fate, supposing his shattered steed had borne him swiftly to the end of his earthly journey. Rest assured, at the outset of this chapter, that no tragedy of consequence has befallen our hero. To dispatch a protagonist, still in the bloom of youth, merely because he tumbled from a horse would be a cruelty unworthy of a tale wherein the age of manhood has not yet fully dawned. Indeed, we mourn already for one Virginian who met his end across the Atlantic; surely, we need not extinguish the spirit of the other within the bounds of England? Heroes do not vanish without cause, nor does the chronicle itself meet its grave unless necessity demands it. Had a gentleman perished with every stumble of his mount, the author of this history would long since have joined the silent majority beneath the earth, whereas the unfortunate youth sprawls safely outside, destined to rise anew once delivered into the sanctuary of Madame de Bernstein's household.

To prove that this youngest of the Virginians draws breath, consider this genuine correspondence from the lady who received him after his fall from Master Will's unruly beast, and in whose kindness he found refuge:

"At Her House at Richmond, in Virginia

"If Mrs. Esmond Warrington of Virginia can recall twenty-three years past, when Miss Rachel Esmond attended Kensington Boarding School, she may perhaps remember Miss Molly Benson, her classmate. Any petty squabbles they shared—of which Miss Molly was frequently at fault—are now forgotten, save for the memory of the generous, high-spirited, vivacious Miss Esmond, the Princess Pocahontas, to whom so many of our schoolfellows paid homage.

"Dear Madam! I cannot erase the fact that you were dear Rachel once, as I was your dearest Molly. Though we parted not on terms of perfect friendship when you returned to Virginia, you know how fond we were. I still cherish the gold etui your father gifted me upon his visit to our speech-day at Kensington; we once acted out the quarrel of Brutus and Cassius from Shakespeare. It was but yesterday morning I dreamed we were summoned before the stern Miss Hardwood to recite our lessons, and that, as usual, Miss Rachel Esmond stood above me. How vividly those days remain! How youthful we seem when recalling them! I remember our strolls and drills, our beloved King and Queen walking through Kensington Gardens with their retinue, while the pupils of Miss Hardwood curtsied in a single file. I can still recount our weekly dinners and point to the spot where your garden flourished, ever superior to mine. Your chest of drawers was a model of neatness, whereas mine were a mess. Do you recall the tales we spun in the dormitory, interrupted by Madame Hibou, the French governess, emerging from bed with her hoots? Have you forgotten the dancing master, who claimed to be ambushed by assassins, only to be dispatched by your brother's footmen? My dear, your cousin, Lady Maria Esmond (whose father was, I believe, Viscount Castlewood at that time), has recently visited this house. I spared her mention of those sorrowful times, about which I am now garrulous to Mrs. Esmond.

"Her Ladyship has stayed here, along with another relative of yours, the Baroness of Bernstein. Both ladies have departed for Tunbridge Wells; however, a dearer relative remains in my house, sound asleep, I trust, in the very next chamber. His name is Mr. Henry Esmond Warrington. Now, do you comprehend how you receive this news? Be not alarmed, dear Madam! I perceive you thinking, 'My boy is ill; therefore Miss Molly Benson writes.' Nay, my dear; Mr. Warrington was unwell yesterday, but today he is quite comfortable. Our physician, no less a person than my dear husband, Colonel Lambert, has bled him, reduced his dislocated shoulder, and declares that in two days more, Mr. Warrington shall be fit to travel.

"I fear my girls and I shall regret his swift recovery. Yesterday evening, a loud ringing at our gate disturbed the peace, a sound rare in this quiet retreat unless a wandering beggar sought alms. The servants ran forth and returned with tidings that a young gentleman, having fallen from his horse, lay seemingly lifeless upon the road, encircled by his traveling companions. At this, my Colonel—who is surely the most Samaritan of men!—hurried forth to render aid to the fallen traveler. Soon thereafter, aided by the servants and followed by two ladies, he brought into the house such a pale, lifeless, beautiful youth! Ah, my dear, how I rejoice that your child has found shelter and succor under my roof! That my husband has spared him from agony and fever, and served as the instrument of restoring him to you and health! We shall be friends again, shall we not? I fell grievously ill last year, nearly meeting my end. In those moments, I often thought of you and our estrangement born of anger so many years prior. I began a foolish note to you, which sickness prevented me from finishing, wishing to declare that if death were to claim me, I should depart the world in charity toward every soul I had ever known.

"The Right Honourable Lady Maria Esmond displayed profound maternal tenderness and concern for her young kinsman following his accident. I am certain she possesses a kind heart. The Baroness de Bernstein, being of advanced years, could not be expected to feel as acutely as the younger generation; yet she remained deeply moved and interested until Mr. Warrington regained consciousness, whereupon she expressed anxiety to proceed to Tunbridge, fearing to linger where medical assistance was absent. My Aesculapius laughed gently, stating he would not undertake the care of a lady of quality, yet he vouched for his young patient. Indeed, the Colonel, through his campaigns, has ample experience with such accidents, and I am convinced that were the entire faculty within twenty miles summoned, Mr. Warrington could receive no better treatment. Thus, leaving the young gentleman to the care of me and my daughters, the Baroness and her Ladyship took their leave, the latter reluctant to depart. When he is strong enough, my Colonel will ride with him as far as Westerham, but on his own horses, to an army comrade of Mr. Lambert's residence. Since this letter shall not reach Falmouth via the post until, by God's grace, your son is well and perfectly restored, you need harbor no alarm for him while under the roof of, Madam, your affectionate and humble servant, MARY LAMBERT.

"P.S. Thursday.

"I am glad to learn (Mr. Warrington's colored gentleman informed our staff of this gratifying turn of events) that Providence has blessed Mrs. Esmond with such immense wealth and an heir poised to honor it. Our current means suffice, yet will dwindle when divided among our survivors. Ah, dear Madam! I have heard of your calamity from last year. Though the Colonel and I have raised many children (five), we have lost two, and a mother's heart feels for yours! I confess, my heart yearned for your boy today when, in a manner inexpressibly moving to me and Mr. Lambert, he spoke of his dear brother. 'Tis impossible to behold your son and not to love and esteem him. I am grateful that it has been our lot to succor him in his distress, and that in welcoming a stranger within our gates, we extend hospitality to the son of an old friend.'"

Nature inscribes a letter of credit upon the visage of certain men, honored almost universally where presented. Harry Warrington's countenance bore this stamp in his youth. His eyes burned with brightness, his cheek flushed with health, his gaze so frank and open that almost all who beheld him—even those who sought to deceive him—trusted him implicitly. Yet, as hinted, the lad was not the artless stripling he appeared. He possessed a knowingness commensurate with his blushing cheeks; perhaps more wily and wary than he became in later ages. Surely, a shrewd and generous man, who leads an upright life and harbors no secret blushes for his conscience, grows simpler with age, arriving at the summation of right through more rapid calculations, learning to discard false arguments with ease, and striking the mark of truth with less preliminary aim and mental disturbance. Or is it merely a senile delusion that our vanities cure themselves with the years, rendering us more just in our perceptions of our own and neighbors' shortcomings? I would humbly suggest that young people, though they possess fairer features, larger eyes, and fewer wrinkles around their lids, are often as artful as some of their elders. What little monsters of cunning are your frank schoolboys! With what dexterity they cheat their mothers, hoodwink their fathers, bamboozle the housekeeper, and cringe to the senior boy for whom they toil at school! What a protracted falsehood and five years of hypocrisy and flattery constitute their conduct toward Dr. Birch! And what of the little boys' sisters? Are they any better, or do the little darlings learn a trick or two only after entering the world?

From the aforementioned letter of Mrs. Lambert, it is evident that she, like all virtuous women (and indeed, almost all wicked ones), was a sentimental soul. As she regarded Harry Warrington reclining in her finest bed, following the Colonel's bleeding and setting of his shoulder, and holding her husband
