Colonel Lambert's first impulse, upon grasping the quiet truth revealed by his youngest daughter's turmoil, was anger directed at the young man who had stolen his child's heart. "A plague on all these rascals, whether English or Indian!" he bellowed to his wife. "I wish that fellow had broken his nose against every doorpost save ours."

"Perhaps it is Providence guiding us to cure him of being a scapegrace, my dear," Mrs. Lambert interjected gently, softening the storm. "That fall at our door holds something divine. You laughed at me, Martin, when I spoke of this before; yet if Heaven did not send this young gentleman to us, who did? And it may be for the blessing and happiness of us all that he arrived."

"It is hard, Molly!" groaned the Colonel. "We cherish and fondle them, rear them through sickness and health. We toil, we scheme, we hoard money in stockings and mend our own old coats. If they ache, we cannot sleep; if they desire a whim, we labor day and night to fulfill it. They are darling daddies and dearest papas. Yet on Tuesday morning I am king of my household, and on Tuesday evening, Prince Whippersnapper appears, and my reign ends. A whole lifetime is forgotten and forsaken for a pair of blue eyes, a pair of lean legs, and a head of golden hair."

"'Tis written that women leave all to follow their husbands," the matron said, laying her hand on her husband's arm. "I believe our courtship was not terribly long, Martin."

"'Tis human nature, and what can you expect?" sighed the Colonel. "And I believe I did my duty, though I admit I left my father for you."

"Excellent wench! Perdition catch my soul, but I do love thee, Molly!" the good Colonel declared. "But mark you, your father never loved me. And if I am ever to have sons-in-law..."

"Ever, indeed! Of course my girls must have husbands!" cried Mamma.

"Well, when they come, I shall hate them, madam, just as your father hated me—and quite rightly, for they take his treasure away."

"Do not be irreligious and unnatural, Martin Lambert! I say you are unnatural, sir!" the matron protested.

"Nay, my dear, I have an old tooth in my left jaw, here," he pointed out, tapping his chin. "'Tis natural for the tooth to loosen. But when the dentist pulls it, it is natural I should feel pain. Do you suppose, madam, I do not love Hetty better than any tooth in my head?" Though no woman resists the notion of her daughter finding a mate, however violently a father revolts against the intruder. Mothers and grandmothers are remarried anew in the unions of their young; their souls don the laces and muslins of forty years past, the postilion's white ribbons bloom once more, and they drive away in the post-chaise. What woman, regardless of age, has not stowed away bridal favors and raiment, wrapped in lavender, in the deepest corners of her heart?

"It will be a sorrowful thing, parting with her," Mrs. Lambert murmured, sighing.

"You have settled that point already, Molly," the Colonel laughed. "Should I not go out and order raisins and Corinth grapes for the wedding cake?"

"And then I shall have to leave the house in their care when I travel to her in Virginia. How many miles is it, Martin? Thousands, surely?"

"A hundred and seventy-three thousand, three hundred and ninety-one and three-quarters, my dear, by the nearest path," Lambert answered gravely. "By the other route, through Persia—"

"Oh, give me the path with the least sea, and your dreadful ships, which I cannot bear!" cried the Colonel's spouse. "I pray Rachel Esmond and I shall become better friends. She possessed a very high spirit when we were schoolgirls."

"Shall we not attend to the baby linen, Mrs. Martin Lambert?" her husband suggested, interjecting. Indeed, Mrs. Lambert likely thought there was no cause for wonderment, having noticed some lovely lace caps and bibs at Mrs. Bobbinit's shop that Sunday afternoon. When the discovery was made, and little Hetty lay upon her pillow with feverish cheeks, closed eyes, and a pitiful countenance, her mother regarded the child with perfect equanimity, seeming almost pleased by Hetty's distress.

The girl was not merely unhappy; she was enraged at herself for revealing her secret. Perhaps the knowledge had struck her suddenly, awakening her to her own state of mind. Now, the little maid chose to be as ashamed as if she had committed a crime and been caught. Indignant at her own weakness, she erupted into transports of self-loathing, vowing never to forgive herself for submitting to such humiliation. Thus, the young pard, wounded by the hunter's dart, chafes with rage in the forest, angry at the surprise of the steel in his side, snarling and biting at his sister-cubs and the leopardess, his spotted mother.

Little Hetty tore, gnawed, and growled so ferociously that I would not wish to be her fraternal cub, nor her spotted dam or sire. "What business has any young woman," she cried aloud, "to indulge in such nonsense? Mamma, I ought to be whipped and sent to bed. I know perfectly well that Mr. Warrington cares not a fig for me. I daresay he prefers French actresses and the commonest little milliner-girl in the toy-shop to me. And so he ought, and so they are superior to me. Why, what a fool I am to burst into tears like a ninny about nothing, simply because Mr. Wolfe said Harry plays cards on Sundays! I know he is not clever, like Papa. I believe he is stupid—I am certain he is stupid—but he is not so stupid as I am. Why, of course, I cannot marry him. How am I to cross to America and leave you and Theo? Of course, he likes somebody else, perhaps in America, or Tunbridge, or Jericho, or somewhere. He is a prince in his own country and cannot think of marrying a poor half-pay officer's daughter with twopenny to her fortune. Did you not tell me, when I was a baby, how I cried wanting the moon? I am a baby now, a most absurd, silly, little baby—do not talk to me, Mrs. Lambert, I am one. Only, there is this to say: he knows nothing of it, and I would rather cut out my tongue than tell him."

Dire were the threats Hetty leveled against Theo, should her sister betray her. As for the infant Charley, his mind wholly fixed upon cheese-cakes, he had neither remarked nor been moved by Miss Hester's agitation; and the parents, along with the kind sister, naturally promised to keep the little maid's secret.

"I begin to think it had been best for us to remain at home," sighed Mrs. Lambert to her husband.

"Nay, my dear," replied the other. "Human nature remains human nature. Surely Hetty's mother told me herself that she harbored the beginnings of a liking for a certain young curate before falling head-over-heels in love with a certain young officer of Kingsley's. As for me, my heart was wounded in a dozen places ere Miss Molly Benson took entire possession of it. Our sons and daughters must follow the paths of their parents, I suppose. Why, but yesterday, you scolded me for grumbling at Miss Het's precocious fancies. To do the child justice, she disguises her feelings entirely, and I defy Mr. Warrington to discern from her behavior how she is disposed toward him."

"A daughter of mine and yours, Martin," cried the mother with great dignity, "shall not fling herself at a gentleman's head!"

"Neither herself nor the teacup, my dear," answered the Colonel. "Little Miss Het treats Mr. Warrington like a vixen. He never visits us, yet she boxes his ears in one fashion or another. I protest she is barely civil to him; but, knowing what transpires within the young hypocrite's mind, I am not going to be angry at her rudeness."

"She needs no reason to be rude at all, Martin; and our girl is good enough for any gentleman in England or America. Why, if their ages suit, should they not marry after all, sir?"

"Why, if he desires her, should he not ask her, my dear? I am sorry we came. I intend to put the horses into the carriage and turn their heads homeward immediately."

"But mamma fondly said, 'Depend on it, my dear, that these matters are wisely ordained.' Depend upon it, Martin, it was not for nothing that Harry Warrington was brought to our gate in that manner; and that he and our children are thus brought together again. If that marriage has been decreed in Heaven, a marriage it will be."

"At what age, Molly, I wonder, do women begin and cease matchmaking? If our little chit falls in love and then falls out again, she will not be the first of her sex, Mrs. Lambert. I wish we were on our way home again, and, if I had my will, I would trot off this very night."

"He has promised to drink his tea here tonight. Would you
