Our young Virginian, generous with wealth acquired with ease and cordial to all in his sphere, felt bound by the customs of fashion to entertain his country friends. He secured the Assembly Rooms for the occasion, inviting nearly every remaining guest from Bath Springs. Within, card tables occupied one chamber for those who could not forego the social gambles common to European society; another held a supper of champagne and bowls of negus; while the great hall was reserved for the dance, where Harry Warrington's guests enjoyed themselves in the homely fashion of our ancestors. Yet, I cannot imagine the amusement was particularly spirited. First, the minuets were called. Two or three couples performed them, including the high-ranking spinsters of the assembly. Among these, Lady Maria Esmond, an earl's daughter and the highest-ranked lady present save for the lame Lady Augusta Crutchley, danced the first minuet with Mr. Warrington, her cousin. He acquitted himself to the universal satisfaction of the room, moving with far greater elegance than Mr. Wolfe, who stood with Miss Lowther.

After concluding his dance with Lady Maria, Mr. Warrington requested the honor of walking the next minuet with Miss Theo. Accordingly, Miss Theo, blushing and radiant, performed her exercise to the great delight of her parents and the fury of Miss Humpleby, Sir John Humpleby's daughter of Liphook, who had expected, at the least, to follow Lady Maria. Following the minuets came the country dances. The music, performed by a harp, fiddle, and flageolet perched in a little balcony, played rather feeble and melancholy tunes throughout the evening. If one takes up an old book of music today and plays even a few of those airs, one wonders how people at any time could have found them otherwise than sorrowful. Indeed, there is scarce one air devoid of *amar aliquid*, a distinct tang of sadness. Perhaps it is because they are ancient and defunct, their plaintive echoes calling to us from the limbo of the past, consigned there for this century. Perhaps they were once gay when alive; but when our descendants now hear the works of certain modern masters, they will exclaim, "Bon Dieu, is this the music which amused our forefathers?"

Mr. Warrington had the distinction of a duchess's company at tea—the Duchess of Queensberry, the heroine of Colonel Lambert and Mr. Prior. Though the duchess carefully turned her back on a countess present, laughing loudly and pointing at the latter with her fan, almost the entire company pushed forward to bow, cringe, and smile before this countess, scarcely acknowledging her Grace of Queensberry, her jokes, or her airs. This countess was none other than the Countess of Yarmouth-Walmoden, the lady whom His Majesty George II, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, delighted to honor. She had met Harry Warrington in the walks that morning and had been exceedingly gracious, telling him they would play a game of cards that night. Purblind old Colonel Blinkinsop, imagining the invitation was for him, had bowed profoundly. "Pooh! Pooh!" declared the Countess of England and Hanover. "I do not mean you. I mean the young Firshinian!" And thus everyone congratulated the youth on his good fortune. By nightfall, the world, presumably to demonstrate its loyalty, thronged around Lady Yarmouth. My Lord Bamborough was eager to invite her to quadrille; My Lady Blanche Pendragon, that model of virtue; Sir Lancelot Quintain, that pattern of knighthood; Mr. Dean of Ealing, that exemplary divine; and countless gentlemen, noblemen, generals, colonels, matrons, and spinsters of the highest rank watched for a smile from her or rushed to join her card table. Lady Maria waited upon her with meek respect, and Madame de Bernstein treated the Hanoverian lady with profound gravity and courtesy.

Harry's bow, though lowered only so far as hospitality required, provoked indignation in Miss Hester. She scarce spoke a word to her partner during their dance, and when he led her to the supper-room for refreshment, she remained little more communicative. To enter, they passed Madame Walmoden's card table, who good-naturedly called out to her host as he passed, asking if his "breddy liddle bardner" liked dancing.

"I thank your ladyship," said Miss Hester, tossing up her head, "I do not like dancing, and I do not like cards." Dropping a curtsey like a cheese, she strutted away from the Countess's table.

Mr. Warrington was deeply offended. Sarcasm from the young toward the old pained him; flippant behavior toward himself wounded him. Courteous in his simple way to all he met, he expected like politeness in return. Hetty knew perfectly well what offense she gave; she marked the displeasure reddening on her partner's honest face with a sidelong glance, yet wore her most ingenuous smile. As she approached the sideboard where refreshments lay, she artlessly asked: "What a horrid, vulgar old woman that is; don't you think so?"

"What woman?" asked the young man.

"That German woman—my Lady Yarmouth—to whom all the men are bowing and cringing."

"Her ladyship has been very kind to me," Harry said grimly. "Won't you have some of this custard?"

"And you have been bowing to her, too! You look as if your negus were not nice," Harmlessly continued Miss Hetty.

"It is not very good negus," said Harry, gulping.

"And the custard is bad too! I declare 'tis made with bad eggs!" cried Miss Lambert.

"I wish, Hester, that the entertainment and the company had been better to your liking," said poor Harry.

"'Tis very unfortunate; but I dare say you could not help it," cried the young woman, tossing her little curly head.

Mr. Warrington groaned in spirit, perhaps in body, clenching his fists and teeth. The little torturer artlessly continued, "You seem disturbed: shall we go to my mamma?"

"Yes, let us go to your mamma," cried Mr. Warrington, his eyes glazing, shouting at an unlucky waiter, "Curse you, why are you always standing in the way?"

"La! Is that the way you speak in Virginia?" asked Miss Pertness.

"We are rough there sometimes, madam, and can't help being disturbed," he said slowly, with a quiver running through his whole frame, looking down upon her with fire flashing in his eyes. Hetty saw nothing distinctly afterwards, nor did she speak again until she reached her mother. Never had she seen Harry look so handsome or so noble.

"You look pale, child!" cried her mother, anxious, like all *pavidae matres*.

"'Tis the cold—no, I mean the heat. Thank you, Mr. Warrington." She made him a faint curtsey, and Harry bowed a tremendous bow, walking elsewhere among his guests. He hardly knew what was happening at first, so angry was he.

He was aroused by another altercation, this time between his aunt and the Duchess of Queensberry. When the royal favorite passed the Duchess, Her Grace gave her Ladyship an awful stare out of eyes no longer bright as in the young days when they "set the world on fire"; she turned round with an affected laugh to her neighbor and shot at the jolly Hanoverian lady a ceaseless fire of giggles and sneers. The Countess pursued her game at cards, not knowing, or perhaps not choosing to know, how her enemy was gibing at her. A feud of many years' date existed between their Graces of Queensberry and the family on the throne.

"How you all bow down to the idol! Don't tell me! You are as bad as the rest, my good Madame Bernstein!" the Duchess exclaimed. "Ah, what a true Christian country this is! And how your dear first husband, the Bishop, would have liked to see such a sight!"

"Forgive me, if I fail quite to understand your Grace."

"We are both of us growing old, my good Bernstein, or, perhaps, we won't understand when we don't choose to understand. That is the way with us women, my good young Iroquois."

"Your Grace remarked that it was a Christian country," said Madame de Bernstein, "and I failed to perceive the point of the remark."

"Indeed, my good creature, there is very little point in it! I meant we were such good Christians because we were so forgiving. Don't you remember reading, when you were young, or your husband the Bishop reading when he was in the pulpit, how when a woman amongst the Jews was caught doing wrong, the Pharisees were for stoning her out of hand? Far from stoning such a woman now, look how fond we are of her! Any man in this room would go round it on his knees if yonder woman bade him. Yes, Madame Walmoden, you may look up from your cards with your great painted face and frown with your great painted eyebrows at me. You know I am talking about you; and I intend to go on talking about you, too. I say any man here would go round the room on his knees, if you bade him!"

"I think,
