Colonel Lambert and his good wife had surely consulted together, resolving to remove their little daughter, Hetty, swiftly from the reach of this charming suitor. With complaints of the sort the poor maiden supposedly suffered, absence often acts as a cure for men; yet I hold that women are not so easily healed by the alibi of distance. Some will travel miles and live years apart, and the obstinate disease of affection remains, defying climate and space. One may whip, abuse, or insult them, and still these deluded creatures persist in their fidelity. Indeed, if I may speak after prolonged study, few methods secure the faithfulness of a partner better than judicious ill-treatment, a brisk dose of occasional violence as an alterative, and for daily diet, a cooling but constant neglect. Administer small quantities of love and kindness at sparing intervals; for taken too frequently, this medicine loses its effect. Those who are most indifferent to their husbands are often those cloyed by too much sugar and syrup. I have known a young woman, with every wish gratified, yawn in her adoring husband's face, preferring the conversation of a mere booby; whereas Chloe, whom Strephon flings his bootjack at in the morning and curses before the servants at dinner, creeps fondling to his knee at tea-time when he is rested, patting his head and playing his favorite tunes. When the butler or maid enters with the candles, she looks round proudly, saying, "Now, John, look how good my dearest Henry is!"

Make your game, gentlemen! There is the coaxing line when one is henpecked and the wife is bored out of existence; and there is the manly, selfish system where she answers to the whistle, knows her master, and frisks about him, licking the hand that is raised to do her good. What did the late lamented O'Connell say? "Hereditary bondsmen, know ye not, who would be free, themselves must strike the blow?" Of course you must, in domestic as well as political circles. Up with your cudgels, my enslaved boys!

These remarks will please women, for they have a taste for humor and understand irony. Young Grubstreet, who writes for penny papers, might say, "I told you so! He advocates the thrashing of women! He has no nobility of soul!" Nor do I, my eminent young friend, any more than you have ears. Ladies, I assure you I am only joking; I do not advocate thrashing your sex. Consider yours a hundred times more loving and faithful than ours.

But what use is it if Hetty's parents take her home, if she intends to be just as fond of Harry absent as present? Why not let her see him before Ball and Dobbin depart, and say, "Good-bye, Harry! I was wilful, but you were kind"? She would show no special emotion, too ashamed to betray her secret. Harry is too preoccupied to discover it. He does not know what grief lies behind Hetty's glances or hidden under her innocent smiles. He parts from her calmly, fancying she is happy to return to her music and flowers.

He did not ride partway homeward by his friend's carriage. Having other plans, he returned later to find the Lamberts gone from Tunbridge Wells. Their windows were open, the sign indicating the apartments were to let. A passing sorrow at the blank aspect of rooms once enlivened by such frank countenances may have crossed Harry's mind, but he dined at the White Horse, ate, and called fiercely for his bottle. Meanwhile, poor little Hester choked over her tea as the Lamberts arrived to sleep at Westerham. By morning, the young roses were wan, black circles around her eyes. It was the thunder and the heat; she could not sleep. Home they came. There was the gate where he had fallen, the bed he lay in, the chair where he sat—ages seemed to have passed! What a gulf between today and yesterday! Who was that little child calling chickens or watering roses yonder? Was she the same Hester Lambert? She seemed older than Theo now—who had always been so composed, so clever, so old for her age—but in a night or two, Hester had lived long, long years. Poppy and mandragora could never medicine them to the sweet sleep they tasted yesterday.

Maria Esmond watched the Lambert cavalcade drive away and felt a grim relief. When Harry entered his aunt's drawing-room, flushed with Barbeau's wine, she looked at him with hot eyes. He laughed, rattled in reply to his aunt asking which girl was his sweetheart, gaily declaring he loved them both like sisters, praising the Lamberts highly. "Why is Lambert not a general?" he asked. "His Royal Highness the Duke is very fond of him." Madame Bernstein, delighted with her boy's success, mimicked the Countess's German accent: "Elle ravvole de fous, cher bedid anche!" "You carry off the hearts of all the old women, doesn't he, Maria?" she sneered at her niece, who quivered under the stab.

"You were quite right not to perceive that she cheated at cards, and you play like a grand seigneur," continued Madame de Bernstein. "Did she cheat?" cried Harry, astonished. "I am sure, ma'am, I saw no unfair play." "No more did I, my dear, but I am sure she cheated. Bah! Every woman cheats, I and Maria included, when we can get a chance. But when you play with the Walmoden, you don't do wrong to lose in moderation. Cultivate her. She has taken a fancy to your beaux yeux. Why should your Excellency not be Governor of Virginia? Pay your respects to the Duke at Kensington. The Countess of Yarmouth will be your best friend."

"Why should you not introduce me, aunt?" asked Harry.

The old lady's rouged cheek grew redder. "I am not in favor at Kensington," she said. "All of us want to forget something or somebody. I dare say our ingenu here would like to wipe a sum or two off the slate. Wouldst thou not, Harry?"

Harry turned red, and so did Maria, and his aunt laughed a wicked laugh. What meant those guilty signals on their cheeks? What account was scored upon their memories? I fear Madame Bernstein was right; most folks have ugly reckonings on their consciences which they are glad to be quit of.

If Maria knew one cause of Harry's disquiet, the spinster would have been more unquiet. For some days, Harry had missed a pocket-book. He remembered having it when he drank claret at the White Horse and Gumbo carried him to bed. Seeking it in the morning, none of his servants had seen it. He inquired at the inn but found no trace. He dared not cry the book; he could only make cautious inquiries. If Lady Maria Esmond knew the book was lost, she would be in a terrible condition. The letters contained all sorts of disclosures: a hundred family secrets narrated by an artless correspondent, satire and abuse of persons they met, expostulations about his attentions to other ladies, scorn, scandal, jokes, protests of eternal fidelity—the usual farrago. Would she like those letters read by anyone else? Did she recollect what she said about the Miss Browns and the unfavorable opinion of Mrs. Thompson's character? Regarding Jones himself, whom she subsequently married after disputes broke off her engagement to Edward, would she like Mr. J. to see those remarks? She wouldn't. Be pleased to withdraw that imputation already cast in your mind upon Lady Maria Esmond. No doubt her letters were foolish, as most love-letters are, but it does not follow there was anything wrong. They are foolish when written by young folks, and how much more foolish when written by an old man to a young lass, or vice versa! No wonder Lady Maria should not like her letters read. The spelling mattered less than the writing itself. I for one am determined never to speak or write my mind out regarding anything or anybody. I intend to say of every woman that she is chaste and handsome; of every man that he is handsome, clever, and rich; of every book that it is delightful; of manners that they are gentlemanlike; of dinners luxurious; of conversation lively; of Xantippe that she has a sweet temper; of Jezebel that her color is natural; of Bluebeard that he was indulgent. What? A word against spotless Messalina? An unfavorable view of human nature? King Cheops not a perfect monarch? Oh, you railer at royalty! When this book concludes, I shall change the jaundiced livery, give them rose-colored coats with cherubs, and all characters shall be perfect angels.

Meanwhile, we are in a society of men and women from whose shoulders no wings have sprouted. There is Madame Bernstein, fallen asleep after dinner, eating and drinking too much. Mr. Harry Warrington has gone to play billiards with Count Caramboli; I suspect idleness is his failing. This is what Mr. Chaplain Sampson remarks to Lady Maria as they talk in a low tone, not to disturb Aunt Bernstein's doze.

"A gentleman of Mr. Warrington's means can afford to be idle," says Lady Maria. "Sure you love cards and billiards yourself, my good Mr. Sampson?"

"I don't say, madam, my practice is good, only my doctrine is sound," says the Chaplain with a sigh. "This young gentleman should have employment. He should appear at court,
