Though the Baroness Bernstein had suffered the brunt of the battle described in the previous chapter, when she next encountered her niece, she displayed no trace of resentment or anger. "Of course, my Lady Maria," she said, "you cannot expect me, as Harry Warrington's close relative, to be delighted by the prospect of his marrying a woman who is as old as his mother and possesses no fortune whatsoever. Yet, if he chooses to commit such a folly, the matter is beyond my control. I suspect I would not have taken the offer of five thousand pounds seriously in the heat of our discussion. Was this arrangement already finalized at Castlewood? If I had known how far things had progressed, my dear, I might have spared some unnecessary opposition. Once a pitcher is broken, what railing can possibly mend it?"

"Madam!" interjected Maria sharply.

"Pardon me—I mean no disrespect to your ladyship's honor or character, which, I am sure, remain intact. Harry confirms it, and you confirm it—what further evidence could one desire?"

"You have discussed matters with Mr. Warrington, madam?"

"And he has acknowledged that he made you a pledge at Castlewood: you hold proof of it in his handwriting."

"Certainly I do, madam!" affirmed Lady Maria.

"Oh!" (the elder lady showed no flinch). "And I admit that, initially, I misinterpreted the tone of your letters to him. They implicated other members of the family..."

"Who have spoken most wickedly of me and labored to prejudice me in every possible way against my dear Mr. Warrington. Yes, madam, I admit I wrote against them to vindicate myself."

"But, naturally, you are pained to think that any wretch might seize possession of stories detrimental to our family and turn them into public scandal. Hence your recent unease."

"Precisely so," said Lady Maria. "From Mr. Warrington, I could conceal nothing henceforth, and I spoke freely to him. Yet, that is a vastly different matter from wishing the entire world to know the internal disputes of a noble household."

"Upon my word, Maria, I admire you, and I have done you an injustice. These—these twenty years, let us say."

"I am exceedingly glad, madam, that you conclude by granting me justice at all," replied the niece.

"When I saw you last night, opening the ball with my nephew, can you guess what occupied my thoughts, my dear?"

"I truly have no conception of what the Baroness de Bernstein thought of," said Lady Maria, with hauteur.

"I recalled that you had performed to that exact tune with the dancing-master at Kensington, my dear!"

"Madam, it was an infamous slander."

"Thereby the poor dancing-master received a beating for naught!"

"It is cruel and unkind, madam, to recall that slander—and I shall beg to decline residing any longer with anyone who repeats it," continued Maria, displaying considerable spirit.

"Do you wish to depart? I can imagine you will not find Tunbridge agreeable. It will be intensely hot for you if those letters are discovered."

"There was not a single word against you in them, madam: regarding that, I can assure you."

"So Harry said, and did your ladyship justice. Well, my dear, we are weary of one another and shall be better apart for a while."

"That is precisely my own sentiment," said Lady Maria, bowing low.

"Mr. Sampson can escort you to Castlewood. You and your maid may take a post-chaise."

"We may take a post-chaise, and Mr. Sampson can escort me," echoed the younger lady. "You see, madam, I act like a dutiful niece."

"Do you know, my dear, I have a notion that Sampson has obtained the letters?" said the Baroness, frankly.

"I confess that such a notion has passed through my own mind."

"And you intend to depart in the carriage to coax the letters from him! Delilah! Well, they can serve no purpose for me, and I trust you may retrieve them. When shall you go? The sooner the better, you say? We are women of the world, Maria. We merely exchange epithets when in a passion. We do not require each other's company; and we part on good terms. Shall we proceed to my Lady Yarmouth's? 'Tis her evening. There is nothing like a change of scenery following one of those minor nervous attacks you have experienced, and cards dispel unpleasant thoughts better than any physician."

Lady Maria agreed to attend Lady Yarmouth's gathering and was dressed and ready first, awaiting her aunt in the drawing-room. As Madame Bernstein descended, she remarked that Maria's door remained ajar. "She holds the letters within her stays," the old lady surmised. The pair departed for their entertainment in separate carriages, exhibiting that charming cordiality and mutual respect which women can display both after and even during the bitterest quarrels.

That night, upon their return from the Countess's assembly, Mrs. Brett, Madame Bernstein's maid, presented herself to my Lady Maria's summons, which the lady had rung from her retiring chamber. Betty, Mrs. Brett, was ashamed to admit she was not in a fit condition to attend immediately. Betty had been reveling and merrymaking with Mr. Warrington's black gentleman, with my Lord Bamborough's valet, and several other ladies and gentlemen of that station; and the liquor—Mrs. Brett was shocked to acknowledge it—had proved too potent for Mrs. Betty. Should Mrs. Brett assist my lady in undressing? My lady stated she would dress without assistance and granted Mrs. Brett leave to withdraw. "She carries the letters in her stays," thought Madame Bernstein. They had bid each other an amicable goodnight on the stairs.

Mrs. Betty received a scolding the following morning when she came to wait upon her mistress from the closet adjoining Lady Maria's apartment, wherein Betty lay. She confessed, with contrition, her partiality for rum-punch, which Mr. Gumbo possessed the knack of brewing most delicately. She accepted her reproof with meekness and, having performed her usual duties regarding her lady's person, retired.

Now Betty was one of the Castlewood maids who had been so charmed by Gumbo, and she was a very handsome, blue-eyed lass upon whom Mr. Case, Madame Bernstein's confidential man, had also cast eyes of affection. Consequently, between Messrs. Gumbo and Case, there had arisen jealousies and even quarrels; which had caused Gumbo, who was of a peaceful disposition, to be somewhat shy of the Baroness's gentlemen, the chief of whom vowed they would break the bones or take the life of Gumbo if he persisted in his attentions to Mrs. Betty.

Yet on the night of the rum-punch, though Mr. Case found Gumbo and Mrs. Betty whispering in the doorway amidst the cool breeze, and Gumbo would have turned pale with fear had he been capable, no one could be more gracious than Mr. Case. It was he who proposed the bowl of punch, which was brewed and consumed in Mrs. Betty's room, concocted by Gumbo with exquisite skill. He complimented Gumbo on his music. Though usually a sober man, he insisted upon drinking more and more, until poor Mrs. Betty was reduced to the state that occasioned her ladyship's just censure.

As for Mr. Case himself, who lay outside the house, he was so ill with the punch that he kept his bed the entire following day and failed to muster the strength to appear and wait upon his ladies until supper-time; when his mistress, good-naturedly, rebuked him, remarking that it was not often he sinned in that manner.

"Why, Case, I could have sworn it was you I saw on horseback this morning galloping along the London road," said Mr. Warrington, who was supping with his relations.

"Me! law bless you, sir! I was in bed, and I thought my head would come off with the aching. I ate a morsel at six o'clock and drank a deal of small beer, and I am almost my own man again now. But that Gumbo, saving your honour's presence, I shall not taste a drop of his punch again." And the honest major-domo proceeded with his duties among the bottles and glasses.

As they sat after their meal, Madame Bernstein was sufficiently friendly. She prescribed strong fortifying drinks for Maria, against the recurrence of her fainting fits. The lady suffered such attacks not infrequently. She urged her to consult her London physician and to send up an account of her case via Harry. By Harry! asked the lady. Yes. Harry was departing for two days on an errand for his aunt to London. "I do not care to tell you, my dear, that it concerns business which will do him good. I wish Mr. Draper to insert him into my will, and as I am traveling upon a round of visits when you and I part, I think, for security, I shall request Mr. Warrington to carry my trinket-box in his post-chaise to London with him, for there have been robberies of late, and I have no fancy for being halted by highwaymen."

Maria looked blank at the notion of the young gentleman's departure, yet hoped she might secure his escort back to Castlewood, whither her elder brother had now returned. "Nay," said his aunt, "the lad has been tied to our
