As Mr. Warrington broke his fast, the *London Advertiser* lay open beside his plate, bearing an announcement that called upon all lovers of manly British sport to witness a trial of skill between the renowned champions Sutton and Figg. With immediate resolve, Harry determined to attend these performances. He mounted the pair of horses he had bought the day prior and set off for the Wooden House in Marybone Fields. The youth knew the roads poorly; his carriage veered and tacked far more often than necessity demanded, sending him deep into the green lanes behind Mr. Whitfield's Round Tabernacle at Tottenham Road and through the grounds surrounding Middlesex Hospital. Eventually, however, he arrived at his destination to find a considerable assembly gathered to behold the valorous exploits of the two titans.

A motley crowd of London blackguards surrounded the doors of this temple of British valour, mingling with the horses and equipages of those persons of fashion who, like Mr. Warrington, came to patronize the spectacle. A variety of beggars and cripples hustled the young gentleman, whining for charity, while shoeblack boys scrambled over one another to polish his boots. Nosegay women and flying fruiterers pressed upon Mr. Gumbo, his faithful attendant, offering their wares. Piemen, padlocks, tramps, and strollers of every stripe hung upon the battle-ground like moths about a flame. A flag fluttered from the building, and on the stage before it, a manager, flanked by a drummer and horn-blower, repeatedly announced that the noble English sports were about to commence.

Mr. Warrington paid his admission and secured a seat in a gallery commanding a perfect view of the platform. Below, in the amphitheatre, sat Gumbo. When weariness overtook him, the faithful servant would issue forth into the outer world to drink a pot of beer or play a game of cards with his fellow lacqueys and the coachmen waiting outside. It was a scene where old society was encumbered by a prodigious quantity of servants. Gentlemen and ladies could scarce move without a vassal in attendance—sometimes two or three. Every theatre possessed a footman's gallery; an army of the liveried race crowded chapel-doors, swarmed anterooms, sprawled in halls and on landings. They guzzled, devoured, debauched, cheated, bullied visitors for tips—that noble, old race of footmen is well-nigh gone. Only a few thousand remain among us today. Grand, tall, beautiful, and melancholy, we still behold them on levee days, adorned with nosegays, buckles, plush, and powder. Yet the fatal decree has passed: Uncas with his tomahawk and eagle's plume, and Jeames with his cocked hat and long cane, are passing out of the world where they once walked in glory.

Before the principal combatants appeared, minor warriors and exercises were displayed. A boxing match took place, yet neither fighter proved particularly game, nor were they severely punished, affording Mr. Warrington and the spectators little pleasure. This was followed by cudgel-play, wherein the injuries inflicted were so trivial and unsatisfactory that the company began to hiss and grumble. "The masters! The masters!" shouted the people, demanding the arrival of the famous champions.

Soon, the intrepid Sutton strode up the steps to the stage, sword in hand. He saluted the company with his warlike weapon, making an especial bow to a private box occupied by a stout gentleman who seemed a person of consequence. Sutton was quickly followed by the famous Figg, to whom the stout gentleman waved a hand of approbation. Both men were shirtless, their heads shaven clean but marked by the cracks and scars of many former glorious battles. Upon each champion's burly sword-arm wore an "armiger," a ribbon denoting his color. Now the gladiators shook hands, and as a contemporary poet noted, "The word it was bilboe."

At the commencement of the combat, Great Figg dealt a blow so tremendous at his opponent that, had it struck the other's honest head, that comely noddle would have been shorn off as cleanly as a carving-knife slices a carrot. But Sutton interposed his own sword, catching the blade. The force of Figg's mighty delivery, however, was such that the weapon snapped in his hands, less constant than the heart of him who wielded it. Other swords were now delivered to the warriors. The first blood drawn spouted from the panting side of Figg amidst a yell of delight from Sutton's supporters. Yet the veteran appealed to his audience—and especially to the stout individual in the private gallery—to reveal that the wound was caused by the sword having broken during the previous encounter.

While this parley occurred, Mr. Warrington observed a gentleman in a riding-frock and plain scratch-wig entering the box of the stout personage. Harry recognized him with pleasure as his Tunbridge Wells friend, Lord March and Ruglen. Lord March, who was by no means prodigal of politeness, seemed to show singular deference to the stout gentleman. Harry remarked how his lordship received, with a profound bow, a handful of bank-bills drawn from a pocket-book and handed to him. While thus engaged, Lord March spotted the Virginian. Once his interview with the stout personage concluded, the nobleman crossed to Harry's gallery and warmly greeted his young friend.

They sat and beheld the combat waging with varying success, yet with immense skill and valour on both sides. After sufficient fighting with swords, the warriors fell to with the quarter-staff. The result of this long and delightful battle was that victory remained with the ancient champion, Figg.

During the heat of the contest, a thunderstorm broke over the building. Mr. Warrington gladly accepted a seat in Lord March's chariot, leaving his own phaeton to be driven home by his groom. Harry was in great delectation with the noble sight he had witnessed; he pronounced it something like true sport, and of the best he had seen since his arrival in England. As usual, associating any pleasure he enjoyed with a desire that his dear companion of boyhood should share the amusement, he began to sigh, "I wish..." and then stopped abruptly. "No, I don't," he said.

"What do you wish and what don't you wish?" asked Lord March.

"I was thinking, my lord, of my elder brother, and wished he had been with me," Harry replied. "We had promised to have our sport together at home, you see; and many's the time we talked of it. But he wouldn't have liked this rough sort of sport, and didn't care for fighting, though he was the bravest lad alive."

"Oh! he was the bravest lad alive, was he?" asked my lord, lolling on his cushion and eyeing his Virginian friend with some curiosity.

"You should have seen him in a quarrel with a very gallant officer, our friend—an absurd affair, but it was hard to keep George off him. I never saw a fellow so cool, nor more savage and determined, God help me. Ah! I wish, for the honour of the country, you know, that he could have come here instead of me, and shown you a real Virginian gentleman."

"Nay, sir, you'll do very well," said the amused nobleman. "What is this I hear of Lady Yarmouth taking you into favour?"

"I will do as well as another. I can ride, and, I think, I can shoot better than George; but then my brother had the head, sir, the head!" said Harry, tapping his own honest skull. "Why, I give you my word, my lord, that he had read almost every book that was ever written; could play both on the fiddle and harpsichord, could compose poetry and sermons most elegant. What can I do? I am only good to ride and play at cards, and drink Burgundy." And the penitent hung down his head. "But them I can do as well as most fellows, you see. In fact, my lord, I'll back myself," he resumed, to the other's great amusement.

Lord March relished the young man's naivete, as the jaded voluptuary still to the end always can relish the juicy, wholesome mutton-chop. "By Gad, Mr. Warrington," says he, "you ought to be taken to Exeter Change and put in a show."

"And for why?"

"A gentleman from Virginia who has lost his elder brother and absolutely regrets him. The breed isn't known in this country. Upon my honour and conscience, I believe that you would like to have him back again."

"Believe!" cries the Virginian, growing red in the face.

"That is, you believe you believe you would like him back again. But depend on it you wouldn't. 'Tis not in human nature, sir; not as I read it, at least. Here are some fine houses we are coming to. That at the corner is Sir Richard Littleton's; that great one was my Lord Bingley's. 'Tis a pity they do nothing better with this great empty space of Cavendish Square than fence it with these unsightly boards. By George! I don't know where the town's running. There's Montagu House made into a confounded Don Saltero's museum, with books and stuffed birds and rhinoceroses. They have actually run a cursed cut—the New Road they call it—at the back
