Young Harry Warrington resided in Bond Street, London, living upon the fat of the land and draining bumpers of the finest vintage. To the fashionable world, he was the epitome of the "Fortunate Youth"—young, wealthy, handsome, and blessed. Society, that fickle mistress, embraced him with open arms. Let us not, dear readers, cry too loudly against the selfishness of the world for favoring the young and beautiful while neglecting the aged and disfigured. If I possess the right to select my acquaintances—preferring the lively, well-dressed gentleman who amuses me at the club to the slouching, ill-washed misanthrope or the ceaselessly prating coxcomb—has not society itself a right to make similar choices? Harry was beloved because he was likable; rich, handsome, jovial, well-born, and brave. With boisterous drinkers, he shared songs and bottles; with sporting gentlemen, he loved every chase on foot or horseback. With ladies, he possessed a modest, blushing timidity that rendered him intriguing; and towards those of humbler station, he was magnificently liberal, ever eager to spare them annoyance. Our Virginian was indeed grand, high, and mighty. Yet, in those eras when rank still held sway, maintaining a distance from inferiors brought no unpopularity to a gentleman. Recall that in those days, the Secretary of State knelt before the King with his despatches, and the Under-Secretary dared not sit in his chief's presence. If I were a Secretary of State, I would find kneeling to present a dispatch a tedious ordeal; if an Under-Secretary, standing while the Right Honorable Benjamins and Edwards scrutinized papers would be unbearable. However, *modus in rebus* dictates certain lines must be drawn. I am merely half-pleased when Bob Bowstreet, whose connection to literature runs through Policemen X and Y, and Tom Garbage, an esteemed contributor to the *Kennel Miscellany*, propose fellowship as brothers-in-arms, slap me on the back, and address me as "old boy" or by my Christian name.

During the winter season of 1756–57, the town offered Mr. Warrington every conceivable pleasure, provided he asked. There were operas, though he derived but moderate delight from them amidst the prodigious satire assailing them as foolish, popish, unmanly, and meaningless. There were theaters hosting Mr. Garrick and Mrs. Pritchard at one house, and Mrs. Clive at another. Masquerades and ridottos frequented by the elite, along with private assemblies of lords and ladies beginning and ending with cards, were all within reach. However, Mr. Warrington preferred White's Club above all, finding the play there neither so high nor so fair as elsewhere.

One day, his kinsman, Lord Castlewood, escorted him to court, presenting Harry to His Majesty, who had recently arrived from Kensington. Yet, the gracious sovereign seemed disinclined toward Harry's introducer, perhaps harboring other reasons for his sulkiness. "Oh, heard of you from Lady Yarmouth," the King remarked, addressing Lord Castlewood in German, "the Earl of Castlewood shall tell him that he plays too much!" And with that, the Defender of the Faith turned his royal back.

Lord Castlewood recoiled, visibly frightened by this icy reception.
"What does he say?" asked Harry.
"His Majesty thinks they play too high at White's, and is displeased," the nobleman whispered.
"If he does not want us, we had better not return, that is all," said Harry simply. "I never, somehow, considered that German fellow a real King of England."
"Hush! For Heaven's sake, hold your confounded colonial tongue!" cried the lord, panic rising. "Do you not see the walls here have ears?"
"And what then?" asked Mr. Warrington, bewildered. "Why, look at the people! Hang me, if it is not quite a curiosity! They were all shaking hands with me, bowing, flattering me just now; and at present, they avoid me as if I were the plague!"

Then, a broad-faced, broad-shouldered gentleman in a scarlet-laced waistcoat and an old-fashioned wig stepped forward. "Shake hands, nephew," he declared. "I heard what you said. I have ears like the wall, look you. And, now, if other people show you the cold shoulder, I'll give you my hand;" and so saying, the gentleman extended a great brown hand, grasping Harry's firmly. "Something of my brother about your eyes and face. Though I suppose in your island you grow more wiry and thin. I am thine uncle, child. My name is Sir Miles Warrington. My lord knows me well enough."

"My lord looked very frightened and yellow," observed the narrative voice. "Yes, my dear Harry. This is your paternal uncle, Sir Miles Warrington."
"Might as well have come to see us in Norfolk, as dangle about playing the fool at Tunbridge Wells, Mr. Warrington, or Mr. Esmond—which do you call yourself?" the Baronet chided. "The old lady calls herself Madam Esmond, doesn't she?"
"My mother is not ashamed of her father's name, nor am I, uncle," said Mr. Harry, rather proudly.
"Well said, lad! Come home and eat a bit of mutton with Lady Warrington at three, in Hill Street—that is, if you can do without your White's kickshaws. You need not look frightened, my Lord Castlewood! I shall tell no tales out of school."
"I—I am sure Sir Miles Warrington will act as a gentleman!" stammered the lord, in much perturbation.
"Belike, he will," growled the Baronet, turning on his heel. "And thou wilt come, young man, at three; and mind, good roast mutton waits for nobody. Thou hast a great look of thy father. Lord bless us, how we used to beat each other! He was smaller than me, and in course younger; but many a time he had the best of it. Take it he was henpecked when he married, and Madam Esmond took the spirit out of him when she got him in her island. Virginia is an island. Ain't it an island?"
Harry laughed and said, "No!" And the jolly Baronet, departing, added, "Well, island or not, thou must come and tell all about it to my lady. She'll know whether 'tis an island or not."

"My dear Mr. Warrington," said the lord, with an appealing look, "I need not tell you that, in this great city, every man has enemies, and that there is a great, great deal of detraction and scandal. I never spoke to you about Sir Miles Warrington, precisely because I did know him, and because we have had differences together. Should he permit himself remarks to my disparagement, you will receive them *cum grano salis*, and remember that it is from an enemy they come." And the pair walked out of the King's apartments into Saint James's Street. Harry found the news of his cold reception at court had already preceded him to White's. The King had turned his back upon him; the King was jealous of Harry's favour with the favourite; Harry was *au mieux* with Lady Yarmouth. A score of gentlemen wished to compliment him upon his conquest. Before night, it was a settled matter that this was amongst the other victories of the Fortunate Youth.

Sir Miles related these matters to his wife and Harry when the young man appeared at the appointed hour at the Baronet's dinner-table, rallying him in his simple, rustic fashion. The lady, initially a grand and stately personage, admitted to Harry that the reputation the world had forged for him was so malign that, at first, she had given him but a frigid welcome. With the young ladies, Sir Miles's daughters, greetings consisted of "How d'ye do, cousin?" and "No, thank you, cousin," accompanied by numerous prim curtseys to the Virginian as they greeted and took leave of him. The little boy, the heir of the house, dined at table under the care of his governor; having his glass of port by Papa after dinner, he gave loose rein to his innocent tongue and asked many questions of his cousin. Finally, the innocent youth, gazing intently at Harry, asked, "Are you wicked, cousin Harry? You don't look very wicked!"
"My dear Master Miles!" the tutor protested, turning very red.
"But you know you said he was wicked!" cried the child.
"We are all miserable sinners, Miley," explained Papa. "Haven't you heard the clergyman say so every Sunday?"
"Yes, but not so very wicked as cousin Harry. Is it true that you gamble, cousin, and drink all night with wicked men, and frequent the company of wicked women? You know you said so, Mr. Walker—and Mamma said so, too, that Lady Yarmouth was a wicked woman."
"And you are a little pitcher," cried Papa. "And my wife, nephew Harry, is a staunch Jacobite—you won't like her the worse for that. Take Miles to his sisters, Mr. Walker, and Topsham shall give thee a ride in the park, child, on thy little horse." The idea of the little horse consoled Master Miles; for, when
