Upon the rejection of his peace offerings, our warlike young American chief chose to be in great wrath—not merely against Colonel Lambert, but against the entire lineage of that gentleman. "He has humiliated me before the girls!" thought the young man, his brow furrowed beneath his wig. "He and Mr. Wolfe, who were forever preaching morality to me and affecting airs of superior protection, have again held me up to the family as a scapegrace and prodigal. They are so virtuous they will not even shake hands with me, forsooth; and when I seek to show them a little common gratitude, they fling my presents in my face!"

"Why, sir, the things must be worth a little fortune!" observed Parson Sampson, casting an eye of covetousness upon the two morocco boxes wherein rested Mr. Sparks's golden gewgaws on their white satin cushions.

"They cost some money, Sampson," replied the young man. "Not that I would grudge ten times the amount to people who have been kind to me."

"No, faith, sir, not if I know your honour!" interjected Sampson, seizing every opportunity to praise his young patron. "The repeater, they told me, was a great bargain, and worth a hundred pounds at Paris. Little Miss Hetty herself said she longed to have a repeating watch."

"Oh, what a love!" cried the chaplain, his eyes shining. "'Tis adorned with a little circle of pearls on the back, and a diamond knob for the handle! Why, 'twould win any woman's heart, Sir!"

"There passes an apple-woman with a basket. I have a mind to fling the thing out to her!" cried Mr. Warrington, fiercely.

When Harry ventured out upon business, which took him to the City and the Temple, his parasite did not follow him far into the Strand, turning away with a terror of Chancery Lane, its inhabitants, and precincts. Mr. Warrington proceeded to his broker, and they walked to the Bank, where they conducted some little business. After the signing of a trifling signature or two, Harry departed with a certain number of crisp bank-notes in his pocket. The broker escorted Mr. Warrington to one of the great dining-houses for which the City was famous; and afterwards showed him the Virginian Walk upon 'Change, through which Harry passed rather shamefacedly. *What would a certain lady in Virginia say,* he thought, *if she knew that I was carrying off in that bottomless gambler's pocket a great portion of my father's patrimony?* Those are all Virginia merchants, he reasoned, and they are all talking to one another about me, saying, "That is young Esmond, of Castlewood, on the Potomac, Madam Esmond's son; and he has been losing his money at play, and he has been selling out so much, and so much, and so much."

His spirits did not rise until he had passed under the Traitors' Heads of Temple Bar and was fairly out of the City. From the Strand, Mr. Harry walked home, looking in at St. James's Street by the way, but there was nobody there as yet, the company not coming to the Chocolate-House till a later hour. Arrived at home, Mr. Harry drew out his bundle of bank-notes, placed three of them into a sheet of paper which he sealed carefully, having previously inscribed within the sheet the words, "Much good may they do you. H. E. W." Directing this packet to the Reverend Mr. Sampson, he left it on the chimney-glass, instructing his servants to deliver it to that divine when he should come in.

Now his honour's phaeton was brought to the door, and he stepped in, intending to drive round the park; but the rain falling, or the east wind blowing, or some other cause arising, his honour turned his horses' heads down St. James's Street and was back at White's about three o'clock. Scarcely anybody had come in yet. It was the hour when folks were at dinner. However, there sat my cousin Castlewood, lounging over the Public Advertiser, having just come off from his duty at Court hard by. Lord Castlewood yawned over the newspaper. What shall they do? Shall they have a little piquet? Harry had no objection to a little piquet. "Just for an hour," said Lord Castlewood. "I dine at Arlington Street at four." "Just for an hour," said Mr. Warrington, and they called for cards. "Or shall we have 'em in upstairs?" said my lord. "Out of the noise?" "Certainly, out of the noise," said Harry.

At five o'clock, a half-dozen gentlemen had come in after their dinner, and were at cards, or coffee, or talk. The folks from the ordinary had not left the table yet. There the gentlemen of White's would often sit till past midnight. One toothpick pointed over the coffee-house blinds into the street. "Whose phaeton?" asked Toothpick 1 of Toothpick 2. "The Fortunate Youth's," said No. 2. "Not so fortunate the last three nights. Luck confoundedly against him. Lost, last night, thirteen hundred to the table. Has Mr. Warrington been here to-day, John?" "Mr. Warrington is in the house now, sir. In the little tea-room with Lord Castlewood since three o'clock. They are playing at piquet," said John. "What fun for Castlewood!" said No. 1, with a shrug. The second gentleman growled out an execration. "Curse the fellow!" he said. "He has no right to be in this club at all. He doesn't pay if he loses. Gentlemen ought not to play with him. Sir Miles Warrington told me at court the other day that Castlewood has owed him money on a bet these three years." "Castlewood," said No. 1, "doesn't lose if he plays alone. A large company flurries him, you see—that's why he doesn't come to the table." And the facetious gentleman grinned, showing all his teeth, polished perfectly clean. "Let's go up and stop 'em," growled No. 2. "Why?" asked the other. "Much better look out the window. A lamplighter is going up the ladder—a famous sport. Look at that old putt in the chair: did you ever see such an old quiz?" "Who is that just gone out of the house?" "As I live, it's Fortunatus! He seems to have forgotten that his phaeton has been here, waiting all the time. I bet you two to one he has been losing to Castlewood." "Jack, do you take me to be a fool?" asked the one gentleman of the other. "Pretty pair of horses the youth has got. How he is flogging 'em!" And they saw Mr. Warrington galloping up the street, scared coachmen and chairmen clearing before him; presently my Lord Castlewood was seen to enter a chair and go his way.

Harry drove up to his own door. It was but a few yards, and those poor horses had been beating the pavement all this while in the rain. Mr. Gumbo was engaged at the door in conversation with a country-looking lass, who tripped off with a curtsey. Mr. Gumbo was always engaged with some pretty maid or other. "Gumbo, has Mr. Sampson been here?" asked Gumbo's master from his driving-seat. "No, sar. Mr. Sampson have not been here!" answered Mr. Warrington's gentleman. Harry bade him go upstairs and bring down a letter addressed to Mr. Sampson. "Addressed to Mr. Sampson? Oh yes, sir," said Mr. Gumbo, who couldn't read. "A sealed letter, stupid! On the mantelpiece, in the glass!" said Harry; and Gumbo leisurely retired to fetch that document. As soon as Harry had it, he turned his horses' heads towards St. James's Street, and the two gentlemen, still yawning out of the window at White's, beheld the Fortunate Youth, in an instant, back again.

As they passed out of the little tea-room where he and Lord Castlewood had had their piquet together, Mr. Warrington had seen that several gentlemen had entered the play-room, and that there was a bank there. Some were already steadily at work, and had their gaming jackets on: they kept such coats at the club, which they put on when they had a mind to sit down to a regular night's play. Mr. Warrington went to the clerk's desk, paid his account of the previous night, and, sitting down at the table, called for fresh counters. This had been decidedly an unlucky week with the Fortunate Youth, and tonight was no more fortunate than previous nights. He called for more counters, and more presently. He was a little pale and silent, though very easy and polite when talked to. But he could not win. At last he got up. "Hang it! Stay and mend your luck!" said Lord March, who was sitting by his side with a heap of counters before him, green and white. "Take a hundred of mine, and go on!" "I have had enough for to-night, my lord," said Harry, and rising, he went away, ate a broiled bone in the coffee-room, and walked back to his lodgings
