To the loyal hearts of Britain, the account of Mr. George Warrington's conduct toward a gallant and gracious Prince—the beloved son of the greatest monarch and Captain-General of the Army—must inevitably stir a spirit of respectful indignation. Consider the inestimable favor slighted; consider the chance of promotion cast aside like a discarded glove. It seemed to Will Esmond, whose tongue was always heavy with blasphemy, that his cousin's behavior demanded the strongest curses in the book. He voiced his delight that the "confounded young Mohock" was effectively cutting his own throat, wishing nothing more than to see the younger brother descend to hell, followed closely by the elder. Upon first meeting him, Will declared he would ensure George understood precisely what he thought of him.

"If you intend to insult George, at least take care that his brother Harry is out of hearing!" cried Lady Maria, her voice sharp enough to summon further imprecations from Mr. Will regarding his twin kin.

"My lord!" said Will. "No more squabbling! We cannot have warriors galore in the family."

"I never heard your lordship claimed as one!" Maria retorted.

"Never, my dear; quite the contrary! Will is our champion, and one is quite sufficient for the house. So I dare say, with the two Mohocks present; George is the student, and Harry is the fighting man. When you intended to quarrel, Will, what a pity it was you had not George, instead of the other, to your hand!"

"Your lordship's hand is famous—at piquet," observed Will's mother.

"It is a pretty one," said my lord, examining his fingers with a simpering air. "My Lord Hervey's glove and mine were of a size. Yes, my hand, as you say, is more fitted for cards than for war. Yours, my Lady Castlewood, is pretty dexterous, too. How I bless the day when you bestowed it on my lamented father!" In this playful exchange, as in other games of skill, his lordship found satisfaction, possessing a cool head capable of beating his entire family around.

When Madame de Bernstein learned of Mr. Warrington's blunder, she was exceedingly angry, storming and scolding her household. She would have scolded George herself, but age had eroded the courage of her youth, and she harbored a lingering fear of her nephew, treating him with undue respect. "You will never make your fortune at court, nephew!" she groaned when he visited her soon after his discomfiture.

"It was never my wish, madam," said Mr. George, in a stately manner.

"Your wish was to help Harry? You might have been of service to your brother had you accepted the Duke's offer. Princes do not love to have their favors refused, and I do not wonder that his Royal Highness was offended."

"General Lambert said the same thing," George confessed, turning slightly red. "And I see now that I was wrong. But you must remember I had never seen a court before, and I suppose I am scarce likely to shine in one."

"I think possibly not, my good nephew," said the aunt, taking a pinch of snuff. "And what then?" asked George. "I never had ambition for that kind of glory, and can make myself quite easy without it. When his Royal Highness spoke to me—most kindly, as I own—my thought was, 'I shall make a very bad soldier, and my brother would be a very good one.' He possesses a hundred qualities for the profession in which I am deficient; he would serve a Commanding Officer far better than I ever could. Say the Duke is in battle, and his horse is shot, as my poor chief's was at home; would he not be better borne by a beast with courage and strength to carry him anywhere, than by one that could not support his weight?"

"Au fait. His Royal Highness's charger must be a strong one, my dear!" remarked the old lady.

"Expende Hannibalem," muttered George with a shrug. "Our Hannibal weighs no trifle."

"I do not quite follow you, sir, and your Hannibal," the Baroness observed.

"When Mr. Wolfe and Mr. Lambert remonstrated with me as you have done, madam," George replied with a laugh, "I made this same defense. I told them I offered the Prince the best soldier in the family, and the gentlemen allowed that my blunder at least had some excuse. Who knows but they may set me right with his Royal Highness? The taste I have had of battles has shown me how little my genius inclines that way. We saw *The Scottish Chiefs* last night, and when the hero, young Norval, spoke of longing to follow some warlike lord to the field, I thought to myself, 'How like my Harry is to him, save that he does not brag!' Harry is currently pining for a red coat, and if we do not mind, will take the shilling. He keeps the map of Germany perpetually under his eyes and follows the King of Prussia wherever he goes. He fears neither men nor gods. As for me, I love my books and quiet above all else, preferring to read about battles in Homer or Lucan."

"Then what made a soldier of you at all, my dear? And why did you not send Harry with Mr. Braddock, instead of going yourself?" Madame de Bernstein pressed.

"My mother loved her younger son the best," George answered darkly. "Besides, with the enemy invading our country, it was my duty, as the head of our family, to go on the campaign. Had I been a Scotchman twelve years ago, I should have been..."

"Hush, sir! Or I shall be more angry than ever!" the old lady exclaimed, though with a perfectly pleased expression.

George's explanation succeeded in appeasing Madame de Bernstein, whose principles were, we fear, somewhat loose. However, to the loyal hearts of Sir Miles Warrington and his lady, the young man's conduct delivered a severe blow. "I should have thought," her ladyship said, "from my sister Esmond Warrington's letter, that my brother's widow was a woman of good sense and judgment, and that she had educated her sons in a becoming manner. But what, Sir Miles, what, my dear Thomas Claypool, can we think of an education which has resulted so lamentably for both these young men?"

"The elder seems to know a power of Latin, though, and speaks French and German too," noted Mr. Claypool. "I heard him with the Hanover Envoy at the Baroness's rout. The French he jabbered easily; and when he was at a loss for High Dutch, he and the Envoy began in Latin, talking away until all the room stared."

"It is not language, but principles, Thomas Claypool!" the virtuous matron cried. "What must Mr. Warrington's principles be when he could reject an offer made by his Prince? Can he speak High Dutch? So much the more ought he to have accepted his Royal Highness's condescension and made himself useful in the campaign! Look at our son, look at Miles!"

"Hold up thy head, Miley, my boy!" urged Papa.

"I trust, Sir Miles, that as a member of the House of Commons and an English gentleman, you will attend his Royal Highness's levee tomorrow and say, if such an offer had been made to us for that child, we would have taken it, though our boy is but ten years of age."

"Faith, Miley, thou wouldst make a good little drummer or fifer!" Papa chuckled. "Shouldst like to be a little soldier, Miley?"

"Anything, sir, anything! A Warrington ought to be ready at any moment to have himself cut in pieces for his sovereign!" cried the matron, pointing to the boy. The child, however, as soon as he comprehended his mother's proposal, protested with a loud roar, amidst which he was spirited away by Screwby. In obedience to these conjugal orders, Sir Miles attended the levee the next day and made a protest of his love and duty, which the Prince graciously accepted, remarking:

"Nobody ever supposed that Sir Miles Warrington would ever refuse any place offered to him."

A compliment indeed, repeated everywhere by Lady Warrington, demonstrating how implicitly the august royal family relied on the loyalty of the Warringtons.

Consequently, when this worthy couple saw George, they received him with a ghastly commiseration—a look akin to that extended by dear relatives when we have done something fatal or clumsy, entered a room just as the company has been abusing us, or seen our names in the commercial columns of the London Gazette. Who does not know that face of pity? Whose dear relations have not so deplored him, not dead, but living? If you have never been in scrapes, never sown a handful of wild oats, always remained fortunate, good, and careful, if butter has never melted in your mouth and an imprudent word escaped your lips, if you have never sinned and repented, then, sir, you are a wiseacre who will not waste time over an idle novel, and it is not *de te* that the fable is narrated.

It was hardly fair for Sir Miles to turn upon George, angry with his nephew for refusing the promotion offered by his Royal Highness, for Sir Miles himself had agreed with George's view
