George Warrington allowed his legal studies no hindrance to his comforts or his constitution. Madam Esmond, in her letters, had taught him that though he sat amidst nameless students in hall-commons, he bore a name of ancient dignity and could stand in rank with the foremost of his country. She urged him to study as a gentleman, not as a mere professional drudge. To this injunction, the young man complied. Thus, he was not of the rank-and-file of the law, but a volunteer in her service, akin to those young gentlemen of whom we have spoken. While the law a century prior was still a jealous mistress demanding exclusive attention—far less rigorous than she is nowadays, who scarcely grants her votaries time for amusement, recreation, sleep, or dinner—it allowed its disciples considerable leisure. Murray, it is said, might have been an Ovid but preferred the ermine of the Lord Chief Justice. Perhaps Mr. Warrington might have risen to a peerage and the woolsack had he studied longer, been a dexterous courtier, and a favorite of attorneys. As it was, he behaved to Themis with decent respect, yet he loved letters far more than law. The black-letter of Chaucer was infinitely more agreeable to him than the Gothic pages of Hale and Coke.

In those quaint times, letters were truly loved, and authors held sway as authorities. Gentlemen appealed to Virgil or Lucan in Courts and Parliament. "What said Statius, Juvenal?" they asked, "let alone Tully or Tacitus!" on such points. Their reign is now ended; the good old Heathens are no more in fashion than the worship of Jupiter and Juno. The age of economists and calculators has superseded theirs; Tooke's *Pantheon* is deserted and ridiculed. Now and then, perhaps, a Stanley kills a kid, a Gladstone bangs up a wreath, a Lytton burns incense, in honor of the Olympians. Yet, who cares at Lambeth, Birmingham, or the Tower Hamlets for ancient rites? Who the plague are the Muses, and what is the use of all that Greek and Latin rubbish? What is Elicon, and who cares? Who was Thalia, pray, and what is the length of her *i*? Is Melpomene's name in three or four syllables? And do you know from whose design I stole that figure of Tragedy which adorns the initial *G* of this chapter?

It has been noted how Mr. George, in his youth and during the long leisure he enjoyed at home and later in his imprisonment within the French fort on the banks of the Monongahela, whiled away his idleness by paying court to Melpomene. The result of their union was a tragedy, omitted from Bell's Theatre, though I dare say it is no worse than some pieces printed there. Most young men pay respects to the Tragic Muse first, falling in love with women far older than themselves. Let the candid reader own, if he ever had a literary turn, that his ambition was of the highest; however, in riper age, he might come down in pretensions, thinking translating an ode of Horace or turning a song of Waller or Prior into decent alcaics was about the utmost of his capability. Tragedy and epic engaged his green, unknowing youth, and no prize but the highest seemed fit for him.

Thus, upon coming to London, George attended theatrical performances at both houses, frequented the theatrical coffee-houses, and heard the opinions of critics. He might be seen at the Bedford between plays or supping at the Cecil alongside wits and actors. Here he gradually acquainted himself with the players and those writers and poets known to the public. The tough old Macklin, the frolicsome Foote, the vivacious Hippisley, and the sprightly Mr. Garrick himself occasionally graced these houses of entertainment. Our gentleman, by his wit, modesty, and the high character for wealth he possessed, became very much liked in the coffee-house circles. Actors drank bowls of punch with him; critics supped at his expense with great affability. To be intimate with an author or actor had been the delight of many a young man; actually to hob-nob with Bobadil or Henry the Fifth, to accept a pinch from Aristarchus's own box, or to hand Monimia to her chair, were privileges delighting to any of a poetic turn. No wonder George Warrington loved the theatre. Moreover, he took satisfaction in thinking his mother only half-approved of plays, thereby feasting on fruit forbidden at home. He gave several elegant entertainments to the players, and it was even said that one or two distinguished geniuses had condescended to borrow money of him.

As he polished and added new beauties to his masterpiece, he sought the counsel of friends. Mr. Spencer, his new acquaintance of the Temple, gave a breakfast at his chambers in Fig Tree Court, where Mr. Warrington read part of his play. The gentlemen present pronounced it to have uncommon merit. Even the learned Mr. Johnson, invited, remarked that the piece showed talent. It warred against the unities, to be sure, but these had been violated by others, and Mr. Warrington might sacrifice them as well. There was a quality in Mr. W.'s tragedy reminding Mr. Johnson both of *Coriolanus* and *Othello*. "And two very good things too, sir!" the author pleaded. "Well, well, there was no doubt on that point; and 'tis certain your catastrophe is terrible, just, and being in part true, is not the less awful," remarked Mr. Spencer.

The plot of Mr. Warrington's tragedy was indeed full of battle and murder. A favorite book of his grandfather had been the life of Old George Frundsberg of Mindelheim, a colonel of foot-folk in the Imperial service at the Battle of Pavia and during the wars of the Constable Bourbon. One of Frundsberg's military companions was a certain Carpzow, or Carpezan, whom our friend selected as his tragedy hero. The first act, as it stood in Sir George Warrington's manuscript, was set before a convent on the Rhine, besieged by Lutherans under Carpezan. A godless gang, they had pulled the beards of Roman friars and torn the veils of hundreds of religious women. A score trembled within the walls, promising surrender if succours did not arrive before midday. Meanwhile, there was an armistice, and sentries looked on with hungry eyes as soldiers gambled on the grass before the gate.

Twelve o'clock! *Ding, ding, dong!* sounded the convent bell. No succours had arrived. "Open gates, warder! Admit the famous Protestant hero, the terror of Turks on the Danube and Papists in the Lombard plains—Colonel Carpezan!" See, he came, clad in complete steel, his hammer of battle over his shoulder, having battered so many infidel sconces, flags displayed, trumpets blowing. "No rudeness, my men," said Carpezan. "The wine is yours, and the convent larder and cellar are good: the church plate shall be melted. Any of the garrison who choose to take service with Gaspar Carpezan are welcome, and shall have good pay. No insult to the religious ladies! I have promised them a safe-conduct, and he who lays a finger on them hangs! Mind that Provost Marshal!" The Provost Marshal, a huge fellow in a red doublet, nodded.

"We shall see more of that Provost Marshal," Mr. Spencer explained to his guests. "A very agreeable acquaintance, I am sure," said Mr. Johnson, wagging his head over his tea. "This scene of mercenaries and camp-followers is novel and stirring, Mr. Warrington."

The Abbess and her oldest ladies appeared before the conqueror. Conqueror as he was, they heard him in their sacred halls. They knew of his violent behavior in conventual establishments; that hammer of his had smashed many sacred images, and pounds of convent plate melted. No wonder the Abbess-Princess of St. Mary's, a lady of violent prejudices and noble birth, disliked the lowborn heretic lordling her convent. She told Carpezan a bit of her mind. In this scene, where the lady gained somewhat the upper hand, the audience at the Temple was pleased. Terrible as he might be in war, Carpezan was shaken at first by the Abbess's brisk charge of words; conqueror as he was, he seemed at first conquered by his actual prisoner. But such an old soldier was not to be beaten ultimately by any woman. "Pray, madam," said he, "how many ladies are there in your convent for whom my people shall provide conveyance?" The Abbess, with a look of trouble and anger, said that besides herself, the noble sisters of Saint Mary's House were twenty-three. She was going to say twenty-four, then corrected herself. "Ha! why this hesitation?" asked Captain Ulric, one of Carpezan's gayest officers.

The dark chief pulled a letter from his pocket. "I require from you, madam," he said sternly, "the body of the noble lady Sybilla of Hoya. Her brother was my favourite captain, slain by my side in the Milanese. By his death, she becomes heiress of his lands. 'Tis said a greedy uncle brought her hither and fast immured the lady against her will. The damsel shall
