The petty skirmish between George and his cousin had effectively severed George's frequent visits to Bloomsbury. Now, Mr. Will was even more assiduous in his attentions, and with both parties legally bound to keep the peace, George found it increasingly difficult to restrain his hands from striking his cousin. Yet, amidst this tension, the naive Lydia possessed a peculiar, shifting manner of receiving her friends. Six weeks prior, she had been madly jealous of George's preference for another; now, she seized every opportunity to compliment Theo in conversation. "Miss Theo is such a quiet, gentle creature," Lyddy insisted, convinced that George was simply the ideal husband for her. "How fortunate that horrid quarrel was prevented!" she mused, recalling how the constables had arrived just in time. To her ears, the image of Mr. Esmond cursing and swearing, raging at his thwarted duel, was nothing short of ridiculous. "But the arrival of the constables saved your valuable life, dear Mr. George," she said with a soft smile. "And I am sure Miss Theo ought to bless them forever." She pressed further, asking if he wouldn't stop to dine with Mr. Esmond today. "You don't like being in his company?" she ventured. "He can't do you any harm; and I am sure you will do him none." Such kind speeches, delivered by a small girl to a gentleman with such strange inadvertence in the presence of other men and ladies, were unlikely to make Mr. Warrington eager for the society of the young American lady.

For several days, George's meeting with Mr. Will remained unknown in Dean Street, for he wished to spare those kind folks the disturbance of his quarrel. However, once the ladies became aware of the incident, a great flurry ensued. "You were actually going to take a fellow-creature's life, and you came to see us, and said not a word!" Theo exclaimed, horrified. "Oh, George, it was shocking!"

"My dear, he had insulted me and my brother," George pleaded. "Could I let him call us both cowards and sit by saying, 'Thank you'?"

The General sat by, looking very grave. "You know you think, papa, it is a wicked and un-Christian practice," Theo continued, "and have often said you wished gentlemen would have the courage to refuse!"

"To refuse?" said Mr. Lambert, still glum.

"It must require a prodigious strength of mind to refuse," Jack Lambert observed, looking as gloomy as his father. "And I think if any man were to call me a coward, I should be apt to forget my orders."

"You see brother Jack is with me!" cried George.

"I must not be against you, Mr. Warrington," Jack declared.

"Mr. Warrington!" cried George, flushing red.

"Would you, a clergyman, have George break the Commandments and commit murder, John?" Theo asked, aghast.

"I am a soldier's son, sister," the young divine replied dryly. "Besides, Mr. Warrington has committed no murder at all. We must soon be hearing from Canada, father. The great question of the supremacy of the two races must be tried there ere long!" As he spoke, he turned his back on George, who eyed him with wonder.

Hetty, looking pale at Jack's original remark, was led out of the room by some artful pretext from her sister. George rose and followed the retreating girls to the door. Returning moments later, he gasped, "Great powers, gentlemen! I believe, on my honour, you are giving me the credit of shirking this affair with Mr. Esmond!" The clergyman and his father exchanged looks.

"A man's nearest and dearest are always the first to insult him," George flashed out.

"You mean to say, 'Not guilty'? God bless thee, my boy!" cried the General. "I told thee so, Jack." He rubbed his hand across his eyes, blushed, and wrung George's hand with all his might.

"Not guilty of what, in heaven's name?" asked Mr. Warrington.

"Nay," said the General. "Mr. Jack, here, brought the story. Let him tell it. I believe 'tis a ---- lie, with all my heart." Uttering this wicked expression, the General walked out of the room.

The Rev. J. Lambert looked uncommonly foolish. "And what is this--this d----d lie, sir, that somebody has been telling of me?" George asked, grinning at the young clergyman.

"To question the courage of any man is always an offence to him," said Mr. Lambert. "And I rejoice that yours has been belied."

"Who told the falsehood, sir, which you repeated?" bawled out Mr. Warrington. "I insist on the man's name!"

"You forget you are bound over to keep the peace," Jack reminded him.

"Curse the peace, sir! We can go and fight in Holland. Tell me the man's name, I say!"

"Fair and softly, Mr. Warrington!" cried the young parson. "My hearing is perfectly good. It was not a man who told me the story which, I confess, I imparted to my father."

"What?" George asked, the truth suddenly occurring. "Was it that artful, wicked little vixen in Bloomsbury Square?"

"Vixen is not the word to apply to any young lady, George Warrington!" Lambert exclaimed. "Much less to the charming Miss Lydia. She is artful—the most innocent of Heaven's creatures! She is wicked—that angel!" With unfeigned delight that the quarrel should be over, and devout gratitude that blood consanguineous should not be shed, she had spoken in terms of the highest praise for George's decision to decline the quarrel, expressing deep sympathy for his painful but necessary method of averting it.

"What method?" demanded George, stamping his foot.

"Why, of laying an information, to be sure!" said Mr. Jack. On this, George burst forth into language much too violent for repetition, highly uncomplimentary to Miss Lydia.

"Don't utter such words, sir!" cried the parson, now taking his turn to be angry. "Do not insult, in my hearing, the most charming, the most innocent of her sex! If she has been mistaken in her information regarding you, and doubted your willingness to commit what, after all, is a crime—for a crime homicide is, and of the most awful description—you, sir, have no right to blacken that angel's character with foul words: and, innocent yourself, should respect the most innocent as she is the most lovely of women! Oh, George, are you to be my brother?"

"I hope to have that honour," answered George, smiling. He began to perceive the other's drift.

"What, then, what—though 'tis too much bliss to be hoped for by sinful man—what, if she should one day be your sister? Who could see her charms without being subjugated by them? I own that I am a slave. I own that those Latin Sapphics in the September number of the *Gentleman's Magazine*, beginning *Lydicae quondam cecinit venustae* (with an English version by my friend Hickson of Corpus), were mine. I have told my mother what hath passed between us, and Mrs. Lambert also thinks that the most lovely of her sex has deigned to look favourably on me. I have composed a letter—she another. She proposes to wait on Miss Lydia's grandpapa this very day, and to bring me the answer, which shall make me the happiest or the most wretched of men! It was in the unrestrained intercourse of family conversation that I chanced to impart to my father the sentiments which my dear girl had uttered. Perhaps I spoke slightingly of your courage, which I don't doubt—by Heaven, I don't doubt: it may be, she has erred, too, regarding you. It may be that the fiend jealousy has been gnawing at my bosom, and—horrible suspicion!--that I thought my sister's lover found too much favour with her; I would have all my own. Ah, dear George, who knows his faults? I am as one distracted with passion. Confound it, sir! What right have you to laugh at me? I would have you to know that *risu inepto*"

"What, have you two boys made it up?" cried the General, entering at this moment, amidst a roar of laughter from George.

"I was giving my opinion to Mr. Warrington upon laughter, and upon his laughter in particular," said Jack Lambert, in a fume.

"George is bound over to keep the peace, Jack! Thou canst not fight him for two years; and between now and then, let us trust you will have made up your quarrel. Here is dinner, boys! We will drink absent friends, and an end to the war, and no fighting out of the profession!"

George pleaded an engagement as a reason for running away early from dinner. Jack must have speedily followed him, for when the former, after transacting some brief business at his own lodgings, came to Mr. Van den Bosch's door in Bloomsbury Square, he found the young parson already in parley with a servant there. "His master and mistress had left town yesterday," the servant said.

"Poor Jack! And you had the decisive letter in your pocket
