"You know, my dear ones, from those tales of magic and fairies we so love, that at every wedding there is usually one soul left to curse the stars for missing out, swearing vengeance with a fiery heart. Thus, it needs no wonder that Cousin Will should roar like a trapped beast at the news of his brother's betrothal to the colonial heiress. First, he bolted from the house, his oath ringing in the air that he would never return. Yet, the world—and even the swearer himself—knew that Will's promises were often just hot wind. After a day or two, the scent of the marriage feast dragged him back. He could not bear to resign his knife and fork at the Castlewood table. So he returned, eating and drinking there in token of revenge, raising a bumper to toast the young bride while muttering prayers for her ruin beneath his breath. When her father gave her away in the chapel, Will offered responses choked with smothered curses, and I, your uncle, vowed to love, honor, and cherish her, though I felt the weight of a thousand grudges.

Many grumbled at this union, and Mr. Warrington heard no end of abuse directed at my lady and her grandfather. Old friends from the City, his legal counsel, the Dissenting clergyman who welcomed them to England, and poor Jack Lambert, the orthodox young divine whose eloquence Will had hoped to wield in private, all bore bitter fruit from this treachery. Each had a story of being enslaved, encouraged, and jilted by the young American. The lawyer, who held such an accurate ledger of her properties, estates, money, slaves, ships, and expectations, was ready to vow that the whole account was a lie—that New York and Virginia were myths, that Mr. Van den Bosch possessed no lands, and that the Guinea trade and the negroes themselves were nothing but black falsehoods invented by a wily old planter. The Dissenting pastor moaned over his lost lamb, questioning if such a small, wily monster could truly be called a lamb. Poor Jack Lambert sadly acknowledged to his mother the possession of a lock of black hair, which he bedewed with tears and apostrophized in language unfit for a cleric. As for Mr. William Esmond, he, with the shrieks and curses he freely indulged, even under his sister-in-law's own pretty little nose, called upon Acheron to witness that no such artful young devil existed as Miss Lydia. He swore she was an infernal female Cerberus and called down all the wrath of heaven upon his swindling rascal of a brother, who had cajoled him with fair words and filched his prize.

"Why," said Mr. Warrington, when Will expatiated on these matters, "if the girl is such a she-devil as you describe, you are all the better for losing her. If she intends to deceive her husband and give him poison, as you say, how lucky for you that you are not the man! You ought to thank the gods, Will, instead of cursing them, for robbing you of such a fury, and cannot be better revenged on Castlewood than by allowing him her sole possession."

"All this was very well," Will Esmond said; but, not unjustly, perhaps, remarked that his brother was not the less a scoundrel for cheating him out of the fortune he expected, a sum he had risked his life to win.

George Warrington was at a loss to know how his cousin had been made to risk his precious existence—for which, perhaps, a rope's end might have been a fitting termination—upon which Will Esmond, with candour, told his kinsman how the little Cerbera had actually caused the meeting between them, interrupted by Sir John Fielding's men. He recounted how Lydia was always saying that George was a coward for sneering at Mr. Will, and the latter doubly a poltroon for ignoring his kinsman's taunts; how George had run away and nearly died of fright in Braddock's expedition. "Deuce take me!" said Will. "I never was more surprised, cousin, than when you stood to your ground so coolly in Tottenham Court Fields yonder, for me and my second offered to wager that you would never come!"

Mr. Warrington laughed, thanking Mr. Will for this opinion of him. "Though," he said, "'twas lucky for me the constables came up, or you would have whipped your sword through my body in another minute. Didn't you see how clumsy I was as I stood before you? And you actually turned white and shook with anger!"

"Yes, curse me!" said Mr. Will, turning very red. "That's my way of showing my rage; and I was confoundedly angry with you, cousin! But now 'tis my brother I hate, and that little devil of a Countess—a countess! a pretty countess, indeed!" With another rumbling cannonade of oaths, Will saluted the reigning member of his family.

"Well, cousin," said George, looking him queerly in the face, "you let me off easily, and I dare say I owe my life to you, or at any rate a whole waistcoat, and I admire your forbearance and spirit. What a pity that a courage like yours should be wasted as a mere court usher! You are a loss to His Majesty's army. You positively are!"

"I never know whether you are joking or serious, Mr. Warrington," growled Will.

"I should think very few gentlemen would dare to joke with you, cousin, if they had a regard for their own lives or ears!" cried Mr. Warrington, who loved this grave way of dealing with his noble kinsman, watching with droll interest the other choking his curses, grinding his teeth because afraid to bite, and smothering his cowardly anger.

"And you should moderate your expressions, cousin, regarding the dear Countess and my lord your brother," Mr. Warrington resumed. "Of you they always speak most tenderly. Her ladyship has told me everything."

"What everything?" cried Will, aghast.

"As much as women ever do tell, cousin. She owned that she thought you had been a little *épris* with her. What woman can help liking a man who has admired her?"

"Why, she hates you, and says you were wild about her, Mr. Warrington!" said Mr. Esmond.

"Spretæ injuria formæ, cousin!"

"For me—what's for me?" asked the other.

"I never did care for her, and hence, perhaps, she does not love me. Don't you remember that case of the wife of the Captain of the Guard?"

"Which Guard?" asked Will.

"My Lord Potiphar," said Mr. Warrington.

"Lord Who? My Lord Falmouth is Captain of the Yeomen of the Guard, and my Lord Berkeley of the Pensioners. My Lord Hobart had 'em before. Suppose you haven't been long enough in England to know who's who, cousin!" remarked Mr. William.

But Mr. Warrington explained that he was speaking of a Captain of the Guard of the King of Egypt, whose wife had persecuted one Joseph for not returning her affection. On which Will said that, as for Egypt, he believed it was a confounded long way off; and that if Lord What-d'ye-call's wife told lies about him, it was like her sex, who he supposed were the same everywhere.

Now the truth is, that when he paid his marriage-visit to Castlewood, Mr. Warrington had heard from the little Countess her version of the story of differences between Will Esmond and herself. And this tale differed, in some respects, though he was far from saying it was more authentic than the ingenuous narrative of Mr. Will. The lady was grieved to think how she had been deceived in her brother-in-law. She feared that his life about the court and town had injured those high principles which all the Esmonds are known to be born with; that Mr. Will's words were not altogether to be trusted; that a loose life and pecuniary difficulties had made him mercenary, blunted his honour, perhaps even impaired the high chivalrous courage "which we Esmonds, cousin," the little lady said, tossing her head, "which we Esmonds must always possess—leastways, you and me, and my lord, and my cousin Harry have it, I know!" says the Countess. "Oh, cousin George! and must I confess that I was led to doubt of yours, without which a man of ancient and noble family like ours isn't worthy to be called a man! I shall try, George, as a Christian lady, and the head of one of the first families in this kingdom and the whole world, to forgive my brother William for having spoken ill of a member of our family, though a younger branch and by the female side, and made me for a moment doubt of you. He did so. Perhaps he told me ever so many bad things you had said of me."

"I, my dear lady!" cried Mr. Warrington.

"Which he said you said of me, cousin, and I hope you didn't, and heartily pray you didn't; and I can afford to despise 'em. And he paid me his court, that's a fact; and so have others, and that I'm used to; and he might have prospered better than he did perhaps (for I did not know my dear lord, nor
