Those of us who had played a part in the guilt of that morning felt a treble burden of shame when we beheld the effect our conduct had wrought upon him, the man whom above all others we loved and revered. The shock to the good man was strange, yet pitiful to behold, especially for those who had delivered the blow. His cherished child had deceived and defied him—I confess to you, my dear, that in the light of eternity, we would never, could never, repeat such a deed; indeed, the entire family seemed to have conspired in a league against his peace. Oh, dear, kind friend and father! We know thou hast pardoned our trespass—within the Heaven wherein thou dwellest among purified spirits who learned on earth the art of loving and forgiving! With such a man, love and forgiveness were natural duties; beneficence flowed from him as easily as breath, accompanied by a sweet, smiling humility. To wound either virtue was to become savage and brutal, akin to torturing a child or striking a nursing mother. Once the deed was done, all we guilty ones groveled in the dust before the injured man. I shall pass over the scenes of forgiveness, reconciliation, and our shared worship, followed by the final separation when the good man departed for his government and the ship sailed away before us, leaving me and Theo stranded on the shore. We stood there, hand in hand, horribly abashed, silent, and consumed by guilt. My wife did not seek me until her father had gone; in the interval between the ceremony of our marriage and his departure, she had remained at home, occupying her old place by her father's side and beside her sister. He was as kind as ever, yet the women were almost speechless amongst themselves; Aunt Lambert, for once, unkind and fretful in her temper; and little Hetty, feverish and strange, muttering, "I wish we were gone. I wish we were gone." Though admitted to the house and forgiven, I slunk away during those last days, seeing my wife for only a minute or two in the street or within the confines of her family. She was not truly mine until they were gone. We proceeded to Winchester and Hampton for what may be termed our wedding. It was, alas, a dismal business. For a while, we felt utterly lonely, grieving for our dear father as though we had buried him, or driven him to the grave by our undutifulness.

I instructed Sampson to announce our marriage in the newspapers—a task for which my wife would later hang her head in sorrow before the poor fellow. I took Mrs. Warrington back to my old lodgings in Bloomsbury, where there was ample room for us, and our modest married life commenced. I wrote home a letter to my mother in Virginia, omitting particulars but stating that since Mr. Lambert was about to depart for his government, I felt honor-bound to fulfill my promise to his dearest daughter; furthermore, I declared my intention to complete my studies for the Bar and qualify for employment at home or in any colony. My good Mrs. Mountain answered this letter, acting on the desire of Madam Esmond, who deemed it best for the sake of peace that my communications be conducted thus. I found my relatives in a fury that was perfectly amusing to witness. The butler's face, as he said, "Not at home," at my uncle's house in Hill Street, was a blank tragedy worthy of study by Garrick himself. My poor little wife rested on my arm, and we tripped away, laughing at the fellow's *accueil*, only to encounter my lady in a street stoppage in her chair. I took off my hat and made her the lowest possible bow. I affectionately asked after my dear cousins. "I—I wonder you dare look me in the face!" gasped Lady Warrington. "Nay, don't deprive me of that precious privilege!" said I. "Move on, Peter," she screamed to her chairman. "Your ladyship would not impale your own husband's flesh and blood!" I retorted. She rattled up the glass of her chair in a fury. I kissed my hand, removed my hat, and performed another of my very finest bows.

Shortly afterwards, walking in Hyde Park with my dearest companion, I met my little cousin exercising on horseback with a groom behind him. As soon as he saw us, he galloped up, the groom powdering afterwards and bawling out, "Stop, Master Miles, stop!"

"I am not to speak to my cousin," said Miles, "but telling you to send my love to Harry is not speaking to you, is it? Is that my new cousin? I'm not told not to speak to her. I'm Miles, cousin, Sir Miles Warrington Baronet's son, and you are very pretty!" "Now, duee now, Master Miles," said the groom, touching his hat to us, and the boy trotted away laughing and looking at us over his shoulder. "You see how my relations have determined to treat me," I said to my partner. "As if I married you for your relations!" said Theo, her eyes beaming with joy and love into mine. Ah, how happy we were! How brisk and pleasant the winter! How snug the kettle by the fire (where the abashed Sampson sometimes came and made the punch); how delightful the night at the theatre, for which our friends brought us tickets of admission, and where we daily expected our new play of *Pocahontas* would rival the successes of all former tragedies.

The fickle old aunt of Clarges Street, who had received me on my first coming to London with my wife with a burst of scorn, presently mollified. As soon as she came to know Theo—who she had previously pronounced to be an insignificant little country-faced chit—she fell utterly in love with her, inviting her to tea and supper every day whenever there was no other company. "As for company, my dears," she would say, "I don't ask you. You are no longer *du monde*. Your marriage has put that entirely out of the question." Thus she sought to have us come to amuse her, entering and exiting by the back stairs. My wife was a fine lady enough to feel only amused at this reception; and I must do justice to the Baroness's domestics, who treated us with a respect we could not have received if we had been duke and duchess. Madame de Bernstein was greatly tickled and amused by my story of Lady Warrington and the chair. I acted it for her, recounting anecdotes of the pious Baronet's lady and her daughters, which pleased the mischievous, lively old woman.

The Dowager Countess of Castlewood, now established in her house at Kensington, gave us that sort of welcome which genteel ladies extend to their poorer relatives. We visited her ladyship's drawing-rooms at Kensington once or twice; but, losing more money at cards and spending more on coach-hire than I cared to afford, we speedily gave up those entertainments. I dare say we were no more missed or regretted than other people in the fashionable world who are carried by death, debt, or other accident out of the polite sphere. My Theo did not in the least regret this exclusion. She had made her appearance at one of these gatherings, attired in some little ornaments left by her mother, by which the good lady set some store; but I thought her own white neck far prettier than these poor twinkling stones. There were dowagers whose wrinkled old bones blazed with rubies and diamonds, which, I am sure, they would gladly have exchanged for her modest parure of beauty and freshness. Not a soul spoke to her—except, to be sure, Beau Lothair, a friend of Mr. Will's, who prowled about Bloomsbury afterwards and even sent my wife a billet. I met him in Covent Garden shortly after and promised to break his ugly face if ever I saw it in the neighborhood of my lodgings, and Madam Theo was molested no further.

The only relative who came to see us (Madame de Bernstein never came, sending her coach or making inquiries via her woman or major-domo) was our poor Maria, who, with her husband, Mr. Hagan, often took a share of our homely dinners. Then we had friend Spencer from the Temple, who admired our Arcadian felicity and gently asked for our sympathy regarding his less fortunate loves; and twice or thrice the famous Doctor Johnson came in for a dish of Theo's tea. A dish? A pailful! "And a pail the best thing to feed him, sar!" said Mr. Gumbo, indignantly; for the Doctor's appearance was not pleasant, nor his linen particularly white. He snorted, grew red, and sputtered while feeding; he flung his meat about and bawled out contradictions, annoying my Theo, whom he professed to admire greatly, by declaring every time he saw her, "Madam, you do not love me; I see by your manner you do not love me; though I admire you, and come here for your sake. Here is my friend Mr. Reynolds that shall paint you: he has no ceruse in his paint-box that is as brilliant as your complexion." Indeed, Mr. Reynolds, a most perfect and agreeable gentleman, would have painted my wife, but I knew what his price was and did not choose to incur that expense. I wish I had now, for the sake of the children, that they might see what yonder face was like some fifty years ago. To me, madam, 'tis the same now as ever; and
