For a heartbeat after that ghastly laughter faded from echoing through the stone cavern, silence reigned absolute between Tars Tarkas and I. No sound broke the stillness; no shadow moved within the limits of our vision.

Then, softly, Tars Tarkas chuckled. To the people of Thark, this is not a hysterical cackle born of fear, but the authentic expression of joy they find in horrors that drive Earthmen to madness or tears. Often have I seen them roll upon the ground in frantic fits of uncontrollable mirth, witnessing the death throes of women and children under the torture of that infernal Martian festival—the Great Games.

I looked up at the Thark, a smile curving my lips, for here truth demanded a grin where a trembling chin would serve no purpose.

"What do you make of it?" I asked. "Where, in heaven's name, are we?"

He stared at me, bewildered.

"Where are we?" he echoed. "Tell me, John Carter, that you know not where you stand?"

"That I am upon Barsoom is all I can surmise," I admitted. "Were it not for you and the great white apes, I would not even guess it, for the sights I have seen today are as alien to the world I call home as they are to the Earth I left ten long years ago.

"No, Tars Tarkas, I know not where we be."

"You ask where you have been since you opened the mighty portals of the atmosphere plant years ago, after the keeper died and the engines stopped, leaving all Barsoom to die of asphyxiation? Your body was never found, though the men of a whole world hunted for it for years. Even the Jeddak of Helium and his granddaughter, your princess, offered rewards so fabulous that princes of royal blood joined the search.

"There was but one conclusion when all efforts failed: that you had taken the long, final pilgrimage down the mysterious River Iss, to await in the Valley Dor upon the shores of the Lost Sea of Korus the beautiful Dejah Thoris, your princess.

"Why you went, none could guess, for your princess still lived—"

"Thank God!" I cut him off. "I dared not ask, fearing I might be too late to save her. She was very low when I left her in the royal gardens of Tardos Mors that long-gone night; so low that I scarcely hoped to reach the atmosphere plant ere her spirit fled forever. And she lives?"

"She lives, John Carter."

"You have not told me where we are," I pressed.

"We are where I expected to find you, John Carter—and another. Long ago you heard the story of the woman who taught me the thing green Martians are reared to hate, the woman who taught me to love. You know the cruel tortures and the awful death her love won for her at the hands of the beast, Tal Hajus.

"She, I thought, awaited me by the Lost Sea of Korus.

"You know it was left for a man from another world, for yourself, John Carter, to teach this cruel Thark what friendship is; and you, I thought, also roamed the care-free Valley Dor.

"Thus were the two I most longed for at the end of the long pilgrimage I must take some day. As the time elapsed which Dejah Thoris had hoped might bring you back, for she always tried to believe you had but temporarily returned to your own planet, I at last gave way to my great yearning. A month since I started upon this journey, the end of which you have this day witnessed. Do you understand now where you be, John Carter?"

"And that was the River Iss, emptying into the Lost Sea of Korus in the Valley Dor?" I asked.

"This is the valley of love and peace and rest to which every Barsoomian since time immemorial has longed to pilgrimage at the end of a life of hate and strife and bloodshed," he replied. "This, John Carter, is Heaven."

His tone was cold and ironical; its bitterness reflecting the terrible disappointment he had suffered. Such a fearful disillusionment, such a blasting of lifelong hopes, such an uprooting of age-old tradition might have excused a vastly greater demonstration on the part of the Thark.

I laid my hand upon his shoulder.

"I am sorry," I said, nor did there seem aught else to say.

"Think, John Carter, of the countless billions of Barsoomians who have taken the voluntary pilgrimage down this cruel river since the beginning of time, only to fall into the ferocious clutches of the terrible creatures that now assailed us. There is an ancient legend that once a red man returned from the banks of the Lost Sea of Korus, back through the mysterious River Iss, and the legend says he narrated a fearful blasphemy of horrid brutes inhabiting a valley of wondrous loveliness, brutes that pounced upon each pilgrim as he ended his journey and devoured him where he sought love and peace. But the ancients killed the blasphemer, as tradition ordains anyone returning from the bosom of the River of Mystery.

"But now we know it was no blasphemy, that the legend is true, and that the man told only what he saw. What does it profit us, John Carter, since even should we escape, we also would be treated as blasphemers? We are between the wild *thoat* of certainty and the mad *zitidar* of fact—we can escape neither."

"As Earth men say, we are between the devil and the deep sea, Tars Tarkas," I replied, unable to help but smile at our dilemma.

"There is naught we can do but take things as they come, and at least have the satisfaction of knowing that whoever slays us eventually will have far greater numbers of their own dead to count than they will get in return. White ape or plant man, green Barsoomian or red man, whosoever it shall be that takes the last toll from us will know that it is costly in lives to wipe out John Carter, Prince of the House of Tardos Mors, and Tars Tarkas, Jeddak of Thark, at the same time."

I could not help but laugh at his grim humor, and he joined in with me in one of those rare laughs of real enjoyment, a trait marking him from the others of his kind.

"But about yourself, John Carter," he cried finally. "If you have not been here all these years, where indeed have you been, and how is it that I find you here today?"

"I have been back to Earth," I replied. "For ten long Earth years I have prayed and hoped for the day that would carry me once more to this grim old planet of yours, for which, with all its cruel and terrible customs, I feel a bond of sympathy and love greater than for the world that gave me birth. For ten years I have endured a living death of uncertainty and doubt as to whether Dejah Thoris lived, and now that for the first time in all these years my prayers have been answered and my doubts relieved, I find myself, through a cruel whim of fate, hurled into the one tiny spot of all Barsoom from which there is apparently no escape, and if there were, at a price which would extinguish forever the last flickering hope I may cling to of seeing my princess again in this life—and you have seen today with what pitiful futility man yearns toward a material hereafter. Only a bare half-hour before I saw you battling with the plant men I was standing in the moonlight upon the banks of a broad river that taps the eastern shore of Earth's most blessed land. I have answered you, my friend. Do you believe?"

"I believe," replied Tars Tarkas, "though I cannot understand."

As we talked, I searched the interior of the chamber with my eyes. It was perhaps two hundred feet in length and half as broad, with what appeared to be a doorway in the center of the wall directly opposite that through which we had entered. The apartment was hewn from the material of the cliff, showing mostly dull gold in the dim light which a single minute radium illuminator in the center of the roof diffused throughout its vast dimensions. Here and there polished surfaces of ruby, emerald, and diamond patched the golden walls and ceiling. The floor was of another material, very hard, worn by much use to the smoothness of glass. Aside from the two doors, I could discern no sign of other aperture, and as one we knew to be locked against us, I approached the other.

As I extended my hand to search for the controlling button, that cruel and mocking laugh rang out once more, so close to me that I involuntarily shrank back, tightening my grip upon the hilt of my great sword.

And then from the far corner of the great chamber a hollow voice chanted: "There is no hope, there is no hope; the dead return not, the dead return not; nor is there any resurrection. Hope not, for there is no hope."

Though our eyes instantly turned toward the spot from which the voice seemed to emanate, there was no one in sight, and I must admit that cold shivers played along my spine, the short hairs at the base of my head stiffening and rising, as do those upon a hound's neck when his eyes see those uncanny things hidden from human sight.

Quickly I walked toward the mournful voice, but it had ceased ere I reached the further wall, and then
