The moonlight filtered through the canvas walls of our hut, casting long, skeletal shadows across the dirt floor as I gestured for Infadoos to join us inside. The air was thick with the scent of dried herbs and impending dread.

"Now, Infadoos," I said, my voice steady despite the knot tightening in my stomach, "we would speak with thee."

"Let my lords say on," the old soldier replied, his eyes darting nervously toward the entrance.

"It seems to us, Infadoos, that Twala the king is a cruel man."

"It is so, my lords. Alas! the land cries out because of his cruelties. To-night ye shall see. It is the great witch-hunt, and many will be smelt out as wizards and slain. No man's life is safe. If the king covets a man's cattle, or a man's wife, or if he fears a man that he should excite a rebellion against him, then Gagool, whom ye saw, or some of the witch-finding women whom she has taught, will smell that man out as a wizard, and he will be killed. Many must die before the moon grows pale to-night. It is ever so. Perhaps I too shall be killed. As yet I have been spared because I am skilled in war, and am beloved by the soldiers; but I know not how long I have to live. The land groans at the cruelties of Twala the king; it is wearied of him and his red ways."

"Then why is it, Infadoos, that the people do not cast him down?"

"Nay, my lords, he is the king, and if he were killed Scragga would reign in his place, and the heart of Scragga is blacker than the heart of Twala his father. If Scragga were king his yoke upon our neck would be heavier than the yoke of Twala. If Imotu had never been slain, or if Ignosi his son had lived, it might have been otherwise; but they are both dead."

"How knowest thou that Ignosi is dead?" a voice cut through the gloom, sharp and unexpected. We spun around, startled, to find Umbopa standing in the doorway, his silhouette framed by the darkness outside.

"What meanest thou, boy?" Infadoos snapped, his hand instinctively going to his spear. "Who told thee to speak?"

"Listen, Infadoos," Umbopa commanded, his tone devoid of fear, carrying a weight that silenced the old soldier instantly. "And I will tell thee a story. Years ago the king Imotu was killed in this country and his wife fled with the boy Ignosi. Is it not so?"

"It is so."

"It was said that the woman and her son died upon the mountains. Is it not so?"

"It is even so."

"Well, it came to pass that the mother and the boy Ignosi did not die. They crossed the mountains and were led by a tribe of wandering desert men across the sands beyond, till at last they came to water and grass and trees again."

"How knowest thou this?"

"Listen. They travelled on and on, many months' journey, till they reached a land where a people called the Amazulu, who also are of the Kukuana stock, live by war, and with them they tarried many years, till at length the mother died. Then the son Ignosi became a wanderer again, and journeyed into a land of wonders, where white people live, and for many more years he learned the wisdom of the white people."

"It is a pretty story," Infadoos muttered, skepticism etched into his wrinkled features.

"For years he lived there working as a servant and a soldier, but holding in his heart all that his mother had told him of his own place, and casting about in his mind to find how he might journey thither to see his people and his father's house before he died. For long years he lived and waited, and at last the time came, as it ever comes to him who can wait for it, and he met some white men who would seek this unknown land, and joined himself to them. The white men started and travelled on and on, seeking for one who is lost. They crossed the burning desert, they crossed the snow-clad mountains, and at last reached the land of the Kukuanas, and there they found *thee*, O Infadoos."

"Surely thou art mad to talk thus," Infadoos exclaimed, stepping back as if struck.

"Thou thinkest so; see, I will show thee, O my uncle." Umbopa moved with a sudden, fluid grace that belied his age. With a single, decisive motion, he slipped off his "moocha" or girdle and stood completely naked before us.

"Look," he said, his finger tracing the skin of his midsection. "What is this?"

There, coiled around his torso in vibrant blue ink, was the image of a great snake. Its tail disappeared seamlessly into its own open mouth just above where the thighs merged into the body, a symbol of infinite recursion and power.

Infadoos stared, his eyes bulging until they seemed ready to pop from their sockets. Then, the old soldier crumbled. He fell upon his knees, the dust rising around him.

"_Koom! Koom!_" he gasped, the words tearing from his throat. "It is my brother's son; it is the king."

"Did I not tell thee so, my uncle? Rise; I am not yet the king, but with thy help, and with the help of these brave white men, who are my friends, I shall be. Yet the old witch Gagool was right, the land shall run with blood first, and hers shall run with it, if she has any and can die, for she killed my father with her words, and drove my mother forth. And now, Infadoos, choose thou. Wilt thou put thy hands between my hands and be my man? Wilt thou share the dangers that lie before me, and help me to overthrow this tyrant and murderer, or wilt thou not? Choose thou."

The old man pressed a hand to his forehead, closing his eyes as if weighing the fate of nations. Slowly, he rose. Advancing toward Umbopa—or rather, Ignosi—he knelt, bowing his head low. He took the young man's hand in both of his weathered palms.

"Ignosi, rightful king of the Kukuanas, I put my hand between thy hands, and am thy man till death. When thou wast a babe I dandled thee upon my knees, now shall my old arm strike for thee and freedom."

"It is well, Infadoos; if I conquer, thou shalt be the greatest man in the kingdom after its king. If I fail, thou canst only die, and death is not far off from thee. Rise, my uncle."

"And ye, white men, will ye help me? What have I to offer you! The white stones! If I conquer and can find them, ye shall have as many as ye can carry hence. Will that suffice you?"

I translated the offer to the newcomers.

"Tell him," Sir Henry answered, his voice calm but firm, "that he mistakes an Englishman. Wealth is good, and if it comes in our way we will take it; but a gentleman does not sell himself for wealth. Still, speaking for myself, I say this. I have always liked Umbopa, and so far as lies in me I will stand by him in this business. It will be very pleasant to me to try to square matters with that cruel devil Twala. What do you say, Good, and you, Quatermain?"

"Well," said Good, adjusting his collar with a casual flair, "to adopt the language of hyperbole, in which all these people seem to indulge, you can tell him that a row is surely good, and warms the cockles of the heart, and that so far as I am concerned I'm his boy. My only stipulation is that he allows me to wear trousers."

I conveyed the substance of their agreement.

"It is well, my friends," Ignosi, formerly Umbopa, declared. "And what sayest thou, Macumazahn, art thou also with me, old hunter, cleverer than a wounded buffalo?"

I paused, scratching my head, considering the gravity of the commitment.

"Umbopa, or Ignosi," I said finally, "I don't like revolutions. I am a man of peace and a bit of a coward"—a comment that earned a faint smile from the young king—"but, on the other hand, I stick up for my friends, Ignosi. You have stuck to us and played the part of a man, and I will stick by you. But mind you, I am a trader, and have to make my living, so I accept your offer about those diamonds in case we should ever be in a position to avail ourselves of it. Another thing: we came, as you know, to look for Incubu's (Sir Henry's) lost brother. You must help us to find him."

"That I will do," Ignosi promised. "Stay, Infadoos, by the sign of the snake about my middle, tell me the truth. Has any white man to thy knowledge set his foot within the land?"

"None, O Ignosi."

"If any white man had been seen or heard of, wouldst thou have known?"

"I should certainly have known."

"Thou hearest, Incubu," Ignosi turned to
