To the man who pays heed to that voice within him which warns him that twilight and danger are settling over his soul, terror is apt to appear an absolute thing, against which his heart must be safeguarded in a twink unless there is to take place an alteration in the whole range and scale of his nature. Mercifully, he has never far to look for safeguards. Of the immediate and small and common and momentary things of life, of usages and observances and modes and conventions, he builds up fortifications against the powers of darkness. He is even content that, not terror only, but joy also, should for working purposes be placed in the category of the absolute things; and the last treason he will commit will be that breaking down of terms and limits that strikes, not at one man, but at the welfare of the souls of all.

be relative, by so much loses its proper quality. He was setting aside the landmarks. Mists and confusion had begun to enwrap him. And he was conscious of nothing so much as of a voracious inquisitiveness. He wanted to know . He was resolved to know. Nothing but the knowledge would satisfy him; and craftily he cast about for means whereby he might attain it. He might have spared his craft. The matter was the easiest imaginable. As in time past he had known, in his writing, moments when his thoughts had seemed to rise of themselves and to embody themselves in words not to be altered afterwards, so now the questions he put himself seemed to be answered even in the moment of their asking. There was exhilaration in the swift, easy processes. He had known no so such joy in his own power since the days when his writing had been a daily freshness and a delight to him.

seemed simple, but to Oleron it was now pellucidly clear. The key, of course , lay in his half-written novel--or rather, in both Romillys , the old and the proposed new one. A little while before Oleron would have thought himself mad to have embraced such an opinion; now he accepted the dizzying hypothesis without a quiver. He began to examine the first and second Romillys . From the moment of his doing so the thing advanced by leaps and bounds. Swiftly he reviewed the history of the Romilly of the fifteen chapters. He remembered clearly now that he had found her insufficient on the very first morning on which he had sat down to work in his new place. Other instances of his aversion leaped up to confirm his obscure investigation. There had come the night when he had hardly forborne to throw the whole thing into the fire; and the next morning he had begun the planning of the new Romilly .

to his discarded creation had--(it was astonishing how credible Oleron found the almost unthinkable idea)--had offended the supplanter. Yet that a malignancy almost homicidal should be extended to his fiction's poor mortal prototype.... In spite of his inuring to a scale in which the horrible was now a thing to be fingered and turned this way and that, a "Good God!" broke from Oleron. This intrusion of the first Romilly's prototype into his thought again was a factor that for the moment brought his inquiry into the nature of his problem to a termination; the mere thought of Elsie was fatal to anything abstract. For another thing, he could not yet think of that letter of Barrett's, nor of a little scene that had followed it, without a mounting of colour and a quick contraction of the brow. For, wisely or not, he had had that argument out at once.

an unwholesome mind, which probably you can't help, but a tongue which you can help, and shall! If there is a breath of this repeated ..." "I'll not be talked to on my own doorstep like this by anybody,..." Barrett had blustered.... "You shall, and I'm doing it ..." "Don't you forget there's a Gawd above all, Who 'as said..." "You're a low scandalmonger!..." And so forth, continuing badly what was already badly begun. Oleron had returned wrathfully to his own house, and thenceforward, looking out of his windows, had seen Barrett's face at odd times, lifting blinds or peering round curtains, as if he sought to put himself in possession of Heaven knew what evidence, in case it should be required of him. The unfortunate occurrence made certain minor differences in Oleron's domestic arrangements. Barrett's tongue, he gathered, had already been busy; he was looked at askance by the dwellers of the square; and he judged it better, until he should be able to obtain other help, to make his purchases of provisions a little farther afield rather than at the small shops of the immediate neighbourhood.

his hat, he sprang to the door and descended the stairs at a run. A sort of panic had seized him. She must be prevented from setting foot in the place. As he ran along the alley he was conscious that his eyes went up to the eaves as if something drew them. He did not know that a slate might not accidentally fall.... He met her at the gate, and spoke with curious volubleness. "This is really too bad, Elsie! Just as I'm urgently called away! I'm afraid it can't be helped though, and that you'll have to think me an inhospitable beast." He poured it out just as it came into his head. She asked if he was going to town. "Yes, yes--to town," he replied. "I've got to call on--on Chambers. You know Chambers, don't you? No, I remember you don't; a big man you once saw me with....

seeing her calm, began to talk less recklessly through silences. By the time they reached the bus terminus, nobody, seeing the pallid-faced man without an overcoat and the large ample-skirted girl at his side, would have supposed that one of them was ready to sink on his knees for thankfulness that he had, as he believed, saved the other from a wildly unthinkable danger. They mounted to the top of the bus, Oleron protesting that he should not miss his overcoat, and that he found the day, if anything, rather oppressively hot. They sat down on a front seat. Now that this meeting was forced upon him, he had something else to say that would make demands upon his tact. It had been on his mind for some time, and was, indeed, peculiarly difficult to put. He revolved it for some minutes, and then, remembering the success of his story of a sudden call to town, cut the knot of his difficulty with another lie.

in the same controlled voice she had employed from the start. "You're not going anywhere. You weren't going out this morning. You only came out because I appeared; don't behave as if we were strangers, Paul." A flush of pink had mounted to his cheeks. He noticed that the wind had given her the pink of early rhubarb. Still he found nothing to say. "Of course, you ought to go away," she continued. "I don't know whether you look at yourself often in the glass, but you're rather noticeable. Several people have turned to look at you this morning. So, of course, you ought to go away. But you won't, and I know why." He shivered, coughed a little, and then broke silence. "Then if you know, there's no use in continuing this discussion," he said curtly. "Not for me, perhaps, but there is for you," she replied.

fell in love. No wonder there was gossip in shops and squares and public houses! In a sense the gossipers were in the right of it. Independent, yet not efficient; with some of womanhood's graces forgone, and yet with all the woman's hunger and need; half sophisticated, yet not wise; Oleron was tired of it all.... And it was time he told her so. "I suppose," he said tremblingly, looking down between his knees, "I suppose the real trouble is in the life women who earn their own living are obliged to lead." He could not tell in what sense she took the lame generality; she merely replied, "I suppose so." "It can't be helped," he continued, "but you do sacrifice a good deal." She agreed: a good deal; and then she added after a moment, "What, for instance?" "You may or may not be gradually attaining a new status, but you're in a false position to-day." It was very likely, she said; she hadn't thought of it much in that light-- "And," he continued desperately, "you're bound to suffer.

to tell you that. Very well. But before you go let me tell you why I came up this morning." In a dull tone he asked her why. Again she looked straight before her as she replied: "I came to force your hand. Things couldn't go on as they have been going, you know; and now that's all over." "All over," he repeated stupidly. "All over. I want you now to consider yourself, as far as I'm concerned, perfectly free. I make only one reservation." He hardly had the spirit to ask her what that was. "If I merely need you ," she said, "please don't give that a thought; that's nothing; I shan't come near for that. But," she dropped her voice, "if you're in need of me , Paul--I shall know if you are, and you will be --then I shall come at no matter what cost.
