Mrs. Jennings arrived at their lodging with a haste that brooked no delay, pushing open the door before anyone could offer it and stepping inside with a face etched by genuine alarm.

"How do you do, my dear?" she asked, her voice thick with pity as she looked at Marianne, who had already turned her face away, refusing to meet the gaze of the woman who meant well.

"How is she, Miss Dashwood? Poor creature! She looks dreadfully ill. No wonder. Ay, it is far too true. He is to be wed very shortly—a scoundrel! I have no patience for such a man. Mrs. Taylor confided this to me only half an hour ago, having learned it from a close confidante of Miss Grey herself; otherwise, I should have dismissed it as rumor. I was nearly fainting when I heard it. 'Well,' I thought, 'if this is true, he has treated a young lady of my acquaintance with abominable cruelty, and I pray with all my soul that his new wife may torment his heart until it breaks.' And so I shall always say, my dear; you may rely upon it. I cannot conceive of men behaving thus. If I ever cross paths with him again, I shall give him a beating he has not known in many a day. Yet, there is solace, my dear Miss Marianne: he is not the only eligible young man in the world. With your lovely face, you will never lack suitors. Well, poor thing! I shall not keep her here longer; she would do better to weep it all out and be done with it. Fortunately, the Parrys and Sandersons are arriving tonight, and their presence will provide amusement."

She departed then, moving on tiptoes as if she feared the mere sound of footsteps might deepen her young friend's sorrow.

To Elinor's surprise, Marianne resolved to dine with them. Elinor counseled against it, but "No, she would descend; she could endure it, and the commotion of the room would distract her." Elinor, delighted to see her sister momentarily governed by such a practical impulse, though doubting she could last the meal, offered no further objection. She adjusted Marianne's gown as best she could while her sister remained on the bed, ready to escort her to the dining room when summoned.

There, despite her wretched appearance, Marianne ate more than Elinor anticipated and appeared calmer. Had she attempted to speak, or had she been conscious of half of Mrs. Jennings's well-intentioned but clumsy attentions, this composure would have been impossible. Not a syllable escaped her lips; the deep abstraction of her thoughts kept her ignorant of everything happening around her.

Elinor, acknowledging Mrs. Jennings's kindness despite its often distressing and occasionally absurd nature, returned the necessary civilities that her sister could not muster. Their good hostess perceived Marianne's unhappiness and felt that every effort should be made to alleviate it. She treated her with the indulgent fondness of a parent toward a favorite child on the final day of its holidays. Marianne was granted the best seat by the fire, tempted by every delicacy in the house, and amused by the recounting of the day's news. Had Elinor not seen the tragic countenance of her sister, she might have been entertained by Mrs. Jennings's attempts to cure a broken heart with sweets, olives, and a roaring fire. However, as the weight of these efforts became undeniable through constant repetition, Marianne could stay no longer. With a hasty cry of "Misery!" and a gesture telling her sister not to follow, she rose abruptly and hurried out of the room.

"Poor soul!" cried Mrs. Jennings immediately after her departure. "It grieves me to see her! I declare she has left without finishing her wine! And the dried cherries too! Lord! nothing seems to help her. I am certain if I knew what she liked, I would scour the entire town for it. Well, it is the strangest thing to me that a man should treat such a pretty girl so badly! But when there is plenty of money on one side and next to none on the other, Lord bless you! they care no such thing!"

"The lady, then—Miss Grey, I believe you called her—is very wealthy?"

"Fifty thousand pounds, my dear. Have you seen her? They say she is smart and stylish, though not handsome. I remember her aunt very well, Biddy Henshawe; she married a very wealthy man. But the whole family is rich together. Fifty thousand pounds! And by all accounts, it won't be available until it is needed, for they say he is completely ruined. No wonder! Dashing about in his curricle and hunting horses! Well, it doesn't matter talking about it; but when a young man, whoever he may be, comes to court a pretty girl and promises marriage, he has no business to flee from his word simply because he grows poor and a richer girl is ready to accept him. Why doesn't he, in such a case, sell his horses, let his house, dismiss his servants, and make a thorough reform at once? I warrant you, Miss Marianne would have been willing to wait until matters improved. But that won't work nowadays; nothing related to pleasure can ever be sacrificed by the young men of this age."

"Do you know what kind of a girl Miss Grey is? Is she said to be amiable?"

"I have never heard any harm of her; indeed, I hardly ever hear her mentioned, except that Mrs. Taylor said this morning that one day Miss Walker hinted to her that she believed Mr. and Mrs. Ellison would not be sorry to have Miss Grey married, for she and Mrs. Ellison could never agree."

"And who are the Ellisons?"

"Her guardians, my dear. But now she is of age and may choose for herself; and what a choice she has made!—What now," she paused, "your poor sister has gone to her own room, I suppose, to mourn by herself. Is there nothing we can do to comfort her? Poor dear, it seems quite cruel to let her be alone. Well, by-and-by we shall have a few friends, and that will amuse her a little. What shall we play at? She hates whist, I know; but is there no round game she cares for?"

"Dear ma'am, this kindness is quite unnecessary. Marianne, I dare say, will not leave her room again this evening. I shall persuade her, if I can, to go to bed early, for I am sure she needs rest."

"Aye, I believe that will be best for her. Let her name her own supper and retire. Lord! No wonder she has looked so bad and so cast down for the last week or two; this matter, I suppose, has been hanging over her head as long as that. And so the letter that came today finished it! Poor soul! I am sure if I had had the slightest notion of it, I would not have joked her about it for all my money. But then you know, how could I guess such a thing? I assumed it was nothing but a common love letter, and you know young people like to be laughed at regarding them. Lord! How concerned Sir John and my daughters will be when they hear it! If I had my senses about me, I might have called in Conduit Street on my way home and told them. But I shall see them tomorrow."

"It would be unnecessary, I am sure, for you to caution Mrs. Palmer and Sir John against ever mentioning Mr. Willoughby, or making the slightest allusion to what has passed, before my sister. Their own good nature must point out to them the real cruelty of appearing to know anything about it when she is present; and the less that may ever be said to myself on the subject, the more my feelings will be spared, as you, my dear madam, will easily believe."

"Oh! Lord! yes, that I do indeed. It must be terrible for you to hear it discussed; and as for your sister, I am sure I would not mention a word about it to her for the world. You saw I did not all dinner time. Neither would Sir John, nor my daughters, for they are all very thoughtful and considerate; especially if I give them a hint, as I certainly will. For my part, I think the less that is said about such things, the better, the sooner it blows over and is forgotten. And what good does talking ever do, you know?"

"In this affair, it can only do harm; more so perhaps than in many cases of a similar kind, for it has been attended by circumstances which, for the sake of everyone concerned, make it unfit for public conversation. I must do *this* justice to Mr. Willoughby—he has broken no positive engagement with my sister."

"Law, my dear! Don't pretend to defend him. No positive engagement indeed! After taking her all over Allenham House and fixing on the very rooms they were to live in henceforth!"

Elinor, for her sister's sake, could not press the subject further, and she hoped it was not required of her for Willoughby's; since, though Marianne might lose much, he could gain very little by the enforcement of the real truth. After a short silence on both sides, Mrs. Jennings, with all her natural hilarity, burst forth again.

"Well, my dear, 'tis a true saying about an ill wind, for it will be all the better for Colonel Brandon. He will have her at last; ay, that he will. Mark my words, if they aren't married by Midsummer. Lord! How he'll chuckle over this news! I hope he will come tonight. It will be all to one a better match for your sister. Two thousand a year without debt or drawback—except the little love-child, indeed; ay, I had forgotten her; but she may be apprenticed out at a small cost, and then what does it signify? Delaford is a nice place, I can tell you; exactly what I call a nice old-fashioned place, full of comforts and conveniences; quite shut in with great garden walls covered with the best fruit-trees in the country; and such a mulberry tree in one corner! Lord! How Charlotte and I did stuff ourselves the only time we were there! Then, there is a dove-cote, some delightful stew-ponds, and a very pretty canal; and everything, in short, that one could wish for; and, moreover, it is close to the church, and only a quarter of a mile from the turnpike-road, so 'tis never dull, for if you only go and sit up in an old yew arbor behind the house, you may see all the carriages that pass along. Oh! 'tis a nice place! A butcher hard by in the village, and the parsonage-house within a stone's throw. To my fancy, a thousand times prettier than Barton Park, where they are forced to send three miles for their meat and have not a neighbor nearer than your mother. Well, I shall spirit up the Colonel as soon as I can. One shoulder of mutton, you know, drives another down. If we *can* but put Willoughby out of her head!"

"Ay, if we can do *that*, Ma'am," said Elinor, "we shall do very well with or without Colonel Brandon." And then rising, she went away to join Marianne, whom she found, as she expected, in her own room, leaning in silent misery over the small remains of a fire which, until Elinor's entrance, had been her only light.

"You had better leave me," was the only notice her sister gave.

"I will leave you," said Elinor, "if you will go to bed." But this, from the momentary perverseness of impatient suffering, she at first refused to do. Her sister's earnest, though gentle persuasion, however, soon softened her to compliance, and Elinor saw her lay her aching head on the pillow, and, as she hoped, in a way to get some quiet rest before she left her.

In the drawing-room, whither she then repaired, she was soon joined by Mrs. Jennings, holding a wine-glass filled with something in her hand.

"My dear," she said, entering, "I have just recollected that I have some of the finest old Constantia wine in the house that ever was tasted, so I have brought a glass of it for your sister. My poor husband! How fond he was of it! Whenever he had a touch of his old colicky gout, he said it did him more good than anything else in the world. Do take it to your sister."

"Dear Ma'am," replied Elinor, smiling at the difference of the complaints for which it was recommended, "how good you are! But I have just left Marianne in bed, and, I hope, almost asleep; and as I think nothing will be of so much service to her as rest, if you will give me leave, I will drink the wine myself."

Mrs. Jennings, though regretting that she had not been five minutes earlier, was satisfied with the compromise; and Elinor, as she swallowed the chief of it, reflected that though its effects on a colicky gout were, at present, of little importance to her, its healing powers on a disappointed heart might be as reasonably tried on herself as on her sister.

Colonel Brandon entered while the party were at tea, and by his manner of looking round the room for Marianne, Elinor immediately fancied that he neither expected nor wished to see her there, and, in short, that he was already aware of what occasioned her absence. Mrs. Jennings was not struck by the same thought; for soon after his entrance, she walked across the room to the tea-table where Elinor presided and whispered, "The Colonel looks as grave as ever you see. He knows nothing of it; do tell him, my dear."

He shortly afterwards drew a chair close to hers and, with a look which perfectly assured her of his good information, inquired after her sister.

"Marianne is not well," she said. "She has been indisposed all day, and we have persuaded her to go to bed."

"Perhaps, then," he hesitatingly replied, "what I heard this morning may—there may be more truth in it than
