"In prison, sir?" The constable seemed surprised, scratching at his chin. "Good lack, for what misdeed?"

"A witness, and a necessary one," the alderman replied, his voice carrying a distinct satisfaction.

"Why, Messire Bailiff," interjected Denys, stepping forward, "you lay not all your witnesses by the heels, I trow."

Pleased by the title, the alderman grew communicative. "In cases of blood, we detain all testimony likely to give us leg bail and thus defeat justice. That is why we still keep the women folk. A man may hide in one mind for a week, but a woman, if she does her duty to the realm on Friday, shall undo it before Sunday comes around. Could you see that wench now, you would find her a-blubbering at having betrayed five males to the gallows. If they had been females, we might have trusted to a subpoena; they despise one another and show some sense. But now, thinking on it, there were other reasons for laying this one aside. Hand me those depositions, young sir." He adjusted his spectacles. "Ay! She was implicated; she was one of the band."

A loud denial erupted simultaneously from Denys and Gerard.

"No need to deafen me," said the alderman, waving a hand dismissively. "It is written in black and white. 'Jean Hardy (who is one of the thieves), being questioned, confessed that—humph? Ay, here it is. And that the girl Manon was the decoy, and her sweetheart was Georges Vipont, one of the band, and hanged last month. And that she had been dejected ever since, and openly blamed the band for his death, saying if they had not been rank cowards, he had never been taken, and it is his opinion she did but betray them out of very spite.' "

"His opinion!" cried Gerard indignantly. "What signifies the opinion of a cutthroat, burning to be revenged on her who has delivered him to justice? And if you follow that line, what avails his testimony? Is a thief never a liar? Is he not always a liar? And here is a motive to lie! Revenge—it is the strongest of all passions. Oh, sir, what madness to question a detected felon and listen to him lying away an honest life—as if he were a true man swearing in open daylight with his true hand on the Gospel!"

"Young man," said the alderman, his tone hardening. "Restrain thy heat in presence of authority! I find by your tone you are a stranger. Know then that in this land we question all the world. We are not so weak as to hope to get at the truth by shutting either our left ear or our right."

"And so you would listen to Satan belying the saints!"

"Ta! Ta! The law meddles but with men and women, and these cannot utter a story of nothing but lies, let them try ever so. Wherefore we shut not the barn-door against any man's grain. Only having taken it in, we do winnow and sift it. And who told you I had swallowed the thief's story whole like fair water? Not so. I did but credit so much of it as was borne out by better proof."

"Better proof?" Gerard looked blank. "Why, who but the thieves would breathe a word against her?"

"Marry, herself."

"Herself, sir? Did you question her too?"

"I tell you we question all the world. Here is her deposition; can you read? Read it yourself, then."

Gerard glanced at Denys and read him Manon's deposition.

"I am a native of Epinal. I left my native place two years ago because I was unfortunate: I could not like the man they bade me. So my father beat me. I ran away from my father. I went to service. I left service because the mistress was jealous of me. The reason she gave for turning me off was because I was saucy. Last year I stood in the marketplace to be hired with other girls. The landlord of 'The Fair Star' hired me. I was eleven months with him. A young man courted me. I loved him. I found out that travelers came and never went away again. I told my lover. He bade me hold my peace. He threatened me. I found my lover was one of a band of thieves. When travelers were to be robbed, the landlord went out and told the band to come. Then I wept and prayed for the travelers' souls. I never told. A month ago my lover died.

"The soldier put me in mind of my lover. He was bearded like him I had lost. I cannot tell whether I should have interfered, if he had had no beard. I am sorry I told now."

The paper almost slipped from Gerard's hands. For the first time, he saw clearly that Manon's life hung by a thread. He knew the doggedness of the law and the men who executed it. With sudden desperation, he threw himself on his knees before the alderman. "Oh, sir! Think of the difference between those cruel men and this poor, weak woman! Could you have the heart to send her to the same death with them? Could you have the heart to condemn us to look on and see her slaughtered, who, but for risking her life for ours, had not now been in jeopardy? Alas, sir! Show me and my comrade some pity, if you have none for her, poor soul. Denys and I be true men, and you will rend our hearts if you kill that poor, simple girl. What can we do? What is left for us to do then but cut our throats at her gallows' foot?"

The alderman was tough, yet mortal. The prayers and agitation of Gerard first astounded him, then touched a hidden cord. He showed it in a peculiar manner, becoming peevish and fretful. "There, get up, do," he said. "I doubt whether anybody would say as many words for me. What ho, Daniel! Go fetch the town clerk."

On the functionary entering from an adjoining room, the alderman continued, "Here is a foolish lad fretting about yon girl. Can we stretch a point? Say we admit her to bear witness, and question her favorably."

The town clerk, a man of "impossibility," shook his head. "Nay, sir, we cannot do that. She was not concerned in this business. Had she been accessory, we might have offered her a pardon to bear witness."

Gerard burst in. "But she did better! Instead of being accessory, she stayed the crime; and she proffered herself as witness by running hither with the tale."

"Tush, young man, 'tis a matter of law."

The alderman and the clerk then engaged in a long discussion, the one maintaining, the other denying, that she stood as fair in law as if she had been accessory to the attempt on the travelers' lives. This proved lucky for Manon. Irritated by the clerk reiterating his impossibilities, the alderman declared he would show him he could do anything he chose. He summoned Manon. Upon the landlord of "The White Hart" acting as her bondsman, and Denys depositing five gold pieces, and the girl promising, not without some coaxing from Denys, to attend as a witness, he liberated her. To ease his conscience, however, he explained his leniency in his own terms.

"The town had to buy a new rope for everybody hanged, and present it to the bourreau, or compound with him in money: and she was not, in his opinion, worth this municipal expense, whereas decided characters like her late confederates were."

Thus, Denys and Gerard carried her off. Gerard danced round her for joy, Denys keeping up her spirits by assuring her of the demise of a troublesome personage, and she wept inauspiciously. On the road to "The White Hart," the public found her out. Having heard the whole story from the archers, who naturally told it warmly in her favor, they followed, hurrahing and encouraging her until, backed by numbers, she plucked up her heart. The landlord, seeing at a glance that her presence would draw custom, received her politely and assigned her an upper chamber. Here she buried herself, and being alone, rained tears again.

Poor little mind, it was like a ripple, up and down, down and up, up and down. Bidding the landlord be very kind to her and keep her a prisoner without letting her feel it, the friends went out. Lo! As they stepped into the street, they saw two processions coming towards them from opposite sides. One was a large one, attended with noise and howls and those indescribable cries by which rude natures reveal at odd times that relationship to the beasts of the field and forest which at other times we succeed in hiding. The other, very thinly attended by a few nuns and friars, came slow and silent.

These were the prisoners going to exposure in the marketplace, and the gathered bones of the victims coming to the churchyard.

And the two met in the narrow street nearly at the inn door, and could not pass each other for a long time. The bier, that bore the relics of mortality, got wedged against the cart that carried the men who had made those bones what they were, and in a few hours must die for it themselves. The mob had not the quick intelligence to be at once
