The condemned criminals were ordered to stand pinioned in the marketplace for two hours, exposed to the gaze of the populace, so that any who recognized them for other crimes might testify against them at their trial. They endured the full duration, yet no fresh accusation arose against them. This was unsurprising, for they were creatures of the night—vampires preying in the shadows upon weary travelers, mostly strangers.

However, as they were being removed, a terrifying scream pierced the crowd. A woman pointed a trembling finger at one of the men, her eyes wide with horror. Before she could speak, she collapsed, fainting instantly. Men and women surged around her, torn between aiding her and satisfying a morbid curiosity. As consciousness returned to her, frantic conjectures erupted among the onlookers. "It was him!" "No, it was this one!" "Nay, nay, it was the hangdog with the hair hanging round his neck!"

These speculations were cut short. The poor creature, recovering her senses, lunged at the man identified as the culprit like a lioness. "My child! Man! Man! Give me back my child!" she cried, seizing the glossy golden hair the officers had tied around his neck. With desperate strength, she tore it from him and buried her face in it, kissing it feverishly. Then, as her confused mind cleared, she realized the tragic truth: the girl was dead. She sank to the ground, shrieking and sobbing over the severed locks, until the crowd swarmed toward the assassin with a savage, unified growl.

His life had ended swiftly; in those days, everyone carried a weapon at their girdle. But Denys drew his sword immediately, shouting, "A moi, camarades!" (To me, comrades!), and held the mob at bay. "Who touches him dies!" he commanded. Other archers backed him, and with difficulty they protected him from the frenzied throng, while Denys appealed to the rioters for restraint.

"What sort of vengeance is this?" he asked, his voice ringing above the din. "Would you be so mad as to rob justice, to give this vermin an easy death?"

Though the mob remained passive due to the archers' steel rather than Denys's words, they growled with flashing eyes. Seeing this, the municipal officers gathered, formed a guard with the archers, and prudently escorted the accused back to jail. The mob hooted at them and the prisoners indiscriminately. Once the inmates were safely lodged, Denys headed for "The White Hart," where he expected to find Gerard.

On the way, he spotted two girls working at a first-floor window. He saluted them, and they smiled. Conversation ensued; their manners were easy, their complexions high. He invited them to dinner at the inn. They initially objected, then acquiesced. In this charming society, Denys momentarily forgot his concern for poor Gerard, who, meanwhile, had been arrested.

On the way to jail, Gerard suddenly stopped, regaining his presence of mind. He demanded to know by whose authority he was detained. "By the vice-baillie's," replied the constable.

"The vice-baillie? Alas! What have I, a stranger, done to offend a vice-baillie? For this charge of sorcery must be a blind. No sorcerer am I; I am a poor, true lad far from home."

This vagueness disgusted the officer. "Show him the *capias*, Jacques," he ordered. Jacques held the writ out, about a yard and a half from Gerard's eye, while the large constable pinned Gerard down. Both officers were on tenterhooks, fearing the prisoner might snatch the document, to which they attached superstitious importance.

But the poor prisoner had no such thought. He craned his neck, reading it, and to his infinite surprise discovered that the vice-bailiff who had signed the writ was the friendly alderman. Taking courage, he assured his captor there must be an error and demanded to be taken before the alderman.

"What say you to that, Jacques?"

"Impossible. We have no orders to take him before his worship. Read the writ!"

"Nay, but good kind fellows, what harm can it be? I will give you each an ecu."

"Jacques, what say you to that?"

"Humph! I say we have no orders *not* to take him to his worship. Read the writ!"

"Then say we take him to prison round by his worship."

Agreed. They accepted the money and bade Gerard observe they were doing him a favor. He saw they desired gratitude as much as silver. He tried to satisfy their cupidity, but feigning was not his forte.

Entering the alderman's presence, Gerard's heart hammered in his throat. He begged with a faltering voice to know what offense he had committed since leaving the room with Manon and Denys. "Nought that I know of," said the alderman. Upon seeing the writ, he explained he had signed it at daybreak. "I am growing old, and my memory fails me: I forgot your offense entirely, thinking only of the girl... but I remember now. All is well. You are the one I committed for sorcery. Stay! Ere you go to gaol, you shall hear what your accuser says: run and fetch him."

The man could not find the accuser immediately. Impatient, the alderman told Gerard the main charge was that he had set a dead body ablaze with diabolical fire that flamed but did not consume. "And if 'tis true, young man, I'm sorry for thee, for thou wilt assuredly burn with fire of good pine logs in the market-place of Neufchâteau."

"Oh, sir, for pity's sake let me have speech with his reverence the cure."

The alderman advised against it. "The Church was harder upon sorcerers than was the corporation."

"But, sir, I am innocent," Gerard insisted, his voice shifting between snarling and whining.

"Oh, if you think you are innocent..." The officer was dismissed to escort Gerard to the cure, but instructed to ensure he did not escape.

They found the cure in his doublet, repairing a wheelbarrow. Gerard told him everything, appealing piteously. "Just for using a little phosphorus in self-defense against cut-throats, they are going to hang."

Lucky for the magician, he had already told his tale fully to the cure, who thus held the stick at the right end while the corporation held it by the ferule. The cure looked exceedingly grave, stating, "I must question you privately on this untoward business." He took Gerard into a private room, bidding the officer stand outside and guard the door. The big constable stood quaking, expecting the room to vanish in a stink of brimstone.

Instantly alone, the cure's countenance unlocked, and he became himself again. "Show me the trick on't," he said, his curiosity piqued.

"I cannot, sir, unless the room be darkened."

The cure quickly closed out the light with a wooden shutter. "Now, then."

"But on what shall I put it?" Gerard asked. "Here is no dead face. 'Twas that made it look so dire." The cure groped about the room. "Good; here is an image: 'tis my patron saint."

"Heaven forbid! That were profanation."

"Pshaw! 'twill rub off, will't not?"

"Ay, but it goes against me to take such liberty with a saint," objected the sorcerer.

"Fiddlestick!" said the divine.

"To be sure, by putting it on his holiness, it will show your reverence it is no Satanic art."

"Mayhap 'twas for that I did propose it," said the cure subtly.

Encouraged, Gerard fired the eyes and nostrils of the image, making the cure jump. Then he lit up the hair in patches and set the whole face shining like a glow-worm's.

"By'r Lady," shouted the cure, " 'tis strange, and small my wonder that they took you for a magician, seeing a dead face thus fired. Now come thy ways with me!"

He put on his grey gown and great hat, and in a few minutes they found themselves before the alderman. By his side stood the accuser, a singular figure in red hose and shoes, a black gown with blue bands, and a cocked hat. After saluting the alderman, the cure turned to the accuser, Mangis, saying good-humoredly, "So, Mangis, at thy work again, babbling away honest men's lives! Come, your worship, this is the old tale! Two of a trade can ne'er agree. Here is Mangis, who professes sorcery, and would sell himself to Satan tonight, but that Satan is not so weak as to buy what he can have gratis. This Mangis, who would be a sorcerer, but is only a quacksalver, accuses of magic a true lad, who did but use in self-defense a secret of chemistry well-known to me and all churchmen."

"But he is no churchman, to dabble in such mysteries," objected the alderman.

"He is more churchman than layman, being convent-bred, and in the lesser orders," said the ready cure. "Therefore, sorcerer, withdraw thy plaint without more words!"

"That I will not, your reverence," replied
