"Nay, Richard," Catherine said finally, "for Heaven's sake, let not this single wretched creature set us all by the ears. Has she not already bred enough ill blood?"

"In truth, she has," replied Gerard, his voice steady though his heart hammered. "Do not fear me, good mother. Let her enter and read the letter of the poor boy whom she has bewitched by devilish arts, and then let her depart. Give me your words to ensure she receives no countenance beyond decent, constrained civility; we cannot afford less, for we are in our own house. And I promise, I will say no more."

On this understanding, they awaited the foe. She, for her part, prepared for the interview in a spirit little less hostile. When Denys brought word that they would not come to her but would receive her, her lip curled, and she bade him observe how in them every feeling, however small, was magnified in importance compared to their love for Gerard. "Well," she said, "I have not that excuse; so why mimic the pretty burgher's pride, the pride of all unlettered folk? I will go to them for Gerard's sake. Oh, how I loathe them!"

Thus poor, good-natured Denys was unwittingly bringing into one house the materials of an explosion.

Margaret made her toilet in the same spirit that a knight of her day dressed for battle—he to parry blows, and she to parry glances—glances of contempt at her poverty or of irony at her extravagance. Her kirtle was of English cloth, dark blue, and her farthingale and hose of the same material, a glossy roan or claret color. There was not an inch of pretentious fur about her, only plain snowy linen wristbands and curiously plaited linen from the bosom of the kirtle up to the commencement of the throat; it did not encircle her throat but framed it, being square, not round. Her front hair still peeped in two waves, much after the fashion which Mary Queen of Scots revived a century later; but instead of the silver net which would have ill become her present condition, the rest of her head was covered with a very small, tight-fitting hood of dark blue cloth, hemmed with silver. Her shoes were red, but the roan petticoat and hose prepared the spectator's mind for the shock, setting off her arched instep and shapely foot. Beauty knew its business then as now.

And with all this, she kept her enemies waiting, though it was three by the dial.

At last she started, attended by her companion. And when they were halfway, she stopped and said thoughtfully, "Denys!"

"Well, she-general?"

"I must go home" (piteously).

"What? Have ye left somewhat behind?"

"What?"

"My courage. Oh! oh! oh!"

"Nay, nay, be brave, she-general. I shall be with you."

"Ay, but wilt keep close to me when I be there?"

Denys promised, and she resumed her march, but gingerly.

Meantime, they were all assembled, waiting for her with a strange mixture of feelings. Mortification, curiosity, panting affection, aversion to her who came to gratify those feelings, yet another curiosity to see what she was like, and what there was in her to bewitch Gerard and make so much mischief.

At last Denys came alone and whispered, "The she-comrade is without."

"Fetch her in," said Eli. "Now, whisht, all of ye. None speak to her but I."

They all turned their eyes to the door in dead silence. A little muttering was heard outside; Denys's rough organ and a woman's soft and mellow voice. Presently that stopped; and then the door opened slowly, and Margaret Brandt, dressed as I have described, somewhat pale but calm and lovely, stood on the threshold, looking straight before her.

They all rose but Kate, and remained mute and staring.

"Be seated, mistress," said Eli gravely, and motioned to a seat that had been set apart for her.

She inclined her head and crossed the apartment; and in so doing, her condition was very visible, not only in her shape but in her languor. Cornelis and Sybrandt hated her for it. Richard thought it spoiled her beauty. It softened the women somewhat.

She took her letter out of her bosom and kissed it as if she had been alone; then disposed herself to read it, with the air of one who knew she was there for that single purpose.

But as she began, she noticed they had seated her all by herself, like a leper. She looked at Denys, and putting her hand down by her side, made him a swift, furtive motion to come by her. He went with an obedient start, as if she had cried "March!" and stood at her shoulder like a sentinel; but this zealous manner revealed to the company that he had been ordered thither, and at that she coloured. And now she began to read her Gerard, *their* Gerard, to their eager ears, in a mellow, clear voice, so soft, so earnest, so thrilling, her very soul seemed to cling about each precious sound. It was a voice as of a woman's bosom set speaking by Heaven itself.

"I do nothing doubt, my Margaret, that long ere this shall meet thy beloved eyes, Denys, my most dear friend, will have sought thee out, and told thee the manner of our unlooked-for and most tearful parting. Therefore I will e'en begin at that most doleful day. What befell him after, poor faithful soul, fain, fain would I hear, but may not. But I pray for him day and night next after thee, dearest. Friend more stanch and loving had not David in Jonathan, than I in him. Be good to him, for poor Gerard's sake."

At these words, which came quite unexpectedly to him, Denys leaned his head on Margaret's high chair and groaned aloud. She turned quickly as she sat, and found his hand, and pressed it. And so the sweetheart and the friend held hands while the sweetheart read.

"I went forward all dizzied, like one in an ill dream; and presently a gentleman came up with his servants, all on horseback, and had liked to have ridden o'er me. And he drew rein at the brow of the hill, and sent his armed men back to rob me. They robbed me civilly enough and took my purse and the last copper, and rode gaily away. I wandered stupid on, a friendless pauper."

There was a general sigh, followed by an oath from Denys.

"Presently a strange dimness came o'er me; I lay down to sleep on the snow. 'Twas ill done, and with store of wolves hard by. Had I loved thee as thou dost deserve, I had shown more manhood. But oh, sweet love, the drowsiness that did crawl o'er me desolate, and benumb me, was more than nature. And so I slept; and but that God was better to us than I to thee or to myself, from that sleep I ne'er had waked; so all do say. I had slept an hour or two, as I suppose, but no more, when a hand did shake me rudely. I awoke to my troubles. And there stood a servant girl in her holiday suit. 'Are ye mad,' quoth she, in seeming choler, 'to sleep in snow, and under wolves' noses? Art weary o' life, and not long weaned? Come, now, said she, more kindly, 'get up like a good lad;' so I did rise up. 'Are ye rich, or are ye poor?' But I stared at her as one amazed. 'Why, 'tis easy of reply,' quoth she. 'Are ye rich, or are ye poor?' Then I gave a great, loud cry; that she did start back. 'Am I rich, or am I poor? Had ye asked me an hour ago, I had said I am rich. But now I am so poor as sure earth beareth on her bosom none poorer. An hour ago I was rich in a friend, rich in money, rich in hope and spirits of youth; but now the Bastard of Burgundy hath taken my friend, and another gentleman my purse; and I can neither go forward to Rome nor back to her I left in Holland. I am poorest of the poor.' 'Alack!' said the wench. 'Natheless, an ye had been rich ye might ha' lain down again in the snow for any use I had for ye; and then I trow ye had soon fared out o' this world as bare as ye came into it. But, being poor, you are our man: so come wi' me.' Then I went because she bade me, and because I recked not now whither I went. And she took me to a fine house hard by, and into a noble dining-hall hung with black; and there was set a table with many dishes, and but one plate and one chair. 'Fall to!' said she, in a whisper. 'What, alone?' said I. 'Alone? And which of us, think ye, would eat out of the same dish with ye? Are we robbers o' the dead?' Then she speered where I was born. 'At Tergou,' said I. Says she, 'And when a gentleman
