"Mistress, the tongues of men say he is dead."

"Not so," Margaret replied, her voice trembling. "They feed me with hope, but they speak otherwise behind my back."

"Aye, to your face, yes," the servant echoed, watching the tears begin to fall from Margaret's cheeks. "Ay, to your face, but behind your back, they all whisper the death knell."

Luke whimpered, seeking comfort in her sorrow. Though he possessed the frame of a man, his heart beat with the timidity of a girl.

"Prithee, weep not so bitterly, sweet mistress," he cooed, pressing close. "If I could conjure him back to life, I would sooner than behold thee weeding thy heart so sore."

Margaret wiped her eyes, blaming the cruelty of the double-tongued world. Recovering her composure, she laid a heavy hand upon his shoulder and spoke with solemn intensity. "Luke, he lives not in death. A dying man possesses a sight strange unto others. Listen to me, Luke! When my poor father lay upon his bed, nearing the end, and I, a simple fool, was so happy believing he would recover entirely, he sat in that very chair where thou standest now—Mother was beside him, and I was yonder sewing a sleeve—and he looked up and said, 'I see him!' I see him!" She paused, her gaze distant. "Not like a failing man, drained and gray, but all on fire. 'Sore disfigured,' he cried, 'on a great river, coming this way.'"

"Oh, Luke," she cried, clutching his arm, "if thou wert a woman, possessing the depth of feeling thou feignest, thou wouldst pity me and find him for me. Take a thought! He is the father of my child!"

"Alack," Luke murmured, his brow furrowing, "if I knew how, I would. But how?"

"Nay, of course thou cannotst. I am mad to think it. But oh, if anyone truly cared for me, they would; that is all I know."

Luke fell silent, his mind racing. "The old folk say dying men see more than living wights. Let me think: for my mind cannot gallop like thine. On a great river... well, the Maas is a great river." He paced, weighing the possibilities. "Coming this way? Then if it were the Maas, he would have arrived by now. Therefore, it is not the Maas. The Rhine is a greater river, vast and long. I think it must be the Rhine."

"And so do I, Luke," Margaret interjected, hope flickering. "Denys bade him come down the Rhine. But even if it is, he may turn off before reaching his birthplace. He does not pine for me as I for him; that is clear. Luke, dost thou not think he has deserted me?" She sought contradiction, but he offered only a grim reflection. "It looks very like it. What a fool he must be!"

"What do we know?" Margaret pleaded, imploring him to deny the worst.

"Let me think again," Luke said, pacing slowly. "My mind cannot gallop."

The result of this meditation was a plan. He knew a station roughly sixty miles up the Rhine where all public boats docked. He would travel there and intercept the truant. Though he did not know Gerard by sight, he would mingle with the passengers on every incoming boat and inquire if a man named Gerard was aboard.

"And, mistress," Luke suggested, looking at her with newfound gravity, "if thou wouldst give me a token, a letter to him? For, being strangers, he may not believe a word I say without proof."

"Good, kind, thoughtful Luke," she breathed, gratitude flooding her features. "How have I undervalued thee! Give me till supper-time to write it."

At supper, she handed him a long letter, tied with silk in the fashion of the age and sealed over the knot. Her cheeks burned with a deep blush.

Luke weighed the parchment in his hand, a shadow of discontent crossing his face. "Say your father was not dreaming," he demanded gravely, "and say I have the luck to fall in with this man, and say he should prove a better bit of stuff than I think him, and come home to thee then and there... what becomes of me?"

Margaret flushed to her brow, panic seizing her. "Oh, Luke, Heaven will reward thee! I shall fall on my knees and bless thee; I shall love thee all my days, sweet Luke, as a mother loves her son. I am so old by thee; trouble ages the heart. Thou shalt not go 'tis not fair of me. Love maketh us to be all self."

"Humph!" Luke grunted. "And if," he resumed, his tone hardening, "that scapegrace reads thy letter, hears me tell him how thou pinest for him, and yet, being a traitor or a mere idiot, refuses to turn to thee... what shall become of me? Must I die a bachelor, and thou fare lonely to thy grave, neither maid, wife, nor widow?"

Margaret panted with fear and emotion at this terrible piece of good sense, the plain question hanging in the air. Finally, she faltered, "If, which our Lady be merciful to me and forbid—"

"Well, mistress?"

"If he should read my letter, hear thy words—and, sweet Luke, be just and tell him what a lovely babe he hath, fatherless, fatherless. Oh, Luke, can he be so cruel?"

"I trow not but if?"

"Then he will give thee up my marriage lines, and I shall be an honest woman, and a wretched one, and my boy will not be a bastard. Of course, then we could both go into any honest man's house troubled by us. And for thy goodness this day, I will—I will—ne'er be so ungrateful as to pass thy door to another man."

"Ay, but wilt thou come in at mine? Answer me that!"

"Oh, ask me not! Some day, perhaps, when my wounds cease bleeding. Alas, I'll try. If I don't fling myself and my child into the Maas. Do not go, Luke! Do not think of going! 'Tis all madness from first to last."

But Luke was as slow to forego an idea as to form one. His reply revealed how swiftly love was forging a man within him. "Well," he said, "madness is something, anyway. And I am tired of doing nothing for thee. I am no great talker. To-morrow, at peep of day, I start."

"But hold!" He paused, his expression darkening. "I have no money. My mother keeps all mine, and I ne'er see it again."

Then Margaret produced Catherine's gold angel, which had escaped scrutiny so often, and pressed it into Luke's hand. With the coin, he set out on his mad errand.

To Luke, it did not seem so mad as it did to us. It was a superstitious age, and he acted upon the dying man's dream, vision, or illusion with the same reverence we apply to respectable information.

Yet Catherine was downright angry when she heard of it. "To send the poor lad on such a wild-goose chase!" she fumed. "But you are like many more girls; mark my words: by the time you have worn that Luke fairly out, and made him as sick of you as a dog, you will turn as fond on him as a cow on a calf, and 'Too late' will be the cry."

***

Two friars reached Holland from the south merely twelve hours after Luke had departed up the Rhine. Thus, whether wild-goose chase or not, the parties were rapidly nearing one another. For Jerome, unable to preach in Low Dutch, pushed on toward the coast, anxious to reach England as soon as possible. Had the stream borne them along, the friars would have missed Luke entirely, passing him in full stream below his intended station, but fate intervened.

About twenty miles above Luke's destination, Clement landed to preach in a large village. Towards the end of his sermon, he noticed a grey nun weeping. He approached her kindly, asking the cause of her grief.

"Nay," she replied, "it is not for myself these tears flow. 'Tis for my lost friend. Thy words remind me of what she was, and what she is, poor wretch." She confessed her distinction as a Franciscan, noting his status as a Dominican, but he reassured her, "It matters little, my sister, if we are both Christians, and if I can aid thee."

Moved by his eloquence, she revealed a terrible secret: a young nun, the darling of the convent and her bosom friend, had been lured away from her vows. After various gradations of sin, she was now living in a small inn as a chambermaid, effectively a decoy, selling her favors to wealthier customers. "Anywhere else," she lamented, "we might, by kindly violence, force her away from perdition. But this innkeeper serves the fierce baron on the heights, holds his ear, and would burn our convent to the ground were we to take her by force."

"Moreover, souls will not be saved by brute force," Clement observed wisely.

Jerome arrived shortly after. Persuaded by Clement to
