For seven days and nights, the ocean had been our prison. The darkness had fallen six times upon a scene of wild terror, and each returning light had revealed only greater ruin. By the seventh day, hope had evaporated entirely. Our course was lost beyond recovery, a mystery to any mind capable of conjecture. The crew, stripped of spirit and utterly drained by relentless labor, watched as the ship tore itself apart. Riven masts lay splintered on the deck; leaks gaped in every direction, swallowing the vessel with rushing water.

Gone were the reckless oaths of men who dare the sea; now, frantic cries rang out for mercy, mingled with strange, ludicrous vows promised to any god who would grant deliverance. Every soul aboard alternately surrendered their spirit to the Creator, striving desperately to imagine a means of survival.

My heart sank as I surveyed my family amidst the carnage. Our four young sons were paralyzed by terror. "Dear children," I spoke, my voice trembling but firm, "if the Lord wills, He can save us from this fearful peril; if not, let us calmly yield our lives into His hand, thinking of the joy of finding ourselves forever united in that happy home above. Even death is not too bitter when it does not separate those who love one another."

At these words, my weeping wife lifted her chin with newfound bravery. As the boys clustered around her, she began to soothe and encourage them with calm, loving tones. I rejoiced in her fortitude, though my own heart threatened to shatter under the gaze of my loved ones.

Together, we knelt, praying with deep earnestness. Fritz, in particular, besought help and deliverance for his parents and brothers, seemingly forgetting his own safety in his fervor. Our hearts were soothed by the comforting power of child-like faith, and the horrors of our situation seemed less crushing. "Ah," I thought, "the Lord will hear our prayer! He will help us!"

Amidst the roar of thundering waves, a cry rent the air: "Land! Land!" Simultaneously, the ship struck with a frightful shock, hurling everyone onto the deck and threatening immediate destruction. Dreadful sounds signaled the breakup of the hull, and the roaring waters poured in from all sides.

Then the Captain's voice boomed above the tumult, shouting, "Lower away the boats! We are lost!"

"Lost!" I exclaimed, the word striking me like a dagger. Yet, seeing my children's terror renew, I composed myself. "Take courage, my boys! We are all above water yet. There is land not far off; let us do our best to reach it. Remember, God helps those who help themselves!" Calling out this cheer, I left them and climbed the slippery ladder to the deck.

A wave instantly threw me down, followed by another, and then another, as I struggled to find footing. The ship was shattered in directions, and on one side, a massive hole gaped in the hull.

Forgetting the passengers, the ship's company crowded into the lifeboats. The last man to enter cut the davit ropes, casting each boat into the sea.

Horror seized me as I beheld the last remaining boat depart, the final seamen springing in and pushing off, ignoring my desperate cries and entreaties to allow us to share their slender chance of life. My voice was drowned in the howling blast, and even if they had wished to return, the mountain-high waves made it impossible.

Casting my eyes despairingly around, I gradually realized our position was not hopeless. The stern of the ship, containing our cabin, was jammed between two high rocks, partly raised from the breakers which dashed the fore-part to pieces. Through rents in the mist and rain, I could make out a line of rocky coast. Though rugged, it offered a sign of help.

Yet, the sense of loneliness weighed heavily on me as I returned to my family. Constrained to smile, I said, "Courage, dear ones! Although our good ship will never sail again, she is so placed that our cabin remains above water. Tomorrow, if the winds abate, I see no reason why we should not reach the shore."

These words worked magic on my children's spirits; they trusted my assurances implicitly. The boys immediately regarded our precarious chance of escape as a happy certainty and began to enjoy the relief from the violent pitching.

However, my wife perceived my hidden distress despite my forced composure. I made her understand our real situation, greatly fearing the toll it might take on her nerves. Yet, her courage and trust in Providence never faltered, and seeing this, my own fortitude revived.

"We must find some food and take a good supper," she declared. "It will never do to grow faint by fasting. We shall require our utmost strength tomorrow."

Night descended apace, the storm as fierce as ever, punctuated by crashes announcing further damage to our unfortunate vessel. We feared the lifeboats must have sunk under the foaming waves.

"God will help us soon now, won't He, Father?" asked my youngest child.

"You silly little thing," said Fritz, my eldest son, sharply, "do you not know that we must not settle what God is to do for us? We must have patience and wait His time."

"Very well said," I murmured inwardly, "had it been said kindly, Fritz, my boy. You too often speak harshly to your brothers, though you may not mean to."

A good meal was now ready. My youngsters ate heartily, and retiring to rest, were speedily fast asleep. Fritz, aware of the real danger, kept watch with us. After a long silence, "Father," he said, "don't you think we might contrive swimming-belts for Mother and the boys? With those, we might all escape to land, for you and I can swim."

"Your idea is so good," I answered, "that I shall arrange something at once, in case of an accident during the night."

We immediately searched for materials and fortunately found a number of empty flasks and tin canisters. Connecting them two and two, we formed floats sufficiently buoyant to support a person. My wife and young sons each willingly put one on. I then provided myself with matches, dry tinder, knives, cord, and other portable articles, trusting that if the vessel went to pieces before daylight, we might gain the shore, not wholly destitute.

Fritz and his brothers now slept soundly. Throughout the night, my wife and I maintained our prayerful watch, dreading every fresh sound as a sign of fatal change.

At length, the faint dawn of day appeared. The long, weary night was over, and with thankful hearts, we perceived that the gale had begun to moderate. Blue sky broke above us, and the lovely hues of sunrise adorned the eastern horizon.

I aroused the boys, and we assembled on the remaining portion of the deck. To their surprise, they discovered that no one else was on board.

"Hallo, Papa! What has become of everybody? Are the sailors gone? Have they taken away the boats? Oh, Papa! Why did they leave us behind? What can we do by ourselves!"

"My good children," I replied, "we must not despair, although we seem deserted. See how those on whose skill and good faith we depended have left us cruelly to our fate in the hour of danger. God will never do so. He has not forsaken us, and we will trust Him still. Only let us bestir ourselves, and each cheerily do his best. Who has anything to propose?"

"The sea will soon be calm enough for swimming," said Fritz.

"And that would be all very fine for you," exclaimed Ernest, "for you can swim, but think of Mother and the rest of us! Why not build a raft and all get on shore together?"

"We should find it difficult, I think, to make a raft that would carry us safe to shore. However, we must contrive something, and first let each try to procure what will be of most use to us."

Away we all went to inspect the wreckage. I proceeded to examine the supplies of provisions and fresh water within reach. My wife took her youngest son, Franz, to help her attend to the unfortunate animals on board, who were in a pitiful plight, having been neglected for several days.

Fritz hastened to the arms chest, Ernest to look for tools; and Jack went towards the Captain's cabin. No sooner did he open the door than out sprang two splendid, large dogs, who testified their extreme delight and gratitude by such tremendous bounds that they knocked their little deliverer completely head-over-heels, frightening him nearly out of his wits.

Jack did not long yield to fear or anger. He recovered himself, the dogs seemed to ask pardon by vehemently licking his face and hands, and so, seizing the larger by the ears, he jumped on its back. To my great amusement, he coolly rode to meet me as I came up the hatchway. I laughed at the sight, praising his courage, but warning him to be cautious, for animals of this species might, in a state of hunger, be dangerous.

When we reassembled in the cabin, we all displayed our treasures.

Fritz brought a couple of guns, a shot belt, powder-flasks, and plenty of bullets.

Ernest produced a cap full of nails, a pair of large scissors, an axe, and a hammer, while pincers, chisels, and augers stuck out of all his pockets.

Even little Franz carried a box of no small size and eagerly began to show us the "nice
