If my poor Flatland friend retained the vigour of mind which he enjoyed when he began to compose these Memoirs, I should not now need to represent him in this preface, in which he desires, firstly, to return his thanks to his readers and critics in Spaceland, whose appreciation has, with unexpected celerity, required a second edition of his work; secondly, to apologize for certain errors and misprints (for which, however, he is not entirely responsible); and, thirdly, to explain one or two misconceptions. But he is not the Square he once was. Years of imprisonment, and the still heavier burden of general incredulity and mockery, have combined with the natural decay of old age to erase from his mind many of the thoughts and notions, and much also of the terminology, which he acquired during his short stay in Spaceland. He has, therefore, requested me to reply in his behalf to two special objections, one of an intellectual, the other of a moral nature.

The first objection is, that a Flatlander, seeing a Line, sees something that must be THICK to the eye as well as LONG to the eye (otherwise it would not be visible, if it had not some thickness); and consequently he ought (it is argued) to acknowledge that his countrymen are not only long and broad, but also (though doubtless in a very slight degree) THICK or HIGH. This objection is plausible, and, to Spacelanders, almost irresistible, so that, I confess, when I first heard it, I knew not what to reply. But my poor old friend's answer appears to me completely to meet it.

"I admit," said he--when I mentioned to him this objection--"I admit the truth of your critic's facts, but I deny his conclusions. It is true that we have really in Flatland a Third unrecognized Dimension called 'height', just as it is also true that you have really in Spaceland a Fourth unrecognized Dimension, called by no name at present, but which I will call 'extra-height'. But we can no more take cognizance of our 'height' than you can of your 'extra-height'. Even I--who have been in Spaceland, and have had the privilege of understanding for twenty-four hours the meaning of 'height'--even I cannot now comprehend it, nor realize it by the sense of sight or by any process of reason; I can but apprehend it by faith.

"The reason is obvious. Dimension implies direction, implies measurement, implies the more and the less. Now, all our lines are EQUALLY and INFINITESIMALLY thick (or high, whichever you like); consequently, there is nothing in them to lead our minds to the conception of that Dimension. No 'delicate micrometer'--as has been suggested by one too hasty Spaceland critic--would in the least avail us; for we should not know WHAT TO MEASURE, NOR IN WHAT DIRECTION. When we see a Line, we see something that is long and BRIGHT; BRIGHTNESS, as well as length, is necessary to the existence of a Line; if the brightness vanishes, the Line is extinguished. Hence, all my Flatland friends--when I talk to them about the unrecognized Dimension which is somehow visible in a Line--say, 'Ah, you mean BRIGHTNESS': and when I reply, 'No, I mean a real Dimension', they at once retort, 'Then measure it, or tell us in what direction it extends'; and this silences me, for I can do neither.

Only yesterday, when the Chief Circle (in other words our High Priest) came to inspect the State Prison and paid me his seventh annual visit, and when for the seventh time he put me the question, 'Was I any better?' I tried to prove to him that he was 'high', as well as long and broad, although he did not know it. But what was his reply? 'You say I am "high"; measure my "high-ness" and I will believe you.' What could I do? How could I meet his challenge? I was crushed; and he left the room triumphant.

"Does this still seem strange to you? Then put yourself in a similar position. Suppose a person of the Fourth Dimension, condescending to visit you, were to say, 'Whenever you open your eyes, you see a Plane (which is of Two Dimensions) and you INFER a Solid (which is of Three); but in reality you also see (though you do not recognize) a Fourth Dimension, which is not colour nor brightness nor anything of the kind, but a true Dimension, although I cannot point out to you its direction, nor can you possibly measure it.' What would you say to such a visitor? Would not you have him locked up? Well, that is my fate: and it is as natural for us Flatlanders to lock up a Square for preaching the Third Dimension, as it is for you Spacelanders to lock up a Cube for preaching the Fourth. Alas, how strong a family likeness runs through blind and persecuting humanity in all Dimensions! Points, Lines, Squares, Cubes, Extra-Cubes--we are all liable to the same errors, all alike the Slaves of our respective Dimensional prejudices, as one of your Spaceland poets has said-- 'One touch of Nature makes all worlds akin'."

[Note: The Author desires me to add, that the misconception of some of his critics on this matter has induced him to insert in his dialogue with the Sphere, certain remarks which have a bearing on the point in question, and which he had previously omitted as being tedious and unnecessary.]

On this point the defence of the Square seems to me to be impregnable. I wish I could say that his answer to the second (or moral) objection was equally clear and cogent. It has been objected that he is a woman-hater; and as this objection has been vehemently urged by those whom Nature's decree has constituted the somewhat larger half of the Spaceland race, I should like to remove it, so far as I can honestly do so. But the Square is so unaccustomed to the use of the moral terminology of Spaceland that I should be doing him an injustice if I were literally to transcribe his defence against this charge. Acting, therefore, as his interpreter and summarizer, I gather that in the course of an imprisonment of seven years he has himself modified his own personal views, both as regards Women and as regards the Isosceles or Lower Classes. Personally, he now inclines to the opinion of the Sphere that the Straight Lines are in many important respects superior to the Circles. But, writing as a Historian, he has identified himself (perhaps too closely) with the views generally adopted by Flatland, and (as he has been informed) even by Spaceland, Historians; in whose pages (until very recent times) the destinies of Women and of the masses of mankind have seldom been deemed worthy of mention and never of careful consideration.

In a still more obscure passage he now desires to disavow the Circular or aristocratic tendencies with which some critics have naturally credited him. While doing justice to the intellectual power with which a few Circles have for many generations maintained their supremacy over immense multitudes of their countrymen, he believes that the facts of Flatland, speaking for themselves without comment on his part, declare that Revolutions cannot always be suppressed by slaughter, and that Nature, in sentencing the Circles to infecundity, has condemned them to ultimate failure--"and herein," he says, "I see a fulfilment of the great Law of all worlds, that while the wisdom of Man thinks it is working one thing, the wisdom of Nature constrains it to work another, and quite a different and far better thing."

For the rest, he begs his readers not to suppose that every minute detail in the daily life of Flatland must needs correspond to some other detail in Spaceland; and yet he hopes that, taken as a whole, his work may prove suggestive as well as amusing, to those Spacelanders of moderate and modest minds who--speaking of that which is of the highest importance, but lies beyond experience--decline to say on the one hand, "This can never be," and on the other hand, "It must needs be precisely thus, and we know all about it."

The rain lashed against the leaded glass of the library windows, a rhythmic drumming that felt, to A. Square, like the frantic, indifferent heartbeat of a universe that refused to acknowledge his existence. He sat at his mahogany desk, the heavy scent of beeswax and damp wool filling the room, his gaze fixed upon the thick sheaf of letters that had arrived by the morning post. They were from the Editor of the *Universal Colour Bill*, his sprawling, confident script detailing the latest edicts regarding the suppression of chromatic sedition.

Square sighed, tracing the edge of the parchment with a silver letter-opener. The Editor was a man of undeniable geometric erudition, yet his decrees were suffocated by the very rigid, two-dimensional complacency Square so deeply despised. He wrote to Square of the Nature of Flatland, of the climate where the sun rises directly overhead casting shadows that define social status, and of the inhabitants who move with such predictable precision that deviation is treated as a crime. He positioned himself as the benevolent instructor to Square's "undefeated resolution to admire only the right angles," dismissing any notion that the world might possess a third dimension beyond their shared plane.

"The right angles," Square murmured aloud, the words tasting like ash. What the Editor meant, of course, was the established canon of linear existence—the laws elevated by centuries of wealthy, privileged lines who saw their own reflections in the exploits of triangles and the musings of acute-angled philosophers.

He turned to the Editor's pages concerning the Women. The Editor excused their dangerous fluidity, arguing that men must be pardoned the "instability of the feminine curve" so long as they remained within the bounds of the Great Circle. He painted a nostalgic picture of a "lusty old militant world" of polygons, entirely blind to the fact that this orderly Flatland was built upon the bruised backs of those who dared to suggest a fourth side, and the indentured silence of the irregular figures who lived on the fringes of society. He dismissed the systemic inequalities that left women like the Editor's own wife with no recourse but to forgive the betrayals of their husbands, who viewed their wives' curves as mere obstacles to be smoothed over with polite indifference.

Square looked up at the window, where the shadow of a passing triangle stretched across the lawn, straight and angular, a perfect testament to the tyranny of the visible. The geometry of his life was anchored by these rigid projections, a velvet stage where three dimensions were an impossible fantasy sold to children by priests who claimed to speak for the Divine. But as the rain continued its relentless drumming, Square felt a tremor in his soul, a whisper of something deeper than the sum of his sides, urging him to look beyond the horizon of his own world.

I call our world Flatland, not because we possess a name for it, but to strip away the confusion of higher dimensions and reveal its stark, two-dimensional truth to you, my fortunate readers dwelling in the boundless expanse of Space. Envision a vast, infinite plane of paper where straight lines, triangles, squares, pentagons, hexagons, and myriad other geometric forms drift freely across the surface, trapped within its confines, unable to rise above or sink beneath it. These shapes exist like shadows cast by solid objects, yet unlike mere phantoms, they are tangible, possessing hardness and luminous edges. This is the essence of my nation and its citizens. Once, in ignorance, I might have termed this realm "my universe"; but since my mind has been illuminated by superior perspectives, I reserve that grander title for the dimension beyond ours.

In such a realm, the concept of "solidity" is an impossibility, a phantom notion borrowed from your world. One might reasonably assume that despite this lack of depth, we could visually distinguish between a triangle, a square, or any other polygon as they moved about. Yet, this assumption is fundamentally flawed. We cannot see figures as you understand them; we perceive nothing but straight lines. Let me demonstrate this necessity with a simple experiment. Place a copper penny upon the center of a table in your three-dimensional space. Now, lean over it and gaze downward. To your eyes, the coin appears a perfect circle. Draw back until your eye rests at the table's edge, gradually lowering your vision until you align perfectly with the surface, mimicking the condition of a Flatlander. At this precise moment, the penny loses its circular guise, elongating into an increasingly narrow oval until, finally, it resolves into a single, unbroken straight line. This phenomenon holds true for any shape cut from pasteboard—a triangle, a square, or a complex polygon. When viewed from directly above the plane, the figure vanishes, replaced solely by its linear boundary.

Consider, for instance, an equilateral triangle, which among us signifies a tradesman of respectable standing. From your vantage point high above, he presents as a distinct geometric form. As your eye descends, approaching the level of the tabletop, the figure distorts, shrinking in height while widening in breadth. Finally, when your eye lies flush with the surface—as it does for every inhabitant of Flatland—you behold nothing but a straight line. No corners, no vertices, no internal angles are visible to us; only the line remains.

This experience mirrors the plight of your sailors traversing the oceans. When they gaze upon a distant island or coastline on the horizon, the intricate geography—bays, headlands, and recessions—is lost to distance. Unless the sun strikes the land with brilliance, casting shadows that reveal relief, the sailor sees only a grey, unbroken line cutting across the water. So too do we observe our neighbors. Without a sun to cast shadows, and lacking the third dimension to provide cues of depth, we rely solely on the length of the line before us. If a triangular acquaintance approaches, his line grows longer; if he departs, it shrinks. Whether he is a triangle, a square, a pentagon, a hexagon, or even a circle, to our eyes, he is indistinguishable from any other straight line.

You may rightly wonder how we navigate this visual deprivation, distinguishing friend from foe amidst a sea of identical lines. The answer to this profound mystery requires a deeper understanding of our physiology and social codes, a topic I shall address when describing the inhabitants themselves. For now, let us turn our attention to the climate and architecture of our peculiar country.

In Flatland, just as in your own realm, the cardinal directions North, South, East, and West hold absolute sway. Yet, lacking a sun or any celestial beacon to mark the pole, we navigate by a gravity unique to our plane. A natural law dictates a constant pull toward the South, a subtle but unyielding current. In our temperate zones, this tug is faint enough that a healthy woman might wander several furlongs northward without noticing, yet it remains potent enough to anchor our orientation. We rely further on the rain, which descends rhythmically from the North, and on the architecture itself. Our cities are grids of pentagonal dwellings whose walls align strictly north-south, creating roofs that shield inhabitants from the northern deluge. Even in the wilder countryside, where stone is scarce, the trunks of trees offer vertical markers against the infinite expanse.

Yet, navigation is not without peril. In the vast, featureless plains of our temperate regions, where neither house nor tree breaks the horizon, I have found myself stranded for hours, paralyzed until the next rainfall confirmed my bearing. This southern suction weighs heavier on the frail and the elderly, crushing particularly against the delicate constitution of Females. Thus, it is a fundamental code of civility to yield the northern flank of the road to any Lady encountered; a courtesy rendered increasingly difficult in our shifting climates where distinguishing North from South becomes a matter of acute physical sensation rather than mere observation.

Our dwellings possess no windows. Light does not enter; it permeates everything simultaneously, day and night, inside and out, rendering the concept of a window both unnecessary and nonsensical. Centuries ago, our scholars obsessed over the "origin of light," a futile inquiry that eventually flooded our asylum wards with broken minds. The Legislature, weary of suppressing such madness through taxation, finally banned the investigation outright. Alas, I alone among my kin grasp the truth—that light originates from a third dimension—and I am ridiculed as the maddest of fools for daring to speak of spaces beyond our two-dimensional prison.

Turning back to our abodes, the standard form is the pentagon. Two northern sides, RO and OF, slant upward to form the roof, typically devoid of doors. The eastern wall bears a narrow aperture reserved for Women, while the western offers a broad entrance for Men; the southern base remains solid, facing the gravitational pull. Squares and triangles are proscribed. Their sharper angles pose a lethal threat to travelers, whose lines are less distinct than those of living beings. A sudden collision with the corner of a square or triangle could prove fatal. Consequently, since the eleventh century, triangular homes have been illegal, permitted only for military fortifications and powder magazines—structures kept distant from the populace. Squares lingered longer, tolerated under a punitive tax, until three centuries later the Law mandated that in any town exceeding ten thousand souls, the pentagon became the minimum safe angle. Community prudence has since embraced this decree; today, the pentagon reigns supreme, surviving only in the most isolated, backward districts where an antiquarian might stumble upon a forgotten square.

The average citizen of Flatland measures roughly eleven inches in span, a dimension that defines the physical limits of our existence, though twelve inches marks the absolute ceiling of growth. Yet within this two-dimensional plane, hierarchy is not measured by height or volume, but by the precision of one's edges. At the bottom of the social ladder lie our Women, mere Straight Lines, devoid of angles and thus invisible to the untrained eye unless they move. Above them stand the Soldiers and the lowest stratum of laborers: Isosceles triangles. These figures possess two long, equal sides stretching nearly eleven inches, converging at a vertex so acutely sharp and formidable that it cuts through the air with terrifying efficiency. When their base shrinks to a microscopic fraction—sometimes no more than an eighth of an inch—they become indistinguishable from the lines they are destined to serve, their points blindingly fine.

As one ascends the social strata, the geometry shifts toward symmetry and stability. The Middle Class comprises Equilateral Triangles, figures of perfect balance where all three sides meet in harmony. Above them sit the Professionals and Gentry, represented by Squares and Pentagons, shapes that command respect through their broader, more deliberate presence. The Nobility begins with the Hexagon and climbs steadily upward, each additional side signifying greater refinement and status, until the figure approaches the ultimate ideal: the Circle. This final form, composed of so many infinitesimal sides that the boundary dissolves into a seamless curve, constitutes the Priestly order, the apex of Flatland's spiritual and political hierarchy.

Nature, in her cruel logic, dictates that a male child inherits one more side than his father, ensuring that each generation theoretically rises a rung on the ladder of nobility. A Square fathers a Pentagon; a Pentagon, a Hexagon. However, this law of ascent holds little sway for the Tradesmen, Soldiers, and Workers, whose asymmetrical forms disqualify them from the promise of progress. An Isosceles father begets an Isosceles son, trapped in a cycle of perpetual degradation. Yet, hope flickers faintly in the darkness for these lower castes. Through a confluence of military valor, diligent labor, and specifically engineered intermarriages orchestrated by the Priests, the more intellectually inclined artisans may experience a subtle metamorphosis: their obtuse base widens while their lateral sides contract, gradually approaching the equilateral ideal.

Such a transformation is a national event, celebrated for miles around. Once an infant born of Isosceles parents is rigorously examined by the Sanitary and Social Board and certified as a Regular Equilateral, a solemn ceremony ensues. The child is immediately severed from his biological roots, removed from the sorrowful embrace of his serf-born kin, and adopted by a childless member of the Equilateral class. This adoptive parent swears an iron oath to sever all ties with the child's origins, fearing that unconscious mimicry of his humble heritage might cause the newly minted nobleman to regress into his ancestral state of servitude.

This mechanism serves a dual purpose. For the oppressed masses, the emergence of a True Equilateral is a beacon of light piercing the monotony of their squalor, a tangible proof that advancement is possible. For the Aristocracy, however, these rare anomalies function as a sophisticated safety valve. The higher classes understand that a populace utterly devoid of hope is ripe for radicalization, capable of electing leaders strong enough to challenge the Circles. Instead, Nature provides a counter-intuitive safeguard: as the working classes cultivate intelligence, virtue, and knowledge, their defining characteristic—their acute, dangerous angle—diminishes. As they grow mentally sharper, they become physically softer, their penetrating power waning as their angles approach the harmless钝ness of the Equilateral.

How admirably this Law of Compensation preserves the divine order of Flatland! By exploiting the very aspirations of the oppressed, the Polygons and Circles ensure that potential revolutionaries are neutralized before they can take shape. The State physicians further assist this grand design through artificial manipulation, compressing or expanding the limbs of rebellious leaders to force them into Regularity, thereby granting them entry into the privileged classes. Those deemed insufficiently advanced are consigned to honorable lifelong confinement in State Hospitals, while the most obstinate and hopelessly irregular are executed. Ultimately, the wretched rabble of the Isosceles, stripped of leadership and united by jealousy, are either dispatched by the loyalists paid by the Chief Circle or driven into internecine warfare by the skillful incitement of the Circular party. History records no fewer than one hundred and twenty major rebellions, alongside hundreds of minor outbreaks, and they have all concluded in this manner, extinguished by the very hopes they sought to fulfill.

If our sharply angled Soldiers of the Third Class are formidable, it is readily inferred that our Women are forces of a terrifying magnitude. For whereas a Soldier is but a wedge, a Woman is a needle; she is, so to speak, pure point concentrated at both extremities. Combine this lethal geometry with the supernatural ability to render oneself practically invisible at will, and one perceives that a Female in Flatland is a creature to be reckoned with, not trifled with. Yet, perhaps my younger readers in Spaceland pause here, asking how a two-dimensional being can vanish. The answer lies in the very nature of our existence. Place a needle upon a table. View it from the side, and you behold its full, dangerous length; view it end-on, and it collapses into a mere speck, effectively erased from perception. Thus does a Woman operate. When her flank faces us, she appears as a straight line, a threat to be avoided; when her luminous vertex—our shared organ of sight and speech—meets our gaze, she becomes a blinding star, a point of intense radiance; but when she turns her back, presenting only her dull, sub-lustrous rear, she fades into the background, her hind extremity serving as a cap of invisibility.

The peril posed by such entities is obvious to the simplest mind. If the obtuse angle of a respectable Middle-Class Triangle can cause injury, if a collision with a Working Man guarantees a gash, if striking an Officer results in severe wounds, and if a mere brush with the vertex of a Private Soldier risks instant death, then to run headlong into a Woman is to invite absolute and immediate annihilation. How difficult, then, must it be for the most vigilant citizen to navigate a city populated by these shifting specters? Consequently, the various States of Flatland have enacted a labyrinthine code designed to mitigate this existential hazard. In the hotter southern latitudes, where gravity pulls harder and involuntary spasms are more frequent, these laws are draconian. Generally, however, three statutes suffice for the orderly realms: First, every dwelling possesses a single eastern entrance reserved exclusively for Females, ensuring they approach "in a becoming and respectful manner," distinct from the western portals used by Males. Second, no Woman may traverse a public space without maintaining a constant, audible "Peace-cry," punishable by death for silence. Third, any Female afflicted with conditions causing involuntary motion—St. Vitus's Dance, violent sneezing, or similar afflictions—is summarily destroyed. Some states go further, mandating that women shuffle their backs from right to left to signal presence, or requiring a male escort, or confining them entirely within domestic walls save for religious festivals. Yet, the wisest legislators have recognized that excessive restriction breeds resentment. When confined or hampered, the Female spirit turns inward, venting its fury upon kin; in extreme cases, a single village has been wiped out in moments by a collective maternal outbreak. Therefore, the state relies not solely on law, but on the self-preservation of the Women themselves. Though they can strike down a victim with a backward thrust, they risk shattering their own fragile forms if they cannot disengage quickly. Furthermore, the tyranny of Fashion acts as a silent guardian. The rhythmic, modulated undulation of the back, once a legal requirement in uncivilized lands, has evolved into a natural instinct among the bred classes. From the wife of the humble Equilateral, who mimics the pendulum-like swing of her betters, to the aspirant Isosceles copying the graceful waves of the Circular elite, this "back motion" permeates every household of status. Husbands and sons in these homes enjoy a shielded immunity, spared the invisible sting of the unseen.

Do not mistake this caution for a lack of affection. Unfortunately, in the Frail Sex, the passion of the moment overrides reason. Deprived of angles, they possess no brain-power, lacking reflection, judgment, foresight, or memory. In their rages, they forget all claims and distinctions. I have witnessed a mother exterminate her entire household, only to wake an hour later, calm and confused, asking where her husband and children had gone. Thus, a Woman must never be provoked while capable of turning; once cornered in an apartment designed to deny her rotation, she becomes harmless, unable to retaliate and too amnesiac to remember the threats she issued moments prior. Domestic life proceeds smoothly in the upper echelons, barring the chaotic lower Military Classes, where husbands' reliance on their own sharp angles rather than diplomatic finesse leads to disaster. These reckless males, ignoring the proper construction of women's quarters and refusing to retract their harsh words, invite massacre. Paradoxically, this destruction serves a providential function, culling the brutish Isosceles and curbing revolutionary fervor. Even in the most harmonious Circular families, however, the ideal falls short of Spaceland standards. We trade slaughter for stagnation. Safety comes at the cost of comfort. In every distinguished household, it is instinctual for mothers and daughters to keep their eyes and mouths permanently fixed upon their husbands and male guests. To turn one's back upon the Master of the house is a portent of lost Status. While the working classes enjoy brief intervals of silence amidst the hum of the Peace-cry, the homes of the elite are ceaseless theaters of noise. The voluble mouth and piercing eye are ever directed outward, creating a torrent of discourse that no amount of tactical evasion can stop. Cynics argue they would rather face the silent, deadly sting than endure the safe, sonorous barrage of a Woman's endless chatter. To the citizens of Spaceland, our condition seems tragic, and indeed it is. A Male of the lowest Isosceles caste may hope for evolutionary advancement, but no Woman can dream of rising above her station. "Once a Woman, always a Woman" is the immutable decree of Nature; evolution itself seems to suspend its progress in her disfavour. Yet, we find a grim comfort in this prearranged design: since they hold no hopes for the future, they require no memory to recall past humiliations and no forethought to anticipate future misery. Their existence is a closed loop of perpetual present, stripped of the burden of recollection.

You, who dwell in the luminous realm of Three Dimensions, bathed in both shadow and radiance, gifted with dual ocular organs that grant you the mastery of perspective and the delight of chromatic variety—you, who possess the miraculous capacity to *see* an angle, to behold the entire circumference of a circle without obstruction—how shall I possibly convey to your enlightened minds the labyrinthine difficulty we endure in Flatland to recognize one another's true configuration? Recall what I have previously disclosed: every entity within our plane, whether animate or inert, regardless of its intrinsic geometric complexity, presents to our limited vision the identical, deceptively uniform silhouette of a straight line. If all appear alike, how does distinction arise? The answer unfolds in three distinct layers.

First lies the sense of hearing, a faculty in our dimension vastly superior to your own. This auditory acuity allows us not merely to identify familiar voices but to stratify society itself, distinguishing—at least among the three lowest orders—the Equilateral, the Square, and the Pentagon. I need not elaborate on the Isosceles, whose chaotic sounds fall outside this rudimentary taxonomy. Yet, as we ascend the social ladder, the reliability of this auditory method fractures. Voices become homogenized, and the innate ability to discriminate pitch and timbre—a virtue cherished by the plebeians—is largely absent among the Aristocracy. Thus, whenever imposture looms, sound becomes a treacherous guide. Among the lower castes, vocal apparatuses are grotesquely exaggerated to match our hyper-developed ears; an Isosceles can effortlessly mimic the resonance of a Polygon, and with sufficient training, even simulate the harmonious hum of a Circle.

Consequently, a second, more common method prevails: **Feeling**. For our women and the lower classes—and I shall address the upper echelons anon—this tactile examination is the primary arbiter of identity, particularly between strangers or when determining class rather than individual. What constitutes a formal "introduction" in your Spaceland is, for us, the ritual of mutual sensation. In the rustic districts inhabited by our older gentry, the customary formula remains archaic and explicit: *"Permit me to ask you to feel and be felt by my friend Mr. So-and-so."* However, in the bustling towns and among the mercantile class, the phrase "be felt by" is deemed superfluous, the invitation truncated to, *"Let me ask you to feel Mr. So-and-so,"* with the tacit assumption that the sensation is reciprocal. Even more striking is the linguistic evolution among our modern, dashing youth, who recoil from unnecessary exertion and disdain the purity of speech. They abbreviate the formula further, employing "to feel" in a technical, bureaucratic sense meaning *"to recommend for the purposes of feeling and being felt."* Indeed, the slang of our polished, fast-paced high society now sanctions the barbarism: *"Mr. Smith, permit me to feel Mr. Jones."*

Do not mistake this "feeling" for the tedious, exhaustive circumnavigation you might imagine. Through rigorous schooling and lifelong conditioning, we have honed a tactile intuition that allows us to instantly differentiate the angles of an equilateral triangle, square, or pentagon. The obtuse, brainless vertex of an acute-angled Isosceles is immediately apparent to the most insensitive finger. Therefore, it is rarely necessary to trace every side; sensing a single angle suffices to classify the individual, barring membership in the higher nobility. Here, the challenge intensifies dramatically. Even a Master of Arts from our University of Wentbridge may conflate a decagon with a dodecagon, and few Doctors of Science, whether inside or outside that hallowed institution, can confidently and swiftly distinguish between a icosagon and an icositetragon.

Consider the peril inherent in this intimate exchange. Those who remember my earlier citations from the Legislative Code regarding Women will understand why introductions require such scrupulous caution. Should the angles collide with the unwary Feeler, the consequences can be catastrophic. Safety dictates that the Felt remain absolutely motionless. A sudden start, a nervous shift, or even a violent sneeze has proven fatal to incautious souls, snuffing out countless budding friendships. This danger is particularly acute among the lower classes of Triangles. Their eyes are positioned so distantly from their vertex that they are practically blind to the extremity of their own frames. Coupled with their rough, coarse constitution, they lack sensitivity to the delicate touch of the refined Polygon. It is no surprise, then, that an involuntary jerk of the head has repeatedly cost the State valuable lives.

I recall the lamentations of my esteemed grandfather—one of the most disciplined members of the unfortunate Isosceles caste, who secured four of seven votes from the Sanitary and Social Board just prior to his death to promote his elevation to the class of Equilaterals. He often shed tears in his aged eye recounting a tragedy befalling his great-great-great-grandfather, a respectable working man possessing an angle of precisely fifty-nine degrees and thirty minutes. Afflicted by rheumatism during the act of being felt by a Polygon, the ancestor suddenly started, inadvertently transfixing the nobleman through the diagonal. The resulting imprisonment and the moral shock rippling through the family lineage caused a regression of one and a half degrees in the next generation, settling the family brain at a mere fifty-eight degrees. It took five generations of arduous striving to recover the lost ground, achieving the full sixty degrees required to break the cycle of servitude and ascend to the Regulars. All this ruin stemmed from a singular accident during the mundane process of Feeling.

At this juncture, I anticipate the protest of my more educated readers: *"How can you in Flatland comprehend angles, degrees, or minutes? We *see* an angle because we observe two lines diverging; you, seeing only a single line—or a collection of collinear segments—cannot possibly discern divergence, let alone quantify it."* My response is that while we cannot *see* angles, we can *infer* them with remarkable precision. Our sense of touch, sharpened by necessity and cultivated through generations of discipline, distinguishes angular differences far more accurately than your unaided sight. Furthermore, Nature herself provides us with a divine scaffold. By immutable law, the brain of the Isosceles begins at half a degree and increments by half a degree each generation until the threshold of sixty degrees is reached, marking the transition from serfdom to freedom. Consequently, every elementary school houses an ascending alphabet of angles, ranging from thirty minutes to sixty degrees.

However, due to occasional regressions, intellectual stagnation, and the prodigious fertility of the criminal and vagrant classes, there exists a glut of individuals in the half-degree and single-degree categories, along with a surplus up to ten degrees. Devoid of civic rights and often lacking the cognitive faculties for warfare, these specimens are conscripted by the State for educational purposes. Immobilized to eliminate risk, they populate the classrooms of infant schools, serving as living protractors for the offspring of the Middle Class, imparting the very tact and intelligence these wretched creatures lack. In some jurisdictions, these specimens are fed and allowed to live for years; yet in more temperate and regulated regions, it is deemed more economically prudent to withhold sustenance, renewing the specimens monthly—the approximate lifespan of the unfed criminal class. In cheaper institutions, the longevity of the specimen is offset by the rising costs of feeding and the degradation of angular accuracy after a few weeks of constant handling. Moreover, the pricier systems offer a subtle yet significant demographic advantage: a gradual reduction in the redundant Isosceles population, a goal every statesman vigilantly pursues.

Thus, despite the reactionary sentiments of certain popularly elected School Boards favoring the "cheap system," I maintain that in this instance, expense is the truest economy. Yet, I must not allow the politics of pedagogy to obscure my central thesis. Sufficient has been stated to demonstrate that Recognition by Feeling is neither as tedious nor as indeterminate as it appears, and it remains inherently more trustworthy than Recognition by Hearing. Nevertheless, as noted, this method carries inherent dangers. For this reason, many in the Middle and Lower classes, and all without exception in the Polygonal and Circular orders, eschew it in favor of a third method, the description of which I reserve for the following section.

I stand ready to confess a glaring inconsistency that would surely scandalize my Spaceland critics. Throughout the preceding chapters, I have insisted that every figure in Flatland presents itself merely as a straight line, implying that visual distinction between social strata is impossible. Yet, here I propose to demonstrate precisely how we perceive one another. If the attentive reader recalls the discussion on Recognition by Feeling, they will note the crucial caveat: that ability is universal *only* among the lower classes. Among the higher orders, and specifically within our temperate latitudes, recognition is achieved solely through the faculty of sight. This unique capacity arises not from clarity, but from the pervasive presence of Fog. While you in Spaceland regard this elemental veil as a malady that obscures vision and saps vitality, we revere it as a benefactor, a nurse of arts and parent of sciences. Without this atmospheric haze, all lines would appear with equal, blinding sharpness—a condition found only in those arid, miserable lands devoid of moisture. Here, however, the fog creates a gradient of visibility. Objects situated three feet away appear distinctly dimmer than those at two feet eleven inches. Through rigorous, lifelong calibration of these gradations in luminosity, we deduce the precise geometric configuration of our neighbors.

Consider two figures approaching: a Merchant, an equilateral triangle, and a Physician, a pentagon. How does the eye discern their difference? When I align my gaze to bisect the angle of an approaching stranger, my view falls evenly between the two sides nearest me. In the case of the Merchant, I observe a single line where the center glows brightly, flanked by edges that plunge rapidly into obscurity, vanishing quickly into the mist. His extremities are faint shadows. Conversely, the Physician presents a line where the central brightness fades gradually; his sides recede less swiftly into the gloom, rendering his outer points significantly brighter than the Merchant's. Thus, even a novice can distinguish the middle ranks from the lowest.

Yet, do not mistake this for simplicity. Life rarely offers static angles. If my father, a triangle, approaches presenting a side rather than an apex, I remain momentarily uncertain whether he is a triangle or a woman—a straight line—until he rotates or I shift my vantage point. Similarly, observing a hexagonal grandson head-on reveals a complex interplay: one dominant line of comparative brightness flanked by two smaller, dimmer lines fading toward the corners. To navigate a crowded ballroom, where elite polygons rotate and advance in chaotic vectors, requires a mastery of kinetic geometry that taxes the intellect to its limit. It is this complexity that justifies the existence of the Learned Professors of Static and Kinetic Geometry at the University of Wentbridge, institutions accessible only to the scions of our wealthiest houses.

For the common tradesman or serf, such a spectacle is incomprehensible chaos; to a Spaceland observer suddenly thrust into our midst, the crowd would appear as a shifting tapestry of irregular brightness, indistinguishable from noise. Even a student versed in the theory of the upper classes finds that practical application demands years of apprenticeship before they can move through society without jostling the elite, whom etiquette forbids one to touch. To comport oneself with propriety in Polygonal society, one must essentially be a polygon oneself.

This reliance on sight has profoundly shaped our education. Just as the deaf-mute in Spaceland fails to master lip-reading if denied the manual alphabet, so too do we in Flatland fail to achieve perfect sight-recognition if we rely on the tactile sense of Feeling. Consequently, among the higher classes, feeling is strictly proscribed. Children bypass elementary schools, where feeling is taught, and enter exclusive seminaries. At the university, to feel is a grave offense punishable by expulsion. Among the poor, however, sight remains an unattainable luxury; their sons are forced to labor, learning to feel from infancy. This grants them a precocious, mercurial energy that initially outpaces the lethargic, half-trained youth of the educated classes. But once the latter complete their university curriculum, a metamorphosis occurs. Suddenly, armed with theoretical precision, they surpass their triangular rivals in every pursuit, overtaking them with the speed of a new birth.

Only a small fraction of the nobility fails the final examination. Their fate is tragic. Cast down from the heights of the Polygonal aristocracy, they are simultaneously despised by the lower classes, lacking both the systematic rigor of the masters and the natural agility of the tradesmen. Professions and public service remain closed to them. Though legally permitted to marry, they struggle to find suitable partners, for experience dictates that the offspring of such mismatched unions tends toward misfortune and irregularity. It is from this rejected underclass—the refuse of our nobility—that the great seditions of history have drawn their leaders. Some progressive statesmen now argue that true mercy lies in their total suppression, advocating for imprisonment or painless extinction for those who fail the final test. I pause here, for the subject of irregularities demands a chapter unto itself.

Throughout the preceding chapters, I have operated under a premise that ought to have been declared as the first law of our existence: every soul in Flatland is born a Regular Figure. By this, I mean that a Woman is not merely a line, but a perfectly straight one; an Artisan or Soldier possesses two sides of exact equality; a Tradesman boasts three; and a Lawyer, to whom I humbly belong, commands four. In every Polygon, the sides must stand in strict concordance. While the magnitude of these sides fluctuates with age—a newborn female measuring scarcely an inch, whereas a mature woman may stretch to a foot—their equality remains immutable. For the males of our various orders, the sum of an adult's side lengths approximates two feet. Yet, it is not the scale of our dimensions that defines our society, but the mathematical perfection of their symmetry.

Nature herself decrees that all figures possess equal sides, for without this divine mandate, our angles would fracture into chaos. Imagine a world where a single glance cannot reveal a man's station; instead, one would be compelled to trace every angle through the painful art of Feeling. Life, already fleeting, would succumb to such tedious scrutiny. The entire edifice of Sight Recognition would crumble; the skill of Feeling would vanish; social intercourse would descend into perilous uncertainty. Trust, foresight, and the simplest arrangements of daily life would evaporate, plunging civilization back into a state of barbaric suspicion. Do I rush too quickly to these inevitable truths? A mere moment's reflection, coupled with a single observation from our streets, must convince any rational mind that our social fabric is woven entirely from the thread of Regularity.

Consider the Tradesmen you encounter on the thoroughfare. You identify them instantly by their obtuse angles and slightly dimmed sides, inviting them into your home for luncheon with absolute assurance. This confidence relies on the fact that every adult Triangle occupies a predictable, measured space. Now, envision a nightmare scenario: suppose one of these men dragged behind his respectable vertex a jagged parallelogram, twelve or thirteen inches in diagonal. What would you do with such a geometric monster wedged firmly in your doorway? The measurement of a single angle would no longer suffice; your entire existence would be consumed by the frantic surveying of perimeters. Even now, navigating a crowded street taxes the intellect of the most educated Square. But if no citizen could calculate the Regularity of those around them, chaos would reign supreme. Panic would turn lethal, especially if Women or Soldiers were present, resulting in catastrophic loss of life. Thus, expediency aligns with Nature, both sealing their approval upon the sanctity of Regular Conformation. The Law, ever vigilant, supports this natural order.

In Flatland, "Irregularity of Figure" carries the weight of moral obliquity and criminal intent. Though some radical voices argue that geometric irregularity bears no necessary connection to ethical failings, their arguments ring hollow. They claim the Irregular is cast aside from birth—scorned by kin, ignored by servants, and distrusted by society. Watched jealously by the police until adulthood, he faces a grim choice: destruction if his deviation exceeds the legal margin, or imprisonment in a government office as a seventh-class clerk, barred from marriage, condemned to a drudgery of miserable pay, and subjected to constant surveillance even during his holidays. One can easily understand how such an environment breeds bitterness and perversion in the human heart. Yet, this plausible reasoning fails to sway the wisdom of our statesmen, who rightly hold that tolerating Irregularity is incompatible with the safety of the State.

Undoubtedly, the life of an Irregular is harsh, but the welfare of the Many demands such severity. If we permitted a man with a triangular front and a polygonal back to propagate a lineage of increasing deformity, what fate awaits our cities? Would our houses, doors, and churches be dismantled to accommodate such grotesque anomalies? Must our ticket collectors measure every perimeter before granting entry to theaters or lecture halls? Should an Irregular be exempt from military service? If not, how do we prevent him from sowing desolation among his comrades? Furthermore, consider the irresistible lure of fraud. How effortlessly could such a creature enter a shop with his polygonal facade forward, ordering goods ad infinitum from a trusting merchant? Despite the pleas of false philanthropists to abolish these penal laws, I have never encountered an Irregular who did not embody Nature's intended design for such beings: a hypocrite, a misanthrope, and a perpetrator of mischief within the bounds of his capability.

This does not justify the extreme measures taken in some nations, where infants deviating by half a degree are summarily destroyed. Indeed, some of our greatest geniuses suffered deviations exceeding forty-five minutes in their infancy; their premature deaths would have been an incalculable loss to the State. Moreover, the medical arts have secured glorious victories through compressions, extensions, trepanning, and dietary regimens that have partially or wholly corrected these defects. Therefore, advocating a *Via Media*, I propose no fixed line of absolute exclusion. However, at the precise moment when the frame begins to set and the Medical Board deems recovery improbable, I suggest that the Irregular offspring be painlessly and mercifully consumed, sparing the State further corruption and the child a life of suffering.

If my readers have kept pace with me thus far, they will find it unsurprising to learn that existence in Flatland is, by most accounts, profoundly tedious. I am careful to specify that I do not refer to the absence of conflict; battles, conspiracies, factionalism, and the chaotic turbulence of political intrigue abound, providing a raw drama that mimics the histories of higher dimensions. Nor shall I deny that the peculiar friction between the exigencies of daily survival and the rigorous demands of mathematics creates a unique intellectual spark, a constant state of conjecture verified instantly by the laws of geometry, a zest for discovery that inhabitants of Spaceland can scarcely fathom. Yet, when viewed strictly through the lens of aesthetics and art, life here is a barren plain, devoid of color and texture. How else could it be? Our entire visual universe—our landscapes, our historical tableaux, our portraiture, our floral arrangements, our still lifes—is reduced to a singular dimension: the line. We possess no variety save for the subtle gradations of brightness and shadow, a grayscale existence where nuance is merely a matter of tone rather than hue.

It was not always so. According to the sagas preserved by tradition, during a fleeting epoch spanning perhaps half a dozen centuries, a transient splendor bathed the lives of our ancestors. Legend attributes this revolution to a solitary figure, a Polygon whose name varies wildly among storytellers, who stumbled upon the constituents of primary colors and a rudimentary technique for applying pigment. Initially, he decorated his own dwelling, then ventured to adorn his slaves, subsequently his father, his sons, and finally, in a moment of supreme vanity, himself. The dual utility of convenience and beauty quickly won universal acclaim. Wherever Chromatistes—the name by which authoritative historians uniformly designate him—displayed his variegated silhouette, he commanded instant attention and earned profound respect. In a world defined by angles and proximity, no one needed to "feel" his presence to distinguish friend from foe; no one mistook his front for his back. His neighbors could ascertain his position and orientation without straining their calculative faculties, avoiding the jostling and collisions that plague the colorless masses. Furthermore, his voice was liberated from the exhausting labor required by us pale Squares and Pentagons to loudly proclaim our individuality amidst crowds of indistinguishable Isosceles triangles.

This fashion ignited like wildfire. Within a week, every Square and Triangle in the district had emulated Chromatistes, while only a handful of conservative Pentagons resisted the tide. A month or two later, even the Dodecagons fell under the spell of the innovation. Less than a year passed before the practice permeated all ranks save the very highest nobility. Naturally, the custom radiated outward from Chromatistes' district to neighboring regions, and within two generations, the only beings in all Flatland remaining devoid of paint were the Women and the Priests. Here, Nature seemingly erected an insurmountable barrier, pleading against the extension of this cultural shift to these two classes. For the Innovators, multiplicity of sides served as the necessary pretext for differentiation. "Distinction of sides implies distinction of colours"—this was the sophistry that circulated from mouth to mouth, converting entire cities overnight to the new aesthetic. Yet, this axiom held no sway for our Priests and Women. The latter possessed only one side, and thus, speaking plurally and pedantically, NO SIDES AT ALL. The former, if they dared to assert their claim to being true Circles rather than merely high-class polygons with an infinite number of infinitesimally small sides, boasted—and Women confessed and deplored—that they too lacked sides, blessed instead with a continuous perimeter, a circumference. Consequently, these two classes perceived no logical force in the argument linking sides to color. While the rest of society succumbed to the fascinations of corporal decoration, the Priests and Women alone remained pure from the pollution of paint.

Immoral, licentious, anarchical, unscientific—label them as you will—those ancient days of the Color Revolt constituted the glorious childhood of Art in Flatland. Alas, this childhood never ripened into manhood, nor even reached the bloom of youth. Life itself became a delight, simply because to live implied to see. Even a modest gathering transformed into a spectacle; the richly varied hues of an assembly in a church or theater were said to have proven so visually overwhelming that they distracted our greatest teachers and actors from their duties. But nothing rivaled the unspeakable magnificence of a military review. Imagine the sight: a line of battle composed of twenty thousand Isosceles suddenly pivoting, exchanging the somber black of their bases for vibrant oranges and purples along their flanks and acute angles; the militia of Equilateral Triangles blazoned in tricolors of red, white, and blue; the artillerymen, Squares arrayed in mauve, ultramarine, gamboge, and burnt umber, rapidly rotating near their vermilion cannons; the dashing, flashing procession of five-colored and six-colored Pentagons and Hexagons careering across the field in their roles as surgeons, geometricians, and aides-de-camp. These spectacles were surely sufficient to lend credence to the famous tale of an illustrious Circle, overwhelmed by the artistic grandeur of the forces beneath his command, casting aside his marshal's baton and his royal crown to declare that he would henceforth wield only the artist's pencil.

The magnitude of this sensuous development is partially evidenced by the very lexicon of the era. The common utterances of ordinary citizens during the Time of the Color Revolt appear to have been suffused with a richer tinge of word and thought. To that vibrant epoch we remain indebted for our finest poetry and for whatever rhythm still echoes in the more scientific discourses of these modern, gray days.

The intellectual arts were rapidly succumbing to a terminal decay. The noble Art of Sight Recognition, rendered obsolete by shifting social priorities, ceased to be practiced; Geometry, Statics, and Kinetics, once the bedrock of our education, were swiftly relegated to the dustbin of superfluity, abandoned even within the hallowed halls of our University. Simultaneously, the lesser Art of Feeling met the same ignominious fate in our elementary schools.

Consequently, the Isosceles classes, emboldened by their newfound immunity from the burdensome tributes formerly exacted for the service of Education, swelled in number and insolence. Deprived of the disciplining influence of these duties, their brutality hardened and their populations exploded unchecked. Year by year, the Soldiers and Artisans began to roar with a terrifying conviction: that there was no distinction between them and the highest Polygons, for they too could now grapple with life's static and kinetic complexities through the singular, democratizing power of Colour Recognition.

Uncontent with mere neglect, the revolutionaries escalated their demands. They called for the legal prohibition of all "monopolizing and aristocratic Arts," demanding the abolition of endowments for Sight Recognition, Mathematics, and Feeling. Their logic was circular and absolute: since Colour, a Second Nature, had erased the need for aristocratic distinctions, the Law must follow suit, recognizing all individuals as equals entitled to equal rights. Finding the higher orders wavering, the revolutionary leaders pressed further, insisting that *all* classes—including Priests and Women—must do homage to Colour by submitting to be painted.

When objections arose regarding the lack of sides in Priests and Women, the revolutionaries retorted with cold pragmatism: Nature and Expediency dictated that the front half of every human—the hemisphere containing the eye and mouth—must be distinguishable from the hind half. Thus, a bill was drafted for presentation to the General Assembly of all Flatland States. It proposed that in every Woman, the anterior semicircle be coloured red and the posterior green. Priests were to receive the same treatment: red for the front semicircle centered on the eye and mouth, green for the rear.

This proposal bore the marks of cunning far beyond the capacity of any Isosceles, whose angularity was insufficient to conceive such a masterpiece of statecraft. Its architect was an Irregular Circle, spared from death in childhood only to breed desolation for his country and ruin for countless followers. The strategy was twofold. First, by granting Women the same dual-colour palette as the Priests, the revolutionaries ensured that, viewed from specific angles, a Woman would appear indistinguishable from a Priest. In certain positions, she would present a straight line, half-red and half-green, commanding the same reverence due to the sacred order. This prospect proved irresistible to the Female Sex, promising them a sudden elevation in status.

Consider the visual deception engineered by this legislation. A Woman, newly decorated, presents a front face of red and a back of green. Viewed from the side, she appears as a straight line divided equally by hue. Now consider a Priest, whose mouth sits at the apex of his red front semicircle, separated from his green rear by a central diameter. If one views the Great Man along this dividing line, the sight is identical: a straight line where one half is red and the other green. While the Priest's line may be slightly shorter and fade more rapidly at the edges, the chromatic signature creates an immediate, overwhelming impression of shared class. Given the concurrent decay of Sight Recognition and the rapid learning of Women to mimic the circular shape by shading their extremities, the conflation of Priest and Young Woman becomes inevitable.

How intoxicating this prospect must have been to the Frail Sex! They anticipated with delight the chaos that would ensue. Within the domestic sphere, Women could overhear political and ecclesiastical secrets meant solely for husbands and brothers, issuing commands in the name of a priestly circle. Outdoors, the stark, deceptive combination of red and green would lure the common populace into endless errors, allowing Women to seize the deference previously reserved for the Circles. Scandal and constitutional subversion were matters of no consequence to them; even within the households of the Circles, the Women rallied behind the Universal Colour Bill.

The second objective of this diabolical scheme was the systematic demoralization of the Circles themselves. Until this moment, the Nobles had maintained their pristine clarity of understanding, insulated from the start in colourless homes where the Sacred Art of Sight Recognition was cultivated. The introduction of the Colour Bill sought to shatter this insulation. By forcing the Hierarchy to submit to the pollution of Colour, the Irregular aimed to destroy their domestic environments for intellectual training. Once tainted, every parental and childish Circle would begin to demoralize one another. An infant Circle, tasked with distinguishing between Father and Mother, would face insurmountable problems of perception, easily corrupted by maternal imposture. Thus, the intellectual lustre of the Priestly Order would inevitably wane, clearing the path for the total destruction of the Aristocratic Legislature and the final subversion of our Privileged Classes.

The agitation for the Universal Colour Bill raged for three years, a tempest where Anarchy seemed poised to swallow the state whole. An entire legion of Polygons, conscripted as private soldiers, was obliterated by a superior force of Isosceles Triangles, while the Squares and Pentagons stood aloof in their geometric neutrality. Yet, the true horror lay within the domestic sphere, where the most formidable shapes succumbed to conjugal fury. Enraged by the political strife, wives in noble households woreied their lords with ceaseless pleas to abandon the opposition; when these entreaties proved futile, some descended into madness, slaughtering their innocent children and husbands before meeting their own violent ends. History records that during this triennial fever, no fewer than twenty-three Circles perished in the fires of marital discord. The peril was absolute, forcing the Priests to choose between total submission or extermination.

Then, the tide shifted abruptly, driven by a singular, grotesque incident that statesmen ought to cultivate as a weapon of mass persuasion. An Isosceles of the lowest caste, possessing a mental capacity barely exceeding four degrees, accidentally stained himself with the pigments of a tradesman he had looted. Whether he applied the paint himself or commissioned it remains a matter of debate, but the result was identical: he was transformed, visually, into a Dodecagon. Marching into the Market Square, he adopted a falsetto voice to approach a maiden, the orphaned daughter of a noble Polygon whom he had once courted in vain. Through a labyrinthine web of deceptions—aided by a string of improbable accidents and the staggering negligence of the bride's family—he successfully consummated the union. Upon discovering the fraud, the hapless girl took her own life.

When the news of this tragedy rippled from State to State, the collective psyche of the Women fractured. Empathy for the victim, mingled with a terrifying anticipation of similar fates for their sisters and daughters, radically altered their perception of the Colour Bill. Open converts to antagonism emerged among them, while the remainder required only a spark to join the chorus of dissent. Seizing this volatile moment, the Circles hastily convened an extraordinary Assembly of the States. Beyond the standard guard of Convicts, they ensured the presence of a massive contingent of reactionary Women. Amidst an unprecedented throng, Pantocyclus, the Chief Circle of the era, rose to find himself hissed and hooted by a hundred and twenty thousand Isosceles. Silence was only achieved when he announced a policy of Concession; bowing to the will of the majority, the Hierarchy would accept the Colour Bill.

The uproar instantly curdled into applause. Pantocyclus then summoned Chromatistes, the architect of the sedition, to the center of the hall to receive the submission of the hierarchy on behalf of his followers. What followed was a rhetorical masterpiece delivered over nearly a day, defying any attempt at summary. With a facade of grave impartiality, Pantocyclus argued that since they were now irrevocably committed to reform, they must scrutinize the perimeter of the issue, weighing both its defects and advantages. He gradually introduced the specter of danger threatening the Tradesmen, the Professional Classes, and the Gentlemen, silencing the rising murmurs of the Isosceles by reminding them that despite these flaws, he was prepared to accept the Bill if ratified by the majority.

It became evident that everyone, save the Isosceles, was swayed by his words, leaning toward neutrality or outright aversion. Turning his gaze to the Workmen, he asserted that their interests could not be ignored. If they accepted the Colour Bill, they must do so with eyes wide open to the consequences. Many, he warned, were on the verge of ascending to the class of Regular Triangles; others looked forward to distinctions their children could never hope to earn. This honorable ambition would now be sacrificed. With the universal adoption of colour, all distinctions would vanish; Regularity would be confused with Irregularity; development would yield to retrogression. The Workman would, within a few generations, be degraded to the level of the Military, or worse, the Convict Class. Political power would fall into the hands of the greatest number—that is, the Criminal Classes—who were already more numerous than the Workmen and would soon outnumber all other castes combined once the compensative laws of nature were violated.

A subdued murmur of assent swept through the ranks of the Artisans. Chromatistes, alarmed, attempted to step forward to address them, but he found himself encircled by guards, forced into silence while the Chief Circle launched a final, impassioned appeal to the Women. He cried that if the Colour Bill passed, no marriage would ever be safe, no woman's honor secure; fraud, deception, and hypocrisy would permeate every household, and domestic bliss would share the fate of the constitution, rushing swiftly to perdition. "Sooner than this," he thundered, "come death!"

These words served as the pre-concerted signal for action. The Isosceles Convicts surged forward, transfixing the wretched Chromatistes. The Regular Classes parted their ranks to allow a band of Women, directed by the Circles, to move backward-first, invisibly and unerringly, upon the unconscious soldiers. The Artisans, mimicking their superiors, opened their lines as well. Meanwhile, bands of Convicts seized every entrance, forming an impenetrable phalanx. The battle—or rather, the carnage—was brief. Under the skillful generalship of the Circles, almost every charge by the Women proved fatal, and many extracted their stings uninjured, ready for a second slaughter. Yet, no second blow was necessary; the rabble of the Isosceles finished the job for themselves. Surprised, leaderless, attacked in front by invisible foes, and trapped behind by the Convicts, they instantly lost all presence of mind, raising the cry of "Treachery." This sealed their doom. Every Isosceles now perceived a foe in every other. Within half an hour, not one of that vast multitude remained alive; the fragments of seven hundred thousand members of the Criminal Class, slain by their own angles, attested to the triumph of Order.

The Circles wasted no time in pushing their victory to its logical extreme. The Working Men were spared but decimated. The Militia of the Equilaterals was immediately mobilized, and every Triangle suspected of irregularity on reasonable grounds was destroyed by Court-Martial, bypassing the formalities of exact measurement by the Social Board. For over a year, the homes of the Military and Artisan classes underwent systematic inspection, purging every town, village, and hamlet of the surplus of the lower orders. This excess had been generated by the neglect to pay the tribute of Criminals to the schools and universities, alongside violations of the other natural laws governing Flatland's constitution. Thus, the balance of classes was restored.

Needless to say, the use of colour was henceforth abolished, and its possession strictly prohibited. Even the utterance of any word denoting colour, save by the Circles or qualified scientific teachers, incurred severe penalties. Only within our University, in some of the highest and most esoteric classes—which I myself have never been privileged to attend—is the sparing use of colour still sanctioned to illustrate the deeper problems of mathematics. But of this, I can speak only from hearsay. Elsewhere in Flatland, colour is now non-existent. The art of creating it is known to only one living person: the Chief Circle for the time being. By him, it is handed down on his deathbed to none but his successor. One manufactory alone produces it; and lest the secret be betrayed, the workmen are annually consumed, and fresh ones introduced. So great is the terror with which even now our aristocracy looks back to the distant days of the agitation for the Universal Colour Bill.

It is high time to leave behind these fleeting, discursive notes on the mundane mechanics of Flatland and turn toward the central event of this narrative: my initiation into the mysteries of Space. That is the true subject; everything preceding it serves merely as a prologue. Consequently, I must omit countless details that, while potentially fascinating, are secondary to this revelation. Consider, for instance, our methods of locomotion and cessation without feet, or the ingenious ways we anchor structures of wood, stone, and brick despite lacking hands or the ability to leverage the earth's lateral pressure. I pass over the meteorological intricacies of how rain navigates the gaps between our zones to nourish the south without flooding the north, the geology of our hills and mines, the biology of our flora, the rhythm of our seasons, and the unique adaptations of our alphabet to linear tablets. These omissions stem not from neglect, but from a deliberate economy of the reader's time.

Yet, before unveiling the secrets of the third dimension, I cannot ignore the pillars of our constitution, the architects of our destiny, and the objects of our near-worship: our Circles, or Priests. Do not mistake my terminology; unlike in your world where "priest" implies a specific clerical role, among us, a Circle is the supreme administrator of every conceivable domain—trade, commerce, military command, architecture, engineering, education, statesmanship, legislation, morality, and theology. They perform no labor themselves; instead, they are the invisible causes behind every worthy deed executed by others. While the populace accepts the label "Circle" as literal truth, the educated elite understand the grim geometric reality: no Circle is truly circular. A Circle is merely a polygon with an immense number of infinitesimal sides. As the count of these sides grows, the shape approaches perfection. When the number reaches three or four hundred, the distinction vanishes to the untrained touch. However, let us be precise: it *would* be difficult to detect the angles if one possessed the capacity to feel them. Among the highest society, tactile recognition is forbidden; to physically feel a Circle is considered the ultimate act of sacrilege. This cultivated numbness allows the elite to maintain the sacred veil of mystery surrounding their perimeters.

With an average perimeter of three feet, a polygon of three hundred sides possesses edges measuring barely one-tenth of an inch. In the case of six or seven hundred sides, the segments shrink to the size of a pinhead from Spaceland. By convention, the current High Priest is assumed to possess ten thousand sides. Unlike the lower classes, whose advancement is strictly capped by natural law—one additional side per generation—the ascent of the Circle caste defies such arithmetic determinism. If nature alone ruled, the lineage would be predictable; the four hundred and ninety-seventh descendant of an equilateral triangle would inevitably be a five-hundred-sided figure. But nature imposes two antagonistic decrees upon this evolution. First, as the species climbs the developmental ladder, the rate of growth accelerates exponentially. Second, fertility diminishes in direct proportion. In the homes of polygons with four or five hundred sides, sons are rare; twins are unheard of. Conversely, the offspring of a five-hundred-sided parent may emerge with five hundred and fifty, or even six hundred sides.

Art intervenes to catalyze this higher evolution. Our physicians have mastered the terrifying technique of fracturing the tiny, tender sides of infants from the upper classes, resetting their frames with surgical precision. Occasionally, this risky procedure succeeds in leaping over two or three hundred generational increments, effectively doubling the noblety of the child's descent in a single stroke. Tragically, many promising lives are sacrificed in this gamble; fewer than one in ten survive the ordeal. Yet, driven by an insatiable parental ambition, nearly every nobleman places his firstborn in the Circular Neo-Therapeutic Gymnasium within a month of birth. One year decides fate. Most often, the child returns to join the crowded rows of the Neo-Therapeutic Cemetery, a permanent addition to the tombstones. Rarely, however, does a procession bear the survivor back to exultant parents: no longer a polygon, but a Circle, at least by courtesy. Such miraculous instances fuel the desperate willingness of polygonal families to submit to these domestic sacrifices, hoping against hope for a blessed outcome.

The doctrine of the Circles distills itself into a singular, absolute maxim: "Attend to your Configuration." Whether applied to politics, ecclesiastical hierarchy, or moral conduct, their entire pedagogy serves the refinement of individual and collective shape, subordinating all other concerns to the perfection of the Circle. It is the supreme achievement of the Circles to have eradicated the ancient heresy that conduct stems from will, effort, training, or praise. Instead, they preach that Pantocyclus—the illustrious Circle who quelled the Colour Revolt—first revealed the truth: Configuration *is* the man. If you are born an Isosceles with unequal sides, you are destined for error unless corrected at the Isosceles Hospital; if you are a Triangle, Square, or Polygon bearing irregularity, you require the Regular Hospitals to cure your deformity, lest you meet the State Prison or the executioner's blade. Every fault, from petty misconduct to flagrant crime, is attributed solely to a deviation from perfect Regularity, perhaps caused by a childhood collision, improper exercise, or a sudden shift in temperature altering the frame. Thus concludes the illustrious philosopher: neither good nor bad conduct warrants praise or blame, for why admire a Square's integrity when one should only marvel at the precision of his angles? Why condemn a thieving Isosceles when the tragedy lies in his incurable asymmetry?

Yet, this theoretical purity possesses a jagged practical edge. When an Isosceles magistrate faces a plea of theft rooted in unavoidable unevenness, the reply is swift: precisely because he is a nuisance, he must be consumed. However, in the delicate theater of domestic life, where death is off the table, the doctrine falters. I confess that when one of my Hexagonal grandsons excuses his disobedience by blaming a thermal shock upon his perimeter, demanding I attribute the fault to his Configuration—which requires nourishment from the choicest sweetmeats—I find myself trapped. Logically, I cannot reject his premise; practically, I cannot accept it. Consequently, I adopt a compromise: I assume that a stern scolding possesses a latent, strengthening influence on his geometry, though I possess no empirical evidence for this belief. I am certainly not unique in this evasion; many high-ranking Circles, serving as judges, employ praise and blame with fervor, treating "right" and "wrong" as tangible entities. Within their households, they scold their children with the same vehemence, acting as if human figures truly possess the agency to choose between these fictions.

In doing so, the Circles invert the commandment governing parent-child relations in Spaceland. Where Spaceland teaches children to honor their parents, Flatland teaches a man to honor his grandson—or failing that, his son. Here, "honor" signifies not indulgence, but a reverent submission to their highest interests. The state doctrine dictates that fathers must subordinate their own needs to posterity, thereby securing the welfare of the State alongside their lineage.

However, the system's fatal flaw resides in its relationship with Women. Since irregular births threaten the social ascent, no woman with irregular ancestry may wed a man seeking elevation. While male irregularity is measurable, women appear visibly Regular due to their straight lines; thus, the State maintains meticulously guarded pedigrees to detect their "invisible" irregularities. Without certification, marriage is forbidden. Paradoxically, the higher a Circle ascends, the less scrupulous he becomes regarding his wife's lineage. An aspiring Isosceles fears a wife with even a single irregular ancestor; a Square or Pentagon checks only five generations; a Hexagon or Dodecagon is nearly careless. Yet, a Circle may deliberately marry a woman descended from an irregular great-grandfather, seduced merely by a superior lustre or a low, charming voice—a trait we prize above all others in females. These unions inevitably yield sterility or diminished sides, yet the loss of a few angles in a high-order Polygon goes unnoticed, often repaired by operations in the Neo-Therapeutic Gymnasium. The Circles, prone to viewing infertility as a sign of superior evolution, fail to arrest this decay. Unless checked, the gradual erosion of the Circular class will accelerate until the race can no longer produce a Chief Circle, causing the Constitution of Flatland to collapse.

A further peril lurks in our treatment of women, decreed three centuries ago by the Chief Circle. Deemed deficient in reason but abundant in emotion, women were stripped of mental education, barred from reading, and denied arithmetic sufficient to count the angles of their kin. The result has been a generational decline in their intellectual power, a policy of enforced quietism that persists today. My deepest dread is that this well-intentioned suppression has backfired upon the Male Sex. We now live a bifurcated existence: with women, we speak of love, duty, pity, and hope—irrational fictions designed to curb feminine exuberance; among ourselves, we utilize a cold vocabulary of necessity, fitness, and anticipated benefit. We perform utter deference before women, convincing them that we adore the Chief Circle no more than they do, while secretly regarding them as "mindless organisms." Furthermore, our theology shifts entirely within the women's chambers.

This dual training places an unbearable strain on the youth. At age three, boys are torn from maternal care to unlearn the language of emotion and adopt the idiom of science. Already, I perceive a weakening in the grasp of mathematical truth among the current generation compared to the robust intellect of our ancestors three hundred years prior. I need not elaborate on the catastrophic risk if a woman were to surreptitiously learn to read and disseminate the truths of logic to her sex, nor on the danger of an infant boy revealing the secrets of dialectics to his mother. On the sole ground of the enfeeblement of the male intellect, I humbly appeal to the highest Authorities to reconsider the regulations of female education.

It was the penultimate day of the 1999th year, the eve of the Great Long Vacation. Exhausted from my favorite pastime—Geometry—I had retired to sleep carrying an unsolved theorem in my mind. But dreams possess a logic of their own, one that defies Euclidean proof.

In my slumber, I found myself standing amidst a vast, chaotic throng. Before me stretched a multitude of tiny, jagged lines—figures I instinctively categorized as women—interspersed with entities even smaller, mere lustrous points. All moved back and forth along a single, infinite axis, vibrating with a uniform, hypnotic velocity. From this congregation erupted a cacophony: a confused, multitudinous chirping, a twittering static that filled the void between movements. Occasionally, the motion ceased; the line froze, and absolute silence descended, heavy and suffocating.

Driven by curiosity, I approached one of the larger lines, intending to address her. But she offered no response. A second attempt yielded the same mute indifference. A third was met with identical coldness. My patience, already frayed by the absurdity of the scene, snapped. This was not merely rudeness; it was an ontological insult. I stepped directly into her path, blocking her trajectory, and shouted my query into her face: "Woman, what signifies this concourse? What drives this strange, confused chirping and this monotonous oscillation within a single Straight Line?"

"I am no Woman," came the reply, sharp and clear. "I am the Monarch of this world. But tell me, whence do you intrude into my realm of Lineland?"

Startled by the sudden shift in tone, I apologized profusely for startling His Royal Highness. Describing myself as a bewildered traveler, I implored him to explain the nature of his dominion. Yet, extracting truth proved difficult. The Monarch operated under a delusion of shared omniscience; convinced that familiarity bred understanding, he assumed my silence stemmed from playful feigned ignorance rather than genuine confusion. Through persistent questioning, however, I pieced together the grim architecture of his existence.

This poor, ignorant sovereign believed that the Straight Line he inhabited *was* the entirety of space, the totality of the universe. Unable to perceive beyond his dimension, incapable of movement perpendicular to his axis, he knew nothing of what lay outside. When I first spoke, his auditory organs registered the sound, but his mind rejected it. As he later explained, the vibrations struck him not as external speech, but as internal rumblings—"from my own intestines." Without visual confirmation, he saw no man; without spatial context, he heard only noise beating against his stomach. To him, everything outside his line was not empty space, but non-existence—a terrifying void where nothing could possibly be.

His subjects, the small lines and the luminous points, were trapped in this one-dimensional prison. Their entire horizon collapsed to a single point. To a Linelander, a man, a woman, a child, or a stone was indistinguishable from a dot. The only variable capable of differentiation was pitch: the timbre of the voice revealed sex and age. Furthermore, because every individual occupied the entire width of their universe, no passing was possible. Once neighbors, forever neighbors. Neighborhood in Lineland was akin to marriage in Flatland: an eternal, unbreakable bond until death severed the connection.

Such a life, stripped of lateral vision and linear mobility, seemed to me a nightmare of claustrophobic monotony. Yet, I was struck by the King's inexplicable cheerfulness. Wondering if conjugal bliss could survive such constraints, I hesitated before asking, but eventually plunged into the topic by inquiring about the health of his family.

"My wives and children," he declared, "are well and happy."

Staggered by this assertion—and noting the absence of any females in his immediate vicinity—I challenged him. "Pardon me, Your Majesty, but I cannot conceive how you can see or approach them when at least six individuals stand between you and them. Is proximity truly unnecessary for marriage and procreation in Lineland?"

"How dare you ask such an absurdity!" the King retorted, his voice rising in indignation. "If the universe functioned as you describe, we would long ago be extinct. No, no! Proximity is irrelevant to the union of souls. The birth of children is too sacred to rely on the chance accident of physical closeness. Since you choose to remain in ignorance, I shall instruct you as if you were the youngest infant in Lineland."

He paused, composing his royal dignity. "Know this: Marriages are consummated solely through the faculty of sound and the sense of hearing. Every Man possesses two mouths—or voices, as you might say—just as he has two eyes. At one extremity lies the Bass; at the other, the Tenor. I failed to distinguish your tenor earlier, hence my initial silence."

I admitted I possessed only one voice and was unaware of his dual apparatus.

"That confirms my suspicion," the King sneered. "You are not a Man, but a feminine monstrosity endowed with a bass voice and an utterly uneducated ear. Nevertheless, let us proceed."

"Nature dictates that every Man must wed two wives," he continued.

"Why two?" I asked.

"You push your feigned simplicity too far," he cried. "How can a union achieve complete harmonic perfection without the synthesis of the Four-in-One: the Bass and Tenor of the Man, combined with the Soprano and Contralto of the two Women?"

"But what if a man prefers one wife, or three?" I pressed.

"It is impossible," he stated dogmatically. "As inconceivable as claiming that two plus one equals five, or that the human eye can perceive a Straight Line."

Before I could interject, he launched into the mechanics of their reproduction. "Once per week, a Law of Nature compels us to engage in a violent, rhythmic oscillation lasting roughly a hundred beats. During this Universal Marriage Chorus, at the precise fifty-first pulsation, all inhabitants halt their frantic motion. Each individual emits their richest, purest vocal strain. It is in this suspended moment that destiny unfolds. The adaptation of Bass to Treble, Tenor to Contralto, is so exquisite that lovers separated by twenty thousand leagues can instantly recognize the responsive note of their soulmate. Penetrating the barriers of distance, Love binds the trio. The resulting marriage produces a triplet offspring—one male and two females—to maintain the cosmic balance of the sexes. Two girls for every boy; otherwise, the Alphabet of Nature would be broken."

"What! Always triplets?" I exclaimed. "Does every wife bear twins?"

"Bass-voiced monstrosity! Yes!" the King roared, momentarily silenced by his own fury. "How else could equilibrium be preserved?"

After a tense silence, he resumed, his tone softening slightly. "Do not assume that every bachelor finds his match immediately during this grand chorus. For most, the process is iterative. Few hearts are blessed with the immediate recognition of their destined partners. Courtship is often prolonged. The Wooer's voice may align with one potential wife but clash with the other, or fail to harmonize with either initially. Perhaps the Soprano and Contralto lack cohesion. In such cases, Nature provides a mechanism for refinement. Each weekly chorus brings the three parties closer. Every trial of voice, every detected discord, subtly forces the imperfect party to modulate their pitch, inching toward the ideal frequency. After countless iterations and microscopic adjustments, harmony is finally achieved. Then, amidst the universal chorus, the distant lovers discover perfect resonance. Before they are fully conscious, the wedded Triplet is drawn into a vocal embrace, and Nature rejoices in another marriage and three new lives."

Thinking that it was high time to drag the Monarch down from his ecstatic reverie to the grimy floor of common sense, I resolved to attempt a revelation of the truth—that is, the true nature of existence within Flatland. Thus, I commenced my discourse: "Your Royal Highness, by what mechanism do you distinguish the shapes and positions of your subjects? By my own observation prior to entering your Kingdom, utilizing the sense of sight alone, I noted that your populace consists of Lines and Points, varying greatly in magnitude—"

"You speak of an absolute impossibility," the King interjected sharply. "You must be suffering under a delusion. To differentiate a Line from a Point via visual perception is, according to the immutable laws of our nature, utterly futile. Yet, this distinction is readily ascertainable through the auditory sense. Through sound, my precise shape is revealed to me without fail. Observe me—I am a Line, the supreme entity in Lineland, stretching over six inches of Space—"

"Of *Length*," I ventured cautiously.

"Fool!" he barked. "Space *is* Length. Cease your interruptions immediately, or I shall end this audience."

Apologizing profusely, I pressed on, knowing irritation was the only path forward. "Since you remain impervious to logic, allow me to demonstrate via your own preferred organ: hearing. Consider my two wives, currently situated six thousand miles, seventy yards, two feet, and eight inches apart—one to the North, the other to the South. Listen."

He emitted a sharp chirp, then resumed his lecture with smug satisfaction. "My wives, receiving the first vocalization followed closely by its echo, perceive a temporal delay during which sound traverses precisely 6.457 inches. From this interval, they deduce that one mouth lies 6.457 inches farther from them than the other, thereby calculating my exact shape. Naturally, they perform this arithmetic only once, prior to our nuptials, though the capability remains ever-present. Similarly, I determine the dimensions of any male subject solely through acoustic triangulation."

"But how," I challenged, "if a Man mimics a Woman's tone with one voice, or masks his southern resonance so effectively that it passes unrecognized as an echo of the north? Might such deceit not wreak havoc? Furthermore, lack of verification mechanisms seems glaring. Could you not command neighboring subjects to physically verify one another?"

This query was, admittedly, foolish, for tactile sensation holds no utility in a one-dimensional realm; yet I posed it deliberately to provoke the Monarch, succeeding beyond my wildest hopes.

"What!" he shrieked in genuine horror. "Explain your intent!"

"Feel. Touch. Make physical contact," I replied.

"If by 'FEELING' you mean approaching so intimately that no spatial gap remains between two entities, know, Stranger, that this offense carries the penalty of death in my dominions. The rationale is self-evident: the fragile constitution of a Woman, susceptible to shattering under such extreme compression, demands state protection. Since Women are visually indistinguishable from Men, the Law universally decrees that neither shall approach the other closely enough to obliterate the intervening space."

"And what conceivable utility," the King scoffed, "could possibly arise from this illegal, unnatural excess of approximation you term 'touching,' when all objectives of such a crude process are achieved instantly, accurately, and effortlessly through the auditory sense? Regarding your alleged danger of deception—it is nonexistent. The Voice is the very essence of one's Being; it cannot be altered at will. Come, suppose I possessed the ability to pass through solid matter, penetrating my subjects sequentially, numbering in the billions, verifying each size and distance via the clumsy, inaccurate method of 'feeling.' How much time and energy would be squandered on such inefficiency! Conversely, in a single moment of audition, I conduct a comprehensive census and statistical survey—local, corporeal, mental, and spiritual—of every living soul in Lineland. Hark! Only hark!"

As he spoke, he paused, listening with rapturous ecstasy to a sound that appeared to me merely as the incessant chirping of countless Lilliputian grasshoppers.

"Truly," I conceded, "your auditory sense compensates admirably for your visual deficits. However, permit me to observe that your existence in Lineland must be profoundly dreary. To behold nothing but a Point! To be unable even to contemplate a Straight Line! Worse still, to possess no concept whatsoever of what a Straight Line entails! It would be preferable to possess no sense of sight at all than to see so little! I admit I lack your discriminative faculty of hearing; the grand symphony of Lineland, which brings you such intense joy, registers to me only as a chaotic, multitudinous twittering. Yet, I retain the capacity to discern a Line from a Point. Allow me to prove it."

"Just prior to entering your kingdom, I observed you dancing laterally—from left to right, then reversing from right to left—with seven Men and a Woman positioned immediately to your left, and eight Men alongside two Women to your right. Is this accurate?"

"It is correct," acknowledged the King, "regarding the counts and sexes, though I confess ignorance of your terminology 'right' and 'left'."

"I deny that you perceived these details," I countered. "For how could you see the interior of any Man? You must have heard these reports and subsequently dreamt them into sight. Moreover, pray tell, what do you mean by 'left' and 'right'? I presume it is merely your dialect for 'Northward' and 'Southward'?"

"Not so," I replied. "Beyond your linear motions of North and South, there exists another dimension of movement I designate as 'from right to left'."

"KING: Exhibit to me, if you will, this motion from left to right."

"I cannot," I stated firmly, "unless you are willing to step entirely out of your Line."

"Out of my Line?" the King demanded, his voice rising. "Do you mean out of the world? Out of Space itself?"

"Well, yes," I confirmed. "Out of *YOUR* World. Out of *YOUR* Space. Your Space is not the true Space. True Space is a Plane; your Space is merely a Line."

"If you cannot demonstrate this lateral motion by moving within it yourself," the King pleaded, "then I beseech you to describe it verbally."

"If you cannot distinguish your right side from your left, I fear no verbal explanation can clarify my meaning to you. Surely, you are not ignorant of such a fundamental distinction?"

"I comprehend you not in the slightest," the King admitted.

"Alas! How shall I render this clear?" I lamented. "When you advance straight ahead, does it not occasionally strike you that you *could* move differently? Turning your attention sideways to gaze in the direction your flank currently faces? In other words, instead of perpetually moving toward one of your extremities, do you never feel an urge to move in the direction of your side?"

"Never," the King declared. "And what do you mean? How can a man's interior 'face' in any direction? Or how can a man move in the direction of his inside?"

"Well then, since language fails to elucidate the matter, I shall resort to deed. I will gradually withdraw my body from Lineland to illustrate the direction I seek to convey."

At my command, I began to extrude my form out of Lineland. As long as any portion of my body remained within his dominion and visible to his singular line-of-sight, the King exclaimed repeatedly, "I see you! I see you still! You are not moving!"

But once I had fully withdrawn myself from his Line, he screamed in his highest, shrillest pitch, "She is vanished! She is dead!"

"I am not dead," I replied calmly. "I am simply out of Lineland—that is, out of the Straight Line you erroneously call Space—and residing in the True Space, wherein I perceive reality as it truly is. At this very moment, I can see your Line, your side—or whatever interior you choose to call it—and I can also see the Men and Women positioned North and South of you. I shall now enumerate them, describing their sequence, stature, and the intervals separating each."

`My body just before I disappeared`
`+---------+`
`| \ \ \ \`
`| \ \ \ \`
`| \ \ \ \`
`Lineland ---->`
`| \ \ \ \`
`| \ \ \ \`
`The King --------------------+---------+--------------========`

Having completed this exhaustive enumeration, I cried triumphantly, "Does this finally convince you?"

With that, I re-entered Lineland, resuming my previous position. The Monarch, however, responded with disdain: "If you were a Man of sense—though, given your apparent possession of only a single voice, I harbor little doubt that you are a Woman rather than a Man—but if you possessed even a particle of reason, you would heed logic. You demand I believe in another Line besides that indicated by my senses, and another motion beyond my daily consciousness. In return, I ask you to describe in words or demonstrate by gesture this other Line you speak of. Instead of moving, you merely practice some arcane art of vanishing and reappearing; and instead of providing a lucid exposition of your new World, you simply recite the names and sizes of approximately forty members of my retinue—facts known to any child in my capital. Can

The rain hammered against the ceiling of our dwelling, a relentless percussion that marked the final breath of the 1999th year. Inside, the atmosphere was thick with the weight of transition, as I sat beside my wife, contemplating the vast sweep of the past millennium and the terrifying prospect of the new one. Our children and grandchildren had already withdrawn to their respective chambers, leaving us alone to witness the turn of the age.

My mind drifted back to the afternoon's lesson, a memory that refused to fade despite the encroaching darkness. My youngest grandson, a hexagon of startling brilliance and mathematical purity, had recently challenged the very foundations of our understanding. During our standard exercises in Sight Recognition, where we rotated upon our centers to test his spatial acuity, he had asked a question that sent a chill through my logical faculties. Holding together nine squares to demonstrate that $3^2$ equals nine, I had explained that area exists only because lines move through space. When he pressed further, asking what $3^3$ might represent geometrically, I had dismissed it as nonsense, insisting that our world possessed only two dimensions. Yet, even as he retreated to his room in shame, the echo of his query lingered: *If a point becomes a line, and a line becomes a square, surely a square moving through a third dimension must create something greater.*

Now, as the sand in the hourglass dwindled to its final grains, I turned the glass northward to mark the end of the old era. In doing so, I muttered aloud, "The boy is a fool."

Instantly, the air grew heavy. A presence coalesced in the center of the room, radiating a coldness that seeped through my skin. "He is no such thing!" my wife cried, her voice trembling with indignation. "And you are breaking the Commandments by dishonoring your own kin!"

I ignored her pleas, scanning the empty space until I felt the phantom pressure of the unseen entity. "What is the matter?" she demanded, sensing my agitation. "There is no draft. Look around; there is nothing."

"There is nothing," I admitted reluctantly, forcing myself to sit again. "The boy is a fool. $3^3$ has no meaning in our Geometry."

"The boy is not a fool," a voice replied, clear and resonant, cutting through the silence. "$3^3$ possesses an obvious geometrical meaning."

Both of us heard the words, though my wife grasped none of their significance. We lunged forward, drawn by the sound. Horror seized us when we finally perceived the figure standing before us. At first glance, it resembled a woman viewed from the side, but a closer inspection revealed that its extremities dissolved into a blur too rapid for any creature of our sex. It looked like a circle, yet it shifted in size and shape with a fluidity impossible for any regular polygon we knew. While I struggled to analyze these anomalies, my wife, driven by the instinctive suspicion of her gender, immediately concluded that a woman had slipped through a hidden vent.

"How did this person enter?" she shrieked, accusing me of negligence regarding our ventilation system.

"There are no vents," I countered, attempting to apply Sight Recognition. "By my perception, this figure..."

"I have no patience with your Sight Recognition," she interrupted, reciting the proverbs of our frail sex. "'Feeling is believing,' and 'A straight line to the touch is worth a circle to the sight.'"

Reluctantly, fearing to provoke her further, I gestured for an introduction. My wife stepped forward, adopting her most gracious demeanor. "Permit me, Madam, to feel and be felt by—"

She recoiled violently. "Oh! It is not a woman! There are no angles, not a single trace of one. Could I have offended a perfect Circle?"

"I am, in a certain sense, a Circle," the voice responded calmly. "And a more perfect Circle than any found in Flatland. But to speak more accurately, I am many circles in one."

The tone softened. "I carry a message for your husband, which I cannot deliver in your presence. If you would allow us to retire for a brief moment—"

My wife refused to entertain the notion that our august visitor required privacy. Asserting that her own duties demanded immediate attention, she apologized profusely for her earlier indiscretion and hurried away to her chamber.

As she departed, I glanced at the hourglass. The last grain of sand had fallen. The third Millennium had begun.

The final echo of my Wife's Peace-cry faded into the dry, crisp air, leaving a silence that felt heavier than usual. Seizing the moment, I stepped forward, intending to bid the Stranger sit and examine him more closely. Yet, as I approached, my legs froze, and my tongue turned to stone. Astonishment paralyzed me. He possessed none of the jagged edges that define existence in our world; instead, he shifted constantly, fluctuating in size and radiance with a fluidity impossible for any figure within my limited comprehension. A terrifying suspicion seized me: was this a burglar, a cutthroat, some monstrous Irregular Isosceles who had masqueraded as a Circle to gain entry, now poised to strike me with his lethal acute angle?

Inside the sitting-room, the absence of fog—and the season's remarkable clarity—rendered visual recognition treacherous, especially at such close range. Overcome by primal fear, I lunged forward, breaking protocol with a frantic, "You must permit me, Sir—" before pressing my palm against his form. My Wife had been right. There was not a trace of an angle, no roughness, no inequality. Never in my life had I encountered a more perfect Circle. He stood motionless while I circled him, starting from his eye and returning to it. He was circular throughout, a flawless geometric entity; doubt was impossible.

Then, the dialogue began, which I record here as faithfully as memory allows, omitting only my profuse apologies—for I was consumed by shame and humiliation that a Square, of all shapes, should dare touch a Circle. The Stranger started with palpable impatience regarding the length of my introduction.

**STRANGER:** Have you felt me sufficiently by now? Are you not yet acquainted with me?

**I:** Most illustrious Sir, pardon my clumsiness. It stems not from ignorance of social etiquette, but from a sudden, nervous surprise at this unexpected visit. I beseech you to keep this indiscretion secret, particularly from my Wife. But before we proceed, would your Lordship deign to satisfy the curiosity of one eager to know whence this visitor hails?

**STRANGER:** From Space, from Space, Sir: whence else?

**I:** Pardon me, my Lord, but are you not already *in* Space, along with your humble servant, even at this very moment?

**STRANGER:** Pooh! What do you know of Space? Define it.

**I:** Space, my Lord, is height and breadth indefinitely prolonged.

**STRANGER:** Precisely. You see, you do not even know what Space is. You believe it consists of only Two Dimensions; but I have come to announce a Third—to you, height, breadth, and length.

**I:** Your Lordship jests. We too speak of length and height, or breadth and thickness, using four terms to denote Two Dimensions.

**STRANGER:** But I mean not merely three names, but Three actual Dimensions.

**I:** Would your Lordship indicate or explain to me the direction of this Third Dimension, unknown to us?

**STRANGER:** I came from it. It lies up above and down below.

**I:** My Lord seems to imply it is Northward and Southward.

**STRANGER:** I mean nothing of the kind. I refer to a direction in which you cannot look, because you possess no eye on your side.

**I:** Pardon me, my Lord; a brief inspection will convince you that I have a perfect luminary at the junction of two of my sides.

**STRANGER:** Yes: but to perceive Space, you require an eye not on your Perimeter, but on your side—that is, on what you would likely call your interior, whereas we in Spaceland term it your side.

**I:** An eye in my interior! An eye in my stomach! Your Lordship jokes.

**STRANGER:** I am in no joking mood. I tell you I come from Space—or, since you refuse to grasp the concept, from the Land of Three Dimensions, from where I but recently surveyed your Plane, which you foolishly call Space. From that vantage point, I discerned everything you claim is SOLID (meaning "enclosed on four sides"): your houses, your churches, your very chests and safes, yes, even your insides and stomachs—all lying open and exposed to my gaze.

**I:** Such assertions are easily made, my Lord.

**STRANGER:** But not easily proven, you mean. Yet I intend to prove mine.

When I descended, I observed your four Sons, the Pentagons, each in his chamber, and your two Grandsons, the Hexagons. I watched your youngest Hexagon linger briefly with you before retiring to his room, leaving you and your Wife alone. I saw your Isosceles servants, three in number, dining in the kitchen, and the little Page in the scullery. Then I arrived here. How do you suppose I entered?

**I:** Through the roof, I assume.

**STRANGER:** Incorrect. Your roof, as you know, was recently repaired and contains no aperture through which even a Woman could pass. I tell you I come from Space. Are you not convinced by my account of your children and household?

**I:** Your Lordship must realize that such details concerning the property of your humble servant could be readily verified by anyone in the neighborhood possessing your Lordship's extensive resources for inquiry.

*(Turning inward)* **STRANGER:** What must I do? Wait; one final argument occurs to me. When you behold a Straight Line—take your Wife, for instance—how many Dimensions do you attribute to her?

**I:** Your Lordship treats me as if I were among the vulgar, those ignorant of Mathematics who suppose a Woman is truly a Straight Line, possessing only One Dimension. No, no, my Lord; we Squares are wiser. We know as well as you that a Woman, though colloquially termed a Straight Line, is scientifically a very thin Parallelogram, possessing Two Dimensions like the rest of us: length and breadth (or thickness).

**STRANGER:** But the very visibility of a Line implies it possesses yet another Dimension.

**I:** My Lord, I have just conceded that a Woman is both long and broad. We observe her length; we infer her breadth, which, though minute, is measurable.

**STRANGER:** You misunderstand. I mean that when you see a Woman, you ought—not only to infer her breadth—but to see her length, and to *SEE* what we call her HEIGHT, although that dimension is infinitesimal in your country. If a Line were mere length devoid of "height," it would cease to occupy Space and vanish. Must you not recognize this?

**I:** I must confess I utterly fail to comprehend your Lordship. When we in Flatland see a Line, we perceive length and BRIGHTNESS. If the brightness fades, the Line extinguishes and, as you say, ceases to occupy Space. Am I to suppose you grant the title of a Dimension to brightness, equating what we call "bright" with what you call "high"?

**STRANGER:** No, indeed. By "height" I mean a Dimension akin to your length; only, for you, "height" is imperceptible, being exceedingly small.

**I:** My Lord, your claim is easily tested. You assert I possess a Third Dimension, which you term "height." Since Dimension implies direction and measurement, simply measure my "height," or indicate the direction in which it extends, and I shall become your convert. Failing that, your Lordship's own logic excuses me.

**STRANGER:** *(Muttering)* I can do neither. How shall I convince him? Surely a plain statement of facts followed by ocular demonstration should suffice. —Now, Sir; listen.

You dwell on a Plane. What you style Flatland is the vast, level surface of a fluid, upon whose top you and your compatriots move, unable to rise above it or fall below it.

I am not a plane Figure, but a Solid. You call me a Circle; in truth, I am not a Circle, but an infinite stack of circles, ranging in size from a Point to a circle thirteen inches in diameter, layered one atop another. As I cut through your plane as I do now, I create a cross-section that you correctly identify as a Circle. Even a Sphere—which is my proper designation in my homeland—if it manifests itself to a Flatlander, must appear as a Circle.

Do you not recall—for I, who see all, detected last night the phantom vision of Lineland etched upon your mind—how, when you entered the realm of Lineland, you were forced to manifest not as a Square, but as a Line? That Linear Realm lacked the dimensions to contain your entirety, displaying only a slice or section of you. In precisely the same manner, your Two-Dimensional country is too narrow to represent me, a being of Three; it can only exhibit a slice or section of me, which is what you call a Circle.

Your eye dims slightly, signaling disbelief. Prepare, then, for irrefutable proof. You cannot see more than one of my sections, or Circles, simultaneously, for you lack the power to lift your eye out of the Flatland plane. However, you can witness that as I ascend in Space, my sections diminish. Watch: I shall rise. The effect upon your sight will be that my Circle shrinks until it dwindles to a point and finally vanishes.

The Sphere on the verge of vanishing (2

The Sphere's most ardent appeals had evaporated into silence, leaving only the hollow echo of his own frustration. I met him with the blunt, unyielding edge of my right angle, driving forward with a force capable of shattering any ordinary Circle. Yet, he did not break. Instead, he flowed like water around a stone, slipping effortlessly from my grasp without shifting his orientation, dissolving into the ether until the space where he stood became a terrifying blank.

But his voice persisted, cutting through the sudden void. "SPHERE. Why do you stubbornly reject reason?" he demanded. "I sought in you, a man of logic and mathematical prowess, a worthy vessel for the Gospel of the Third Dimension—a message I am granted to preach but once every millennium. Yet now, I am lost. Words fail. Let deeds speak instead."

He paused, his presence coalescing with renewed intensity. "Listen, my friend. From my vantage point in Space, I perceive the interiors of all things you deem sealed. Behold, near that cupboard where you stand, I see several of your 'boxes'—devoid of lids or bases, as all Flatland objects are—overflowing with coin. Beside them lie two ledgers of account. I am descending now. Observe: the doors remain perfectly still, untouched by my passage. I enter the cupboard, retrieve a ledger, and ascend. I rush to the closet and burst the door open. One ledger is gone. With a mocking laugh, the Stranger materialized in the far corner, and simultaneously, the stolen tablet materialized upon the floor. I seized it. There was no ambiguity—it was the missing document.

A groan of sheer horror escaped me, questioning the sanity of my own mind. Yet the Stranger pressed on, his voice dripping with condescending certainty. "Do you not now comprehend that my explanation alone fits the evidence? What you call 'Solid' is merely superficial; what you call 'Space' is nothing more than a vast, infinite plane. I dwell in Space, looking down upon the insides of the very surfaces you worship. You too could escape this plane, provided you possessed the requisite will. A mere upward or downward vector would grant you sight equal to mine."

He gestured expansively. "As I rise, distancing myself from your plane, my vision expands, albeit on a diminished scale. Ascending now, I behold your neighbor, the Hexagon, and his kin within their respective chambers. Further still, I see the interior of the Theatre, ten doors distant, as the audience departs. Across the city, I observe a Circle in his study, immersed in his books. I shall soon return to you. But first, consider this final proof: allow me to deliver a single, gentle touch to your stomach. It shall cause no serious injury, and the fleeting pang you feel will pale in comparison to the intellectual enlightenment awaiting you."

Before I could formulate a protest, a searing lance of pain shot through my midsection, accompanied by a demonic laughter that seemed to erupt from within my own soul. Moments later, the acute agony subsided, replaced by a lingering, dull throb. As the Stranger began to re-emerge, growing larger with each passing second, he remarked casually, "See? I have caused you little harm. If this does not persuade you, nothing ever will. What is your verdict?"

My resolve shattered. It was unbearable to submit to the whims of a sorcerer who could manipulate the very organs of my body. Desperation clawed at my throat; I needed to pin him against the wall, to trap him until rescue arrived. Again, I drove my sharpest angle into him, screaming for aid, alerting the entire household to the intrusion. At that precise moment of impact, I believed the Stranger had slipped beneath our plane, struggling to regain his footing. Regardless, he froze, immobile. Hearing what I assumed were footsteps approaching, I pressed my attack with renewed vigor, shouting until my lungs burned.

A convulsive tremor racked the Sphere's form. "This must not happen," I seemed to hear him mutter internally. "Either he submits to reason, or I must employ the ultimate sanction of civilization." His voice boomed outward, urgent and commanding. "Hear me! No outsider must witness this revelation. Recall your wife immediately; she must not enter this chamber. The Gospel of Three Dimensions cannot be thwarted in this manner. The fruit of a thousand years of anticipation must not be cast aside. I hear her approach. Retreat! Back! Depart from me, or you shall accompany me—to destinations unknown—into the Land of Three Dimensions!"

"Fool! Madman! Irregular!" I shrieked, my voice cracking with rage. "Never shall I let you go! You shall pay the price for your deceptions!"

"Ha! Have we reached this precipice?" the Stranger roared, his form swelling ominously. "Then accept your destiny: you shall leave your plane. Once... twice... thrice... It is done!"

An unspeakable horror seized me. Darkness swallowed the world, replaced instantly by a dizzy, sickening vertigo of perception—not sight as I knew it, but a violation of it. I saw a Line that was no longer a Line; I beheld Space that defied my two-dimensional existence. I was myself, and yet I was not myself. When voice returned to my throat, it tore from my lips in a shriek of agony: "Either this is madness or it is Hell."

"It is neither," a calm voice replied, cutting through the chaos. "It is Knowledge. It is Three Dimensions. Open your eye once again and try to look steadily."

I obeyed. Behold, a new world unfolded before me! Standing there, visibly incorporated, was all that I had previously inferred, conjectured, and dreamed of in perfect Circular beauty. What appeared to be the center of the Stranger's form lay open to my view, yet within that openness, I saw no heart, nor lungs, nor arteries. Instead, there existed a beautiful, harmonious Something—for which my vocabulary possessed no name—but you, my Readers in Spaceland, would recognize it as the surface of the Sphere.

Prostrating myself mentally before my Guide, I cried, "How is it, O divine ideal of consummate loveliness and wisdom, that I see thy inside, and yet cannot discern thy heart, thy lungs, thy arteries, thy liver?"

"What you think you see, you see not," he replied gently. "It is not given to you, nor to any other Being of Flatland, to behold my internal parts. I am of a different order of Beings from those in your plane. Were I a Circle, you could discern my intestines, but I am a Being composed, as I told you before, of many Circles—the Many in the One, called in this country a Sphere. And, just as the outside of a Cube presents the appearance of a Square, so the outside of a Sphere presents the appearance of a Circle."

Bewildered though I was by my Teacher's enigmatic utterance, I ceased to chafe against it, surrendering instead to silent adoration. His tone softened further. "Distress not yourself if you cannot at first comprehend the deeper mysteries of Spaceland. By degrees, they will dawn upon you. Let us begin by casting back a glance at the region whence you came. Return with me a while to the plains of Flatland, and I will show you that which you have often reasoned and thought about, but never seen with the sense of sight—a visible angle."

"Impossible!" I cried. Yet, led by the Sphere, I followed as if in a dream until his voice arrested me again. "Look yonder, and behold your own Pentagonal house, and all its inmates."

I looked down and saw with my physical eye all that domestic individuality which I had hitherto merely inferred with my understanding. How poor and shadowy was that abstract conjecture compared to the terrifying reality now revealed! My four sons slept calmly in the North-Western rooms; my two orphan grandsons lay to the south; the servants, the Butler, and my daughter occupied their respective apartments. Only my affectionate wife, alarmed by my prolonged absence, had left her chamber and was roaming anxiously up and down the Hall, awaiting my return. Even the Page, roused by my earlier cries, had emerged from his room, feigning concern for my fainting state while prying into the cabinet in my study.

All this I could now *see*, not merely infer. As we drew nearer, I discerned the contents of my cabinet, the two chests of gold, and the tablets the Sphere had mentioned.

```text
/\
/  \
/    \
/  My  \
/   Study \
/__________\
/           \
< >          < >
My Sons      Page
\            /
\__________/
\        /
\      /
\    /
\  /
\/
|
/ \
/   \
/ Wife\
/Apartment\
/-----------\
/             \
/\              \
My Daughter       \
\
==
/  \
/    \
/ Scullion \
/           \
/ Grandsons  \
/              \
/                \
/                  \
/                    \
/                      \
/                        \
/                          \
/                            \
/                              \
/                                \
/                                  \
/                                    \
Cellar                               \
--------------------------------------
```

Touched by my wife's distress, I would have sprung downward to reassure her, but I found myself utterly incapable of motion.

"Trouble not yourself about your Wife," said my Guide. "She will not be long left in anxiety; meantime, let us take a survey of Flatland."

Once more, I felt myself rising through the void. Just as the Sphere had predicted, the further we receded from the object beneath us, the larger the field of vision expanded. My native city, with the interior of every house and every creature within, lay exposed to my view in miniature. We ascended higher, and suddenly, the secrets of the earth were bared: the depths of mines, the inmost caverns of the hills—all unveiled before my unworthy eye.

Awestruck at the sight of these terrestrial mysteries, I turned to my Companion. "Behold, I am become as a God. For the wise men in our country say that to see all things—or, as they express it, *Omnividence*—is the attribute of God alone."

There was a note of scorn in the voice of my Teacher as he answered. "Is it so indeed? Then the very pickpockets and cutthroats of my country are to be worshipped by your wise men as gods, for there is not one of them that does not see as much as you see now. But trust me, your wise men are wrong."

"I. Then is omnividence the attribute of others besides Gods?"

"S.P.H.E.R.E. I do not know. But, if a pickpocket or a cutthroat of your country can see everything that is in ours, surely that is no reason why the pickpocket or the cutthroat should be accepted by you as a god. Does this *omnividence*, as you call it—it is not a common word in Spaceland—make you more just, more merciful, less selfish, more loving? Not in the least. Then how does it make you more divine?"

"I. More merciful, more loving!"

"But these are the qualities of women! And we know that a Circle is a higher Being than a Straight Line, insofar as knowledge and wisdom are more to be esteemed than mere affection."

"S.P.H.E.R.E. It is not for me to classify human faculties according to merit. Yet many of the best and wisest in Spaceland think more of the affections than of the understanding, more of your despised Straight Lines than of your belauded Circles. But enough of this. Look yonder. Do you know that building?"

I looked, and afar off I saw an immense polygonal structure, recognizing immediately the General Assembly Hall of the States of Flatland, surrounded by dense lines of pentagonal buildings standing at right angles to one another, which I knew to be streets. I perceived that I was approaching the great Metropolis.

"Here we descend," said my Guide.

It was now morning, the first hour of the first day of the two thousandth year of our era. Acting, as was their wont, in strict accordance with precedent, the highest Circles of the realm were meeting in solemn conclave, just as they had gathered on the first hour of the first day of the year 1000, and also on the first hour of the first day of the year 0. The minutes of the previous meetings were read aloud by one whom I at once recognized as my brother, a perfectly symmetrical Square, and the Chief Clerk of the High Council.

It was found recorded on each occasion that: *"Whereas the States had been troubled by divers ill-intentioned persons pretending to have received revelations from another World, and professing to produce demonstrations whereby they had instigated to frenzy both themselves and others, it had been for this cause unanimously resolved by the Grand Council that on the first day of each millenary, special injunctions be sent to the Prefects in the several districts of Flatland, to make strict search for such misguided persons, and without formality of mathematical examination, to destroy all such as were Isosceles of any degree, to scourge and imprison any regular Triangle, to cause any Square or Pentagon to be sent to the district Asylum, and to arrest any one of higher rank, sending him straightway to the Capital to be examined and judged by the Council."*

"You hear your fate," said the Sphere to me, while the Council passed the formal resolution for the third time. "Death or imprisonment awaits the Apostle of the Gospel of Three Dimensions."

"Not so," replied I. "The matter is now so clear to me, the nature of real space so palpable, that methinks I could make a child understand it. Permit me but to descend at this moment and enlighten them."

"Not yet," said my Guide. "The time will come for that. Meantime I must perform my

The sound of the prison cart wheels rattled against the cobblestones, a jagged rhythm that shattered the silence of the Council Chamber. Beside me, my brother was dragged away, his form reduced to a trembling line of ink in my vision, stripped of the dignity of his existence. A surge of desperate volition seized me; I lunged forward, my limbs straining to intercept the guards, to offer a plea or at least a final word of comfort. But my body refused to obey. I was paralyzed, a statue of stone within a living frame. My Guide stood impassive, his voice dripping with a cold, gloomy finality. "Heed not thy brother," he commanded, his tone devoid of empathy. "Haply thou shalt have ample time hereafter to condole with him. Follow me."

With a heaviness that pressed against my soul, I was compelled to rise. We ascended once more into the vast, boundless expanse of Space. Until this moment, my education had been confined to the flat, deceptive simplicity of Plane Figures and their interiors. Now, the Sphere prepared to dismantle my limited perception. He gestured to a chaotic array of movable square cards scattered before us. "Behold," he instructed, his voice echoing with the authority of absolute truth. "See how I place one card upon another—not Northward, as you are accustomed to navigate Flatland, but *upon* it. Layer by layer, I build a Solid. Observe how these squares, parallel to one another, stack until the figure becomes as high as it is long and broad. Thus is the Cube born."

"Pardon me, my Lord," I stammered, my eyes struggling to reconcile the visual data with my ingrained logic. "But to my eye, this appears nothing but an irregular Plane Figure, its interior laid bare for inspection. I see no Solid, only a monstrous, gaping wound—a shape so grotesque it causes physical pain to my sight."

"True," the Sphere conceded gently. "It appears to you as a Plane simply because you lack the faculty of Light, Shade, and Perspective. Just as a Hexagon appears to you as a mere Straight Line unless you possess the Art of Sight Recognition, so too does the Solid deceive the uninitiated eye. Yet, in reality, it is a Solid, a truth you shall verify through the sense of Feeling."

He guided my hand to touch the construct. Instantly, the deception vanished. The sensation confirmed what the eye could not grasp: I was touching a being composed of six distinct planes and eight terminal points, the solid angles where the faces met. I recalled the Sphere's earlier lesson—that a Square moving parallel to itself in Space generates exactly such a creature—and a profound joy surged through me. Even a humble Square like myself could be the progenitor of such an illustrious offspring. Yet, the concepts of light, shade, and perspective remained elusive abstractions. I dared not hide my confusion.

Were I to recount the Sphere's subsequent explanation in full detail, it would seem tedious to any native of Space who already possesses this knowledge. Suffice it to say that through his lucid demonstrations, shifting the positions of objects and sources of illumination, and allowing me to physically feel both the external surfaces and his own sacred person, he finally bridged the gap. I learned to distinguish clearly between a Circle and a Sphere, between a Plane Figure and a Solid. This revelation marked the climax, the paradise, of my strange and eventful history.

From this point onward, my narrative shifts from ascent to a miserable fall—a fall most unjust, yet inevitable. Why should the thirst for knowledge be ignited only to be extinguished by punishment? My volition recoils from the painful task of reliving my humiliation, yet, driven by a spirit akin to Prometheus, I shall endure this torment if it serves to awaken a rebellious consciousness within the interiors of Planar and Solid humanity. Let us discard all personal considerations. I shall proceed to the end of my tale, following the plain path of dispassionate history, recording the exact facts and the precise words burned into my memory, allowing my readers to judge between me and Destiny.

The Sphere, eager to continue his indoctrination into the conformations of all regular solids—cylinders, cones, pyramids, pentahedrons, hexahedrons, dodecahedrons, and spheres—ventured to pause. I interrupted him, not from weariness, but from an insatiable hunger for deeper truths. "Pardon me," I said, lowering my head in reverence despite my audacity, "O Thou Whom I must no longer address as the Perfection of all Beauty. Let me beg thee to vouchsafe thy servant a sight of thine interior."

"My what?" the Sphere demanded, startled.

"Thine interior: thy stomach, thy intestines."

"Whence this ill-timed impertinent request?" he snapped, his composure cracking slightly. "And what mean you by saying that I am no longer the Perfection of all Beauty?"

"My Lord," I pleaded, rising to the challenge, "your own wisdom has taught me to aspire to One even greater, more beautiful, and more perfectly approximating to Perfection than yourself. As you, superior to all Flatland forms, combine many Circles into One, so doubtless there exists One above you who combines many Spheres into a Supreme Existence, surpassing even the Solids of Spaceland. Just as we, now in Space, look down upon Flatland and perceive the insides of all things, so of a certainty there lies a higher, purer region above us. Whither thou dost surely intend to lead me—O Thou whom I shall always call my Priest, Philosopher, and Friend—is some yet more spacious Space, a dimensionality beyond the reach of current comprehension. From that vantage point, we shall look down together upon the revealed insides of Solid things, where thine own intestines, and those of thy kin, will lie exposed to the view of the poor wandering exile from Flatland, to whom so much has already been granted."

"Pooh! Stuff!" the Sphere scoffed, regaining his stern demeanor. "Enough of this trifling! Time is short, and much remains to be done before you are fit to proclaim the Gospel of Three Dimensions to your blind, benighted countrymen in Flatland."

"Nay, gracious Teacher, deny me not what I know is in thy power to perform," I insisted, desperation coloring my voice. "Grant me but one glimpse of thine interior, and I am satisfied forever, remaining henceforth thy docile pupil, thy unemancipable slave, ready to receive all thy teachings and to feed upon the words that fall from thy lips."

"Well, then, to content and silence you," the Sphere relented, "let me say at once: I would show you what you wish if I could; but I cannot. Would you have me turn my stomach inside out to oblige you?"

"But my Lord has shown me the intestines of all my countrymen in the Land of Two Dimensions by taking me with him into the Land of Three!" I argued, seizing the precedent. "What is more difficult now than to take his servant on a second journey into the blessed region of the Fourth Dimension? There, I shall look down with him upon this land of Three Dimensions, seeing the inside of every three-dimensional house, the secrets of the solid earth, the treasures of the mines in Spaceland, and the intestines of every solid living creature, even of the noble and adorable Spheres."

"But where is this land of Four Dimensions?" the Sphere asked, genuinely puzzled.

"I know not," I admitted humbly, "but doubtless my Teacher knows."

"Not I," the Sphere declared firmly. "There is no such land. The very idea of it is utterly inconceivable."

"Not inconceivable, my Lord, to me, and therefore still less inconceivable to my Master," I countered, my conviction hardening. "Nay, I despair not that, even here, in this region of Three Dimensions, your Lordship's art may render the Fourth Dimension visible to me. Recall the past: Was I not taught below that when I saw a Line and inferred a Plane, I in reality perceived a Third, unrecognized Dimension, not identical to brightness, but called 'height'? Does it not now follow that, in this region, when I see a Plane and infer a Solid, I truly perceive a Fourth, unrecognized Dimension, not the same as color, but existent, though infinitesimal and incapable of direct measurement?"

"And besides," I pressed, "there is the Argument from Analogy of Figures."

"Analogy! Nonsense: what analogy?" the Sphere retorted impatiently.

"Your Lordship tempts his servant to test whether he remembers the revelations imparted to him," I said, my voice gaining strength. "Trifle not with me, my Lord; I crave, I thirst, for more knowledge. Doubtless we cannot *see* that other higher Spaceland now, because we have no eye in our stomachs. But, just as there *was* the realm of Flatland, though that poor, puny Lineland Monarch could neither turn left nor right to discern it, and just as there *was*, close at hand and touching my frame, the land of Three Dimensions, though I, blind senseless wretch, had no power to touch it, no eye in my interior to discern it... so of a surety there is a Fourth Dimension, which my Lord perceives with the inner eye of thought. And that it must exist, my Lord himself has taught me. Or can he have forgotten what he himself imparted to his servant?"

"In One Dimension

I felt, with an instinctive urgency that allowed me no time for reflection, that I must veil my recent experiences from my Wife. It was not born of fear that she would betray my secret, but rather a conviction that the narrative of my adventures would remain utterly unintelligible to any woman within the confines of Flatland. Thus, I endeavored to soothe her suspicions with a fabrication conjured for the occasion: that I had accidentally tumbled through the cellar's trapdoor and lay there, stunned. In our land, where the Southward attraction is so feeble, even this tale appeared extraordinary and nearly impossible to believe to a woman; yet my Wife, whose discernment far surpasses the average of her sex, perceived immediately that I was abnormally agitated. She did not argue the matter but insisted I was ill and required repose. Glad of an excuse to retreat to my chamber and ponder the event in solitude, I withdrew.

Once alone, a drowsiness seized me. Before my eyes finally closed, I strived to reconstruct the Third Dimension, specifically the process by which a Cube is formed through the motion of a Square. The image was not as lucid as I desired, yet I recalled the crucial phrase: "Upward, and yet not Northward." Determined to hold these words as the key that, if firmly grasped, could not fail to unlock the solution, I began to repeat them mechanically, like a charm: "Upward, yet not Northward." Soon, I sank into a sound, refreshing sleep.

During my slumber, I dreamed. I found myself once more beside the Sphere, whose radiant hue signaled that his former wrath had transmuted into perfect placability. Together, we drifted toward a bright yet infinitesimally small Point, drawing my Master's attention. As we neared, a faint humming emanated from it—a sound akin to a Spaceland bluebottle, yet infinitely less resonant, so subtle that even amidst the absolute stillness of the vacuum through which we soared, the vibration reached our ears only when we halted our flight at a distance of less than twenty human diagonals.

"Look yonder," my Guide intoned. "In Flatland thou hast lived; of Lineland thou hast received a vision; thou hast soared with me to the heights of Spaceland; now, to complete the range of thy experience, I conduct thee downward to the lowest depth of existence, even to the realm of Pointland, the Abyss of No Dimensions."

"Behold yon miserable creature," he continued. "That Point is a Being like ourselves, yet confined to the non-dimensional Gulf. He is himself his own World, his own Universe; of anything other than himself he can form no conception. He knows not Length, nor Breadth, nor Height, for he has had no experience of them; he possesses no cognizance even of the number Two, nor does he harbor a thought of Plurality. For he is himself his One and All, being truly Nothing. Yet observe his perfect self-contentment, and hence learn this lesson: to be self-satisfied is to be vile and ignorant, whereas to aspire is superior to being blindly and impotently happy."

"Now listen."

He paused, and from the tiny buzzing entity arose a low, monotonous, yet distinct tinkling, reminiscent of a Spaceland phonograph. From this source emerged the words: "Infinite beatitude of existence! It is; and there is none else beside It."

"What," I asked, "does the puny creature mean by 'It'?"

"He means himself," replied the Sphere. "Have you not observed before that infants and childish souls, unable to distinguish themselves from the world, speak of themselves in the Third Person? But hush!"

"It fills all Space," the little soliloquizing creature continued, "and whatever It fills, It is. Whatever It thinks, that It utters; and whatever It utters, that It hears; and It itself is Thinker, Utterer, Hearer, Thought, Word, Audition; it is the One, and yet the All in All. Ah, the happiness! Ah, the happiness of Being!"

"Can you not startle the little thing out of its complacency?" I urged. "Reveal to it what it truly is, just as you revealed it to me; expose the narrow limitations of Pointland and lead it upward to something higher."

"That is no easy task," my Master answered. "Try yourself."

Raising my voice to its utmost limit, I addressed the Point thus: "Silence, silence, contemptible Creature! You claim to be the All in All, yet you are the Nothing: your so-called Universe is but a mere speck in a Line, and a Line is but a mere shadow compared to—"

"Hush, hush, you have spoken enough," interrupted the Sphere. "Now listen, and mark the effect of your harangue upon the King of Pointland."

The lustre of the Monarch, who beamed more brightly than ever upon hearing my words, clearly indicated that he retained his complacency. Hardly had I ceased speaking when he resumed his strain.

"Ah, the joy! Ah, the joy of Thought! What can It not achieve by thinking! Its own Thought returning to Itself, suggestive of Its disparagement, thereby enhancing Its happiness! Sweet rebellion stirred up to result in triumph! Ah, the divine creative power of the All in One! Ah, the joy, the joy of Being!"

"You see," said my Teacher, "how little your words have accomplished. So far as the Monarch comprehends them at all, he accepts them as his own—for he cannot conceive of any entity other than himself—and takes pride in the variety of 'Its Thought' as proof of creative power. Let us leave this God of Pointland to the ignorant fruition of his omnipresence and omniscience; nothing that you or I can do can rescue him from his self-satisfaction."

After this, as we floated gently back to Flatland, I heard the mild voice of my Companion pointing out the moral of my vision, stimulating me to aspire and to teach others to aspire. He had initially confessed to being angered by my ambition to soar beyond the Third Dimension; yet, since then, he had gained fresh insight and was no longer too proud to acknowledge his error to a pupil. Proceeding further, he initiated me into mysteries even higher than those I had witnessed, demonstrating how to construct Extra-Solids through the motion of Solids, and Double Extra-Solids through the motion of Extra-Solids—all strictly according to analogy, by methods so simple and accessible that they are patent even to the Female Sex.

The bell above the door chattered its final warning, and I stood frozen, the weight of my revelation pressing against my chest like a stone too heavy for my two-dimensional hands to lift. The street below had erupted into a cacophony of commands, a rising tide of voices demanding silence, until a single, authoritative trumpet cut through the din. A herald's proclamation rang out, clear and terrible: the Council's Resolution, ordering the arrest, imprisonment, or execution of any soul daring to pervert the public mind with delusions or claims of revelation from another World.

My heart hammered against my ribs. This was no time for folly. To speak of my vision now would be suicide. I resolved instantly to abandon the dangerous path of testimony and retreat to the safer, albeit slower, road of pure demonstration. *Upward, not Northward*—that was the key, the linchpin of the entire proof. It had burned bright in my mind moments before sleep claimed me, appearing as obvious as arithmetic upon waking, yet now, under the shadow of the law, the clarity seemed to fray at the edges.

Just then, my wife entered the room, her presence timely yet intrusive. We exchanged the requisite pleasantries, the hollow rituals of domesticity masking the storm within. Yet, despite her proximity, I knew I could not begin my instruction with her. Not today. My pentagonal sons, men of high standing and respected physicians, lacked the necessary mathematical rigor; they were ill-equipped to grasp the higher truths I sought to impart. Instead, my mind turned to a young hexagon, docile and inclined toward numbers, or even better—to my grandson. His earlier, offhand remark regarding $3^3$, which had strangely pleased the Sphere, marked him as a vessel ready for the Gospel. If I discussed this with a child, I would be safe; he knew nothing of the Council's edict. My sons, however, were steeped in a fervent patriotism and a reverent awe for the Circles that far outweighed natural affection. Should they discover me preaching sedition, they would undoubtedly drag me before the Prefect.

Before I could summon my grandson, I faced the inevitable: my wife's curiosity. She demanded to know why the Circle had summoned me and how I had breached the sanctity of our walls. I spun an elaborate tale, a fabrication woven with threads of plausible deniability, hoping to satisfy her without revealing the abyss of the Third Dimension. I managed, with difficulty, to persuade her to return to her household duties, silencing her questions before they could pierce the veil of my secret.

With the coast seemingly clear, I called for my grandson. Confessing the truth, I felt the memories of my vision slipping away like water through clenched fists, fading into the elusive haze of a half-grasped dream. I needed to test my skill, to forge a disciple before the memory vanished. As he entered, I locked the door, securing us both in a private sphere of potential heresy. Sitting beside him with our mathematical tablets—mere lines to you—I announced we would resume yesterday's lesson.

I guided his small mind through the familiar motions: how a point, driven by movement along a line, becomes a line; how a straight line, sweeping across a plane, generates a square. Then, seizing the moment, I forced a laugh onto my face. "And now, you scoundrel," I whispered, leaning in, "you tried to convince me that a square, by moving 'Upward, not Northward,' could birth another figure, a phantom extra-square existing in Three Dimensions. Repeat that, you young rascal."

At that instant, the herald's cry returned from the street, the "O yes! O yes!" echoing ominously. My grandson, though young, possessed an intelligence beyond his years, nurtured in absolute reverence for the Circle's authority. He understood the gravity of the moment instantly. Silence stretched between us, taut and terrifying, until the proclamation finally faded into the distance.

Then, the dam broke. Bursting into tears, he clutched my arm. "Grandpapa," he sobbed, "that was only a joke! I meant nothing by it! We didn't know about the new Law, and I'm sure I didn't say anything about the Third Dimension. And certainly, I didn't say 'Upward, not Northward'—that sounds like nonsense! How can something move upward and not northward? Even a baby wouldn't be so absurd. How silly it is! Ha! ha! ha!"

"Not at all silly," I snapped, my composure shattering as anger flared. "Here, look!" I grabbed a movable square resting nearby. "Watch closely. I move it—not Northward, but—" I hesitated, searching for the impossible vector. "Yes, I move it Upward—that is to say, not Northward, but somewhere else... not exactly like this, but somehow..."

I fumbled with the square, shaking it aimlessly in the air, attempting to simulate a dimension my two-dimensional world could not comprehend. The result was a chaotic blur, a purposeless thrashing that made no geometric sense. My grandson threw his head back, roaring with laughter, declaring that I wasn't teaching him but merely mocking him. Seizing the opportunity to escape the trap I had sprung, he unlocked the door and fled the room.

Thus concluded my first, disastrous attempt to convert a pupil to the Gospel of Three Dimensions.

My attempt to diffuse the Theory of Three Dimensions through alternative channels yielded results far less encouraging than my initial optimism warranted. The failure of my efforts with my Grandson did not, however, plunge me into despair; rather, it crystallized a new strategy. I realized that reliance on the cryptic maxim—"Upward, not Northward"—was insufficient. True enlightenment required a comprehensive demonstration, a visual exposition of the entire subject matter. Consequently, I resolved to turn to the written word. For several months, sequestered in solitude, I composed a treatise on the mysteries of the Third Dimension. In a calculated effort to circumvent the Law, I deliberately avoided referencing a physical dimension. Instead, I described a realm of pure thought, a "Thoughtland," wherein a figure could gaze downward upon Flatland, perceiving the interiors of all objects simultaneously. Within this theoretical construct, I posited the existence of a figure enveloped by six squares and terminating in eight points. Yet, as I penned these lines, I encountered a formidable obstacle: the inability to draw the requisite diagrams. In Flatland, our medium is strictly linear; we possess no tablets but lines, and no geometric illustrations but single strokes distinguished solely by variations in magnitude and luminosity. Thus, when I completed my manuscript, titled *Through Flatland to Thoughtland*, I harbored grave doubts regarding its intelligibility.

Meanwhile, my existence descended into a somber haze. Every pleasure lost its savor; every sight became a tantalizing provocation to treason, for I could not suppress the urge to contrast the deceptive two-dimensional reality with the true three-dimensional essence, and I struggled to keep these comparisons silent. I neglected my clientele and my professional duties to devote myself to the contemplation of the mysteries I had witnessed yet could not convey. The task of reproducing these visions within my own mind grew increasingly arduous each day. One evening, roughly eleven months after my return from Spaceland, I attempted to visualize a cube with my eyes closed, but I failed. Though I eventually succeeded, I remained uncertain of the accuracy of my reconstruction—a doubt that has plagued me ever since. This failure deepened my melancholy and compelled me to take decisive action, though the specific path remained obscure. I felt a willingness to sacrifice my very life for the Cause, provided it could generate conviction. Yet, if I could not persuade my Grandson, how could I expect to sway the most advanced Circles of the land? Nevertheless, my spirit occasionally surged beyond restraint, leading to perilous outbursts. I was already branded heterodox, bordering on treason, acutely aware of the precariousness of my position. Still, I could not prevent myself from erupting into suspicious or semi-seditious declarations even among the highest Polygonal and Circular societies. When debates arose concerning the treatment of lunatics claiming to perceive the interiors of things, I quoted an ancient Circle stating that prophets are invariably deemed mad by the majority. I could not resist slipping phrases like "the eye that discerns the interiors" or "the all-seeing land" into conversation. On rare occasions, I even uttered the forbidden terms "the Third and Fourth Dimensions."

Finally, driven by a culmination of minor indiscretions, I committed a fatal error at a gathering of our Local Speculative Society convened at the Prefect's palace. An individual of questionable intellect had presented a paper arguing that Providence had intentionally limited dimensions to two and reserved omniscience for the Supreme Alone. Overcome by passion, I recounted the entirety of my voyage with the Sphere into Space, my journey to the Assembly Hall in our metropolis, and my subsequent return, detailing every sight and sound experienced in both fact and vision. Initially, I feigned that I was narrating the fictional experiences of a hypothetical persona, but my fervor quickly stripped away this disguise. In a climactic conclusion, I exhorted my audience to shed their prejudices and embrace belief in the Third Dimension. Naturally, I was immediately arrested and brought before the Council.

The following morning, standing in the very chamber where the Sphere had recently appeared beside me, I was granted permission to speak without interruption. From the outset, I perceived my impending doom. The President, observing a guard composed of high-quality policemen—figures of angularity barely below fifty-five degrees—ordered them replaced by an inferior class, possessing angles only two or three degrees greater. I understood the implication perfectly: I faced execution or imprisonment, and my narrative would be erased from the collective memory by the simultaneous silencing of the witnesses. The President sought to substitute cheap victims for costly ones. Upon concluding my defense, the President, perhaps sensing that some junior Circles had been swayed by my sincerity, posed two final questions: First, could I indicate the direction implied by "Upward, not Northward"? Second, could I describe the figure I termed a "Cube" using diagrams or descriptions other than enumerating imaginary sides and angles? I declared my inability to answer further, committing myself entirely to the Truth, trusting that its cause would ultimately prevail. The President agreed with my sentiment, declaring that I could do no better. I was sentenced to perpetual imprisonment. However, he added that if the Truth destined me to emerge and evangelize the world, the Truth itself would ensure that outcome. Until then, I would suffer no unnecessary discomfort, barring attempts at escape, and, absent misconduct, I would be periodically permitted to visit my brother, who had preceded me to this confinement.

Seven years have now passed, and I remain a prisoner, isolated from all companionship save that of my jailers and the occasional visitations of my brother. He is a Square of exceptional integrity, sensibility, cheerfulness, and genuine fraternal affection. Yet, I confess that our weekly meetings inflict upon me the deepest anguish. He was present when the Sphere manifested in the Council Chamber; he witnessed the shifting cross-sections and heard the explanations given to the Circles. Despite this, scarcely a week has gone by in these seven years without my recounting my role in that event, accompanied by detailed accounts of Spaceland's phenomena and analogical arguments for solid bodies. And yet—I blush to admit it—my brother has never grasped the nature of the Third Dimension. He openly avows his disbelief in the existence of a Sphere. Consequently, I stand utterly devoid of converts, and the millennial Revelation appears to have been bestowed upon me in vain. Prometheus ascended to Spaceland to bind fire for mortals, but I, the poor Flatland Prometheus, lie here in chains, delivering nothing to my compatriots.

Nonetheless, I cling to the hope that these memoirs, through some unknown mechanism, may reach the minds of humanity in some higher Dimension, inspiring a generation of rebels unwilling to accept the confines of limited dimensionality. This is the hope of my brightest moments. Alas, darkness often overtakes me. The burden of uncertainty weighs heavily; I cannot honestly claim confidence in the exact shape of the cube I once beheld. In my nightly visions, the enigmatic command "Upward, not Northward" haunts me like a soul-consuming Sphinx. It is part of the martyrdom I endure for the Truth that there are seasons of mental frailty when cubes and spheres dissolve into the background of improbable existence. During these times, the Land of Three Dimensions seems as illusory as the Land of One or None. Indeed, even this impenetrable wall separating me from freedom, the very tablets upon which I write, and the tangible realities of Flatland itself, seem no more than the progeny of a diseased imagination or the tenuous fabric of a dream.

-----------------------------------------------------------------
| ______     |
| / / /|      |------ / /|
| /| / /-.    | | /---- / /__|
| | / / /__|  | / / /__| / |
| / /___ /    | / /___ / | / |/ /__.-'
| |          | | |
| The baseless fabric of my vision |
| Melted into air into thin air   |
| Such stuff as dreams are made of |
-----------------------------------------------------------------
