After leaving Vienna, and long before you come to Budapest, the Danube enters a region of singular loneliness and desolation, where its waters spread away on all sides regardless of a main channel, and the country becomes a swamp for miles upon miles, covered by a vast sea of low willow-bushes. On the big maps this deserted area is painted in a fluffy blue, growing fainter in color as it leaves the banks, and across it may be seen in large straggling letters the word *Sümpfe*, meaning marshes.

In high flood this great acreage of sand, shingle-beds, and willow-grown islands is almost topped by the water, but in normal seasons the bushes bend and rustle in the free winds, showing their silver leaves to the sunshine in an ever-moving plain of bewildering beauty. These willows never attain to the dignity of trees; they have no rigid trunks; they remain humble bushes, with rounded tops and soft outline, swaying on slender stems that answer to the least pressure of the wind; supple as grasses, and so continually shifting that they somehow give the impression that the entire plain is moving and alive. For the wind sends waves rising and falling over the whole surface, waves of leaves instead of waves of water, green swells like the sea, too, until the branches turn and lift, and then silvery white as their underside turns to the sun.

Happy to slip beyond the control of the stern banks, the Danube here wanders about at will among the intricate network of channels intersecting the islands everywhere with broad avenues down which the waters pour with a shouting sound; making whirlpools, eddies, and foaming rapids; tearing at the sandy banks; carrying away masses of shore and willow-clumps; and forming new islands innumerably which shift daily in size and shape and possess at best an impermanent life, since the flood-time obliterates their very existence.

Properly speaking, this fascinating part of the river's life begins soon after leaving Pressburg, and we, in our Canadian canoe, with gipsy tent and frying-pan on board, reached it on the crest of a rising flood about mid-July. That very same morning, when the sky was reddening before sunrise, we had slipped swiftly through still-sleeping Vienna, leaving it a couple of hours later a mere patch of smoke against the blue hills of the Wienerwald on the horizon; we had breakfasted below Fischeramend under a grove of birch trees roaring in the wind; and had then swept on the tearing current past Orth, Hainburg, Petronell (the old Roman Carnuntum of Marcus Aurelius), and so under the frowning heights of Thelsen on a spur of the Carpathians, where the March steals in quietly from the left and the frontier is crossed between Austria and Hungary.

Racing along at twelve kilometers an hour soon took us well into Hungary, and the muddy waters—sure sign of flood—sent us aground on many a shingle-bed, and twisted us like a cork in many a sudden belching whirlpool before the towers of Pressburg (Hungarian, Pozsóny) showed against the sky; and then the canoe, leaping like a spirited horse, flew at top speed under the grey walls, negotiated safely the sunken chain of the Fliegende Brucke ferry, turned the corner sharply to the left, and plunged on yellow foam into the wilderness of islands, sandbanks, and swamp-land beyond—the land of the willows.

The change came suddenly, as when a series of bioscope pictures snaps down on the streets of a town and shifts without warning into the scenery of lake and forest. We entered the land of desolation on wings, and in less than half an hour there was neither boat nor fishing-hut nor red roof, nor any single sign of human habitation and civilization within sight. The sense of remoteness from the world of humankind, the utter isolation, the fascination of this singular world of willows, winds, and waters, instantly laid its spell upon us both, so that we allowed laughingly to one another that we ought by rights to have held some special kind of passport to admit us, and that we had, somewhat audaciously, come without asking leave into a separate little kingdom of wonder and magic—a kingdom that was reserved for the use of others who had a right to it, with everywhere unwritten warnings to trespassers for those who had the imagination to discover them.

Though still early in the afternoon, the ceaseless buffetings of a most tempestuous wind made us feel weary, and we at once began casting about for a suitable camping-ground for the night. But the bewildering character of the islands made landing difficult; the swirling flood carried us in shore and then swept us out again; the willow branches tore our hands as we seized them to stop the canoe, and we pulled many a yard of sandy bank into the water before at length we shot with a great sideways blow from the wind into a backwater and managed to beach the bows in a cloud of spray. Then we lay panting and laughing after our exertions on the hot yellow sand, sheltered from the wind, and in the full blaze of a scorching sun, a cloudless blue sky above, and an immense army of dancing, shouting willow bushes, closing in from all sides, shining with spray and clapping their thousand little hands as though to applaud the success of our efforts.

"What a river!" I said to my companion, thinking of all the way we had traveled from the source in the Black Forest, and how he had often been obliged to wade and push in the upper shallows at the beginning of June.

"Won't stand much nonsense now, will it?" he said, pulling the canoe a little farther into safety up the sand, and then composing himself for a nap.

I lay by his side, happy and peaceful in the bath of the elements—water, wind, sand, and the great fire of the sun—thinking of the long journey that lay behind us, and of the great stretch before us to the Black Sea, and how lucky I was to have such a delightful and charming traveling companion as my friend, the Swede.

We had made many similar journeys together, but the Danube, more than any other river I knew, impressed us from the very beginning with its *aliveness*. From its tiny bubbling entry into the world among the pinewood gardens of Donaueschingen, until this moment when it began to play the great river-game of losing itself among the deserted swamps, unobserved, unrestrained, it had seemed to us like following the growth of some living creature. Sleepy at first, but later developing violent desires as it became conscious of its deep soul, it rolled, like some huge fluid being, through all the countries we had passed, holding our little craft on its mighty shoulders, playing roughly with us sometimes, yet always friendly and well-meaning, till at length we had come inevitably to regard it as a Great Personage.

How, indeed, could it be otherwise, since it told us so much of its secret life? At night we heard it singing to the moon as we lay in our tent, uttering that odd sibilant note peculiar to itself and said to be caused by the rapid tearing of the pebbles along its bed, so great is its hurrying speed. We knew, too, the voice of its gurgling whirlpools, suddenly bubbling up on a surface previously quite calm; the roar of its shallows and swift rapids; its constant steady thundering below all mere surface sounds; and that ceaseless tearing of its icy waters at the banks. How it stood up and shouted when the rains fell flat upon its face! And how its laughter roared out when the wind blew up-stream and tried to stop its growing speed! We knew all its sounds and voices, its tumblings and foamings, its unnecessary splashing against the bridges; that self-conscious chatter when there were hills to look on; the affected dignity of its speech when it passed through the little towns, far too important to laugh; and all these faint, sweet whisperings when the sun caught it fairly in some slow curve and poured down upon it till the steam rose.

It was full of tricks, too, in its early life before the great world knew it. There were places in the upper reaches among the Swabian forests, when yet the first whispers of its destiny had not reached it, where it elected to disappear through holes in the ground, to appear again on the other side of the porous limestone hills and start a new river with another name; leaving, too, so little water in its own bed that we had to climb out and wade and push the canoe through miles of shallows.

And a chief pleasure, in those early days of its irresponsible youth, was to lie low, like Brer Fox, just before the little turbulent tributaries came to join it from the Alps, and to refuse to acknowledge them when in, but to run for miles side by side, the dividing line well marked, the very levels different, the Danube utterly declining to recognize the newcomer. Below Passau, however, it gave up this particular trick, for there the Inn comes in with a thundering power impossible to ignore, and so pushes and incommodes the parent river that there is hardly room for them in the long twisting gorge that follows, and the Danube is shoved this way and that against the cliffs, and forced to hurry itself with great waves and much dashing to and fro in order to get through in time. And during the fight our canoe slipped down from its shoulder to its breast, and had the time of its life among the struggling waves. But the Inn taught the old river a lesson, and after Passau it no longer pretended to ignore new arrivals.

This was many days back, of course, and since then we had come to know other aspects of the great creature, and across the Bavarian wheat plain of Straubing she wandered so slowly under the blazing June sun that we could well imagine only the surface inches were water, while below there moved, concealed as by a silken mantle, a whole army of Undines, passing silently and unseen down to the sea, and very leisurely too, lest they be discovered.

Much, too, we forgave her because of her friendliness to the birds and animals that haunted the shores. Cormorants lined the banks in lonely places in rows like short black palings; grey crows crowded the shingle-beds; storks stood fishing in the vistas of shallower water that opened up between the islands, and hawks, swans, and marsh birds of all sorts filled the air with glinting wings and singing, petulant cries. It was impossible to feel annoyed with the river's vagaries after seeing a deer leap with a splash into the water at sunrise and swim past the bows of the canoe; and often we saw fawns peering at us from the underbrush, or looked straight into the brown eyes of a stag as we charged full tilt round a corner and entered another reach of the river. Foxes, too, everywhere haunted the banks, tripping daintily among the driftwood and disappearing so suddenly that it was impossible to see how they managed it.

But now, after leaving Pressburg, everything changed a little, and the Danube became more serious. It ceased trifling. It was half-way to the Black Sea, within seeming distance almost of other, stranger countries where no tricks would be permitted or understood. It became suddenly grown-up, and claimed our respect and even our awe. It broke out into three arms, for one thing, that only met again a hundred kilometers farther down, and for a canoe there were no indications which one was intended to be followed.

"If you take a side channel," said the Hungarian officer we met in the Pressburg shop while buying provisions, "you may find yourselves, when the flood subsides, forty miles from anywhere, high and dry, and you may easily starve. There are no people, no farms, no fishermen. I warn you not to continue. The river, too, is still rising, and this wind will increase."

The rising river did not alarm us in the least, but the matter of being left high and dry by a sudden subsidence of the waters might be serious, and we had consequently laid in an extra stock of provisions. For the rest, the officer's prophecy held true, and the wind, blowing down a perfectly clear sky, increased steadily till it reached the dignity of a westerly gale.

It was earlier than usual when we camped, for the sun was a good hour or two from the horizon, and leaving my friend still asleep on the hot sand, I wandered about in desultory examination of our hotel. The island, I found, was less than an acre in extent, a mere sandy bank standing some two or three feet above the level of the river. The far end, pointing into the sunset, was covered with flying spray which the tremendous wind drove off the crests of the broken waves. It was triangular in shape, with the apex up stream.

I stood there for several minutes, watching the impetuous crimson flood bearing down with a shouting roar, dashing in waves against the bank as though to sweep it bodily away, and then swirling by in two foaming streams on either side. The ground seemed to shake with the shock and rush, while the furious movement of the willow bushes as the wind poured over them increased the curious illusion that the island itself actually moved. Above, for a mile or two, I could see the great river descending upon me; it was like looking up the slope of a sliding hill, white with foam, and leaping up everywhere to show itself to the sun.

The rest of the island was too thickly grown with willows to make walking pleasant, but I made the tour, nevertheless. From the lower end the light, of course, changed, and the river looked dark and angry. Only the backs of the flying waves were visible, streaked with foam, and pushed forcibly by the great puffs of wind that fell upon them from behind. For a short mile it was visible, pouring in and out among the islands, and then disappearing with a huge sweep into the willows, which closed about it like a herd of monstrous antediluvian creatures crowding down to drink. They made me think of gigantic sponge-like growths that sucked the river up into themselves. They caused it to vanish from sight. They herded there together in such overpowering numbers.

Altogether it was an impressive scene, with its utter loneliness, its bizarre suggestion; and as I gazed

The darkness pressed against the canvas walls, heavy and suffocating, until I found myself lying awake, my eyes fixed on the gap where the tent door hung open. My gaze drifted to the watch pinned haphazardly against the rough fabric; the moonlight caught its face, revealing that the hour had long since passed midnight. We had slept only a few hours, a slumber broken by the relentless howling of the wind outside. Beside me, the Swede remained fast asleep, oblivious to the chill that had settled deep in my chest. It was a primal dread, a sudden, sharp plucking of the heart that signaled something was wrong in our immediate vicinity. The air felt thick with disturbance, a static charge before a storm.

I sat up abruptly, squinting into the gloom. The trees beyond the campsite were thrashing violently, their branches whipping like frantic snakes as the gusts battered them. Yet, our small patch of green canvas seemed miraculously secure, nestled safely in the hollow, the wind sliding over us without finding enough purchase to tear. But the unease did not fade. It coiled tighter in my gut. I crawled out of the tent, moving with deliberate silence so as not to wake my companion, driven by a strange, electric excitement that had no name.

Halfway out, kneeling on the damp sand, my eyes locked onto the tops of the bushes directly opposite. Against the pale backdrop of the moonlit sky, the moving tracery of leaves formed shifting, unnatural silhouettes. I froze, sitting back on my haunches, staring in disbelief. There, hovering just above the brush and slightly ahead, were shapes of an indeterminate nature among the willows. As the branches swayed, these forms seemed to coalesce, arranging themselves into monstrous outlines that twisted and shifted rapidly beneath the silver light. They were close—perhaps fifty feet away.

My first, desperate instinct was to rouse the Swede, to share this vision with someone else. But a sudden, paralyzing hesitation stopped me. The thought occurred to me, perhaps subconsciously, that I would not welcome confirmation from another; that seeing them alone made them more terrifying, more absolute. So I crouched there, my eyes stinging from the strain, wide awake and trembling.

Then, they became fully visible. Emerging from the canopy of the bushes were immense, bronze-colored figures, moving with a fluidity entirely independent of the swaying branches. They were colossal, far larger than any human, and their very appearance screamed that they were *not* human. They were certainly not merely the play of light and shadow. They shifted on their own accord, rising in a continuous, spiraling stream from the earth into the sky, vanishing completely the moment they touched the darkness above. Interlaced and fused together, they formed a great, writhing column. I could see their limbs and massive bodies melting into one another, creating a serpentine line that bent and twisted in rhythm with the wind-tossed trees. They were nude, fluid shapes pouring upward through the foliage, rising in a living pillar toward the heavens. I could never see their faces; they were blank masks of bronze.

They poured upward unceasingly, swaying in great, bending curves, their skin glowing with a dull, metallic hue. I stared, forcing every ounce of vision from my eyes, terrified that at any moment they would dissolve into mere optical illusions created by the moonlight and the wind. I searched frantically for proof of their reality, yet all the while, I understood that my definition of reality had shifted. The longer I watched, the more certain I became that these figures were real and alive, though perhaps not by the standards of biology or photography.

Far from feeling fear, I was seized by a profound awe and wonder unlike anything I had ever known. It felt as though I was gazing at the personified elemental forces of this haunted, primeval land. Our intrusion had stirred the ancient powers of the place into activity; we were the cause of the disturbance. My mind overflowed with stories and legends of spirits and deities worshipped by men throughout history. But before I could construct any explanation, an impulse drove me forward. I crept further out on the sand, standing upright. The ground beneath my bare feet was still warm; the wind tore at my hair and face; the roar of the river burst upon my ears with sudden violence. These sensations proved my senses were functioning normally. Yet, the figures continued to rise from the earth to the heavens, silent and majestic, in a great spiral of grace and strength that overwhelmed me with a deep, visceral emotion of worship. I felt compelled to fall down and worship—absolutely worship.

Perhaps I would have done so in another minute when a violent gust of wind swept against me, knocking me sideways and nearly sending me stumbling. It seemed to shake the dream violently from my mind, offering a new perspective. The figures remained, ascending into the heart of the night, but my reason began to claw its way back to the surface. It must be a subjective experience, I argued to myself—real to me, but still subjective. The moonlight and the branches were working together to paint these pictures upon the mirror of my imagination, which I had foolishly projected outward into the world. I knew this had to be the case. I took a breath, steeling myself, and began to move forward across the open patches of sand. By Jove, was it all hallucination? Was it merely a trick of the mind? Did my reason argue in the old, futile way, clinging to the narrow standards of the known?

All I know is that the great column of figures ascended darkly into the sky for what seemed an eternity, possessing a completeness of reality that defied my skepticism. And then, suddenly, they were gone!

As the immediate wonder of their presence faded, a cold rush of terror descended upon me. The esoteric, terrible meaning of this lonely, haunted region flamed up within my soul, and I began to tremble dreadfully. I cast a quick, panicked glance around, calculating vainly for a way to escape, realizing with horror how helpless I was to do anything effective. I crept back silently into the tent, collapsing onto my sandy mattress. First, I lowered the door-curtain to shut out the sight of the willows in the moonlight, and then I buried my head as deeply as possible beneath the blankets, trying to deaden the sound of the terrifying wind that whispered threats from the dark.

As though further to convince me that I had not been dreaming, I remember that it was a long time before I fell again into a troubled and restless sleep; and even then only the upper crust of me slept, and underneath there was something that never quite lost consciousness, but lay alert and on the watch.

But this second time I jumped up with a genuine start of terror. It was neither the wind nor the river that woke me, but the slow approach of something that caused the sleeping portion of me to grow smaller and smaller till at last it vanished altogether, and I found myself sitting bolt upright—listening.

Outside there was a sound of multitudinous little patterings. They had been coming, I was aware, for a long time, and in my sleep they had first become audible. I sat there nervously wide awake as though I had not slept at all. It seemed to me that my breathing came with difficulty, and that there was a great weight upon the surface of my body. In spite of the hot night, I felt clammy with cold and shivered. Something surely was pressing steadily against the sides of the tent and weighing down upon it from above. Was it the body of the wind? Was this the pattering rain, the dripping of the leaves? The spray blown from the river by the wind and gathering in big drops? I thought quickly of a dozen things.

Then suddenly the explanation leaped into my mind: a bough from the poplar, the only large tree on the island, had fallen with the wind. Still half caught by the other branches, it would fall with the next gust and crush us, and meanwhile its leaves brushed and tapped upon the tight canvas surface of the tent. I raised a loose flap and rushed out, calling to the Swede to follow.

But when I got out and stood upright I saw that the tent was free. There was no hanging bough; there was no rain or spray; nothing approached.

A cold, grey light filtered down through the bushes and lay on the faintly gleaming sand. Stars still crowded the sky directly overhead, and the wind howled magnificently, but the fire no longer gave out any glow, and I saw the east reddening in streaks through the trees. Several hours must have passed since I stood there before watching the ascending figures, and the memory of it now came back to me horribly, like an evil dream. Oh, how tired it made me feel, that ceaseless raging wind! Yet, though the deep lassitude of a sleepless night was on me, my nerves were tingling with the activity of an equally tireless apprehension, and all idea of repose was out of the question. The river I saw had risen further. Its thunder filled the air, and a fine spray made itself felt through my thin sleeping shirt.

Yet nowhere did I discover the slightest evidence of anything to cause alarm. This deep, prolonged disturbance in my heart remained wholly unaccounted for.

My companion had not stirred when I called him, and there was no need to waken him now. I looked about me carefully, noting everything; the turned-over canoe; the yellow paddles—two of them, I'm certain; the provision sack and the extra lantern hanging together from the tree; and, crowding everywhere about me, enveloping all, the willows, those endless, shaking willows. A bird uttered its morning cry, and a string of duck passed with whirring flight overhead in the twilight. The sand whirled, dry and stinging, about my bare feet in the wind.

I walked round the tent and then went out a little way into the bush, so that I could see across the river to the farther landscape, and the same profound yet indefinable emotion of distress seized upon me again as I saw the interminable sea of bushes stretching to the horizon, looking ghostly and unreal in the wan light of dawn. I walked softly here and there, still puzzling over that odd sound of infinite pattering, and of that pressure upon the tent that had wakened me. It *must* have been the wind, I reflected—the wind bearing upon the loose, hot sand, driving the dry particles smartly against the taut canvas—the wind dropping heavily upon our fragile roof.

Yet all the time my nervousness and malaise increased appreciably.

I crossed over to the farther shore and noted how the coast-line had altered in the night, and what masses of sand the river had torn away. I dipped my hands and feet into the cool current, and bathed my forehead. Already there was a glow of sunrise in the sky and the exquisite freshness of coming day. On my way back I passed purposely beneath the very bushes where I had seen the column of figures rising into the air, and midway among the clumps I suddenly found myself overtaken by a sense of vast terror. From the shadows a large figure went swiftly by. Someone passed me, as sure as ever man did….

It was a great staggering blow from the wind that helped me forward again, and once out in the more open space, the sense of terror diminished strangely. The winds were about and walking, I remember saying to myself, for the winds often move like great presences under the trees. And altogether the fear that hovered about me was such an unknown and immense kind of fear, so unlike anything I had ever felt before, that it woke a sense of awe and wonder in me that did much to counteract its worst effects; and when I reached a high point in the middle of the island from which I could see the wide stretch of river, crimson in the sunrise, the whole magical beauty of it all was so overpowering that a sort of wild yearning woke in me and almost brought a cry up into the throat.

But this cry found no expression, for as my eyes wandered from the plain beyond to the island round me and noted our little tent half hidden among the willows, a dreadful discovery leaped out at me, compared to which my terror of the walking winds seemed as nothing at all.

For a change, I thought, had somehow come about in the arrangement of the landscape. It was not that my point of vantage gave me a different view, but that an alteration had apparently been effected in the relation of the tent to the willows, and of the willows to the tent. Surely the bushes now crowded much closer—unnecessarily, unpleasantly close. *They had moved nearer.*

Creeping with silent feet over the shifting sands, drawing imperceptibly nearer by soft, unhurried movements, the willows had come closer during the night. But had the wind moved them, or had they moved of themselves? I recalled the sound of infinite small patterings and the pressure upon the tent and upon my own heart that caused me to wake in terror. I swayed for a moment in the wind like a tree, finding it hard to keep my upright position on the sandy hillock. There was a suggestion here of personal agency, of deliberate intention, of aggressive hostility, and it terrified me into a sort of rigidity.

Then the reaction followed quickly. The idea was so bizarre, so absurd, that I felt inclined to laugh. But the laughter came no more readily than the cry, for the knowledge that my mind was so receptive to such dangerous imaginings brought the additional terror that it was through our minds and not through our physical bodies that the attack would come, and was coming.

The wind buffeted me about, and, very quickly it seemed, the sun came up over the horizon, for it was after four o'clock, and I must have stood on that little pinnacle of sand longer than I knew, afraid to come down to close quarters with the willows. I returned quietly, creepily, to the tent, first taking another exhaustive look round and—yes, I confess it—making a few measurements. I paced out on the warm sand the distances between the willows and the tent, making a note of the shortest distance particularly.

I crawled stealthily into my blankets. My companion, to all appearances, still slept soundly, and I was glad that this was so. Provided my experiences were not corroborated, I could find strength somehow to deny them, perhaps. With the daylight I could persuade myself that it was all a subjective hallucination, a fantasy of the night, a projection of the excited imagination.

Nothing further came in to disturb me, and I fell asleep almost at once, utterly exhausted, yet still in dread of hearing again that weird sound of multitudinous pattering, or of feeling the pressure upon my heart that had made it difficult to breathe.

The sun burned high and white in the heavens when my companion roused me from a heavy, dreamless sleep. He announced that the porridge was ready and that there was just enough time to bathe before the river claimed us. The scent of frizzling bacon drifted through the tent flap, a savory promise of survival.

"River still rising," he said, his voice tight. "Several islands have vanished into the flood. Our own is shrinking by the hour."

"Any wood left?" I asked, my voice thick with grogginess.

"The wood and the island will finish tomorrow in a dead heat," he laughed, but the sound lacked its usual warmth. "Enough to last us till then."

I plunged into the water at the island's point, which had already shifted in shape and size during the night. The current swept me instantly to the landing opposite the tent. The water was ice-cold, and the rushing banks blurred past like scenery from a speeding train. Bathing in such conditions was a shock to the system, an exhilarating purge that seemed to wash the terror of the night from my brain. Yet, as I climbed out, the sun blazing hot against a cloudless sky, I felt a chill that had nothing to do with the water. The wind had not abated; it roared with a relentless, mechanical fury.

Suddenly, the implication of his words struck me. "Enough to last till tomorrow"—he meant we were staying another night. It was a drastic change from the urgency of the previous evening. How had his resolve crumbled so quickly?

Breakfast was a chaotic affair. Great chunks of the riverbank crumbled into the frying pan, sending clouds of spray into our food, while he talked incessantly about the impossibility of the Vienna-Pesth steamers navigating the flood. But his state of mind troubled me far more than the rising water. He had changed. His manner was agitated, shy, laced with a suspicion that made his gestures jerky and his voice uncertain. I couldn't quite define it then, but I knew with absolute certainty that he was frightened.

He ate little and omitted his pipe. Instead, he spread the map open beside him, staring at the markings with a furrowed brow.

"We'd better get off sharp in an hour," I said, sensing an opening for a confession.

"Rather! If they'll let us," he replied, his eyes fixed on the paper.

"Who'll let us? The elements?" I asked, feigning indifference.

"The powers of this awful place, whoever they are," he said, not looking up. "The gods are here, if they are anywhere at all in the world."

"The elements are always the true immortals," I replied, forcing a laugh that felt brittle in my throat.

"We shall be fortunate if we get away without further disaster," he said gravely, finally meeting my gaze across the smoke.

That was exactly what I had dreaded. I forced myself to ask the direct question. It was like consenting to a tooth extraction; the pain was inevitable, and the rest was just pretense.

"Further disaster! What's happened?"

"For one thing—the steering paddle's gone," he said quietly.

"The steering paddle gone!" I repeated, my excitement spiking. Without a rudder, the Danube in flood was suicide. "But what—"

"And there's a tear in the bottom of the canoe," he added, a genuine tremor shaking his voice.

I stared at him, repeating the words in my mind. There, on the burning sand, a freezing atmosphere descended upon us. He nodded gravely and led the way toward the tent. The canoe lay there as I had left her, ribs uppermost, and beside her sat the single paddle.

"There's only one," he said, stooping to pick it up. "And here's the rent in the base-board."

I almost told him I had seen two paddles an hour ago, but a second impulse silenced me. I approached to inspect the damage.

There was a long, cleanly made tear in the bottom of the canoe where a sliver of wood had been neatly gouged out. It looked as if a sharp rock had eaten down her length, and investigation confirmed the hole went all the way through. Had we launched without noticing, we would have foundered instantly.

"There," he murmured, more to himself than to me, "an attempt to prepare a victim for the sacrifice. Two victims, rather," he added, running his fingers along the slit.

I began to whistle—a habit I had when utterly nonplussed—and pretended not to hear. I was determined to dismiss his words as foolishness.

"It wasn't there last night," he said, looking anywhere but at me.

"We must have scratched her in landing," I said, stopping my whistle. "The stones are very sharp."

I stopped abruptly. He turned and met my eye squarely. I knew as well as he did that my explanation was impossible. There were no stones.

"And then there's this to explain too," he added, handing me the paddle and pointing to the blade.

A new, curdling emotion spread over me as I examined it. The blade was scraped down all over, beautifully smoothed, as if someone had sanded it with care until it was so thin that the first vigorous stroke would snap it off.

"One of us walked in his sleep and did this," I said feebly. "Or perhaps the wind blew sand against it."

"Ah," said the Swede, turning away with a bitter laugh. "You can explain everything."

"The same wind that caught the paddle and flung it near the bank," I called out, desperate to maintain the illusion of rationality.

"I see," he shouted back before disappearing among the willow bushes.

Alone with the evidence, my first thought was that one of us had done it, and certainly not I. But my second thought dismissed that too. My companion, the trusted friend of a dozen expeditions, could not have knowingly sabotaged us. Nor could this practical man have suddenly gone insane.

Yet, the certainty remained: his mind had altered. He was nervous, suspicious, aware of events he refused to speak of, waiting for a climax he expected imminently.

I inspected the tent and surroundings. The measurements of the night remained unchanged, but I noticed deep, basin-shaped hollows in the sand, varying from tea-cup sizes to large bowls. The wind must have created these miniature craters, just as it had tossed the paddle. The rent in the canoe was the only inexplicable thing, though I clung to the theory of a sharp snag with the diminishing portion of my intelligence I called "reason." An explanation was an absolute necessity for sanity.

I set the pitch melting, and the Swede joined me. Under the best conditions, the canoe could not travel safely until the next day. I casually drew his attention to the hollows.

"Yes," he said. "They're all over the island. But *you* can explain them, no doubt!"

"Wind, of course," I answered without hesitation. "Little whirlwinds in the street twist everything into circles. This sand is loose enough."

He made no reply. We worked in silence. I watched him surreptitiously; I felt he was watching me. He seemed to be listening to something I could not hear, turning his head toward the bushes, the sky, and the water through the willow gaps. Sometimes he pressed his hand to his ear, holding it there for minutes. He said nothing, and I asked no questions. While he mended the torn canoe with the skill of a red Indian, I was glad of his absorption, fearing he would speak of the changed aspect of the willows. If he had noticed that, my imagination would no longer suffice.

At length, he began to talk in a hurried voice.

"Queer thing," he said, eager to get it over. "About that otter last night."

I had expected something else entirely. "Shows how lonely this place is. Otters are shy—"

"I don't mean that. Did you think it really was an otter?"

"What else, in the name of Heaven?"

"You saw it before me. It seemed so much bigger. It had extraordinary yellow eyes."

"That was the sun," I laughed boisterously.

He looked at me absently. "I wondered what that thing in the boat was. I remember thinking it was not a man. The whole business rose suddenly out of the water."

I laughed again, but with impatience and anger. "Look here, this place is queer enough without imagining things! That was an ordinary boat, an ordinary man, and an otter. Don't play the fool!"

He looked steadily at me, grave and unannoyed. "You fool! That's just the way all victims talk. As if you didn't understand just as well as I do!" he sneered, a tone of resignation in his voice. "Keep quiet and hold your mind firm. Self-deception only makes the truth harder."

My little effort was over. I knew his words were true. Up to this point, he had kept ahead of me, proving himself more sensitive to these extraordinary happenings. I had missed the point about the necessity of a victim, that we ourselves were destined to satisfy the want. I dropped all pretense, and my fear increased steadily to a climax.

"But you're right about one thing," he added. "We're wiser not to talk about it, or even think about it, because what one *thinks* finds expression in words, and what one *says*, happens."

That afternoon, while the canoe dried, we fished, tested the leak, and collected wood. The island grew perceptibly smaller as the banks were torn away. The weather remained fine until four o'clock, when the wind finally showed signs of abating. Clouds gathered in the southwest.

This lessening of the wind was a relief, yet the silence that came at five o'clock was oppressive. The booming of the river filled the air with deep, monotonous murmurs, sounding like the music of doom. The withdrawal of sunlight stripped the landscape of cheerfulness. The willows stood densely together, rustling among themselves when no wind stirred, shaking oddly from the roots upward. In the darkening light, they assumed a bizarre grotesquerie, appearing as purposeful, living creatures. Their very ordinariness masked a malignancy. The forces of the region were focusing upon our island, and upon ourselves.

I had slept in the afternoon, recovering somewhat from the exhausted night, but this only made me more susceptible to the haunting spell. I fought against it, laughing at my feelings as absurd, yet I dreaded the approaching night as a child lost in a forest dreads the dark.

The canoe was covered with a waterproof sheet, and the single paddle was tied securely to a tree. From five o'clock, I prepared dinner. We had potatoes, onions, bacon fat, and a residue of former stews, mixed with black bread. My companion sat lazily watching me, cleaning his pipe and offering useless advice. He had been quiet all afternoon, re-caulking the canoe and fishing for driftwood. No more talk of undesirable things had passed between us.

The pot began to bubble when I heard his voice calling from the bank.

"Come and listen," he said, holding his hand cupwise to his ear. "See what you make of it."

"Now do you hear anything?" he asked curiously.

We stood there, listening. At first, there was only the deep note of the water and the hiss of turbulence. Then, a peculiar sound reached my ears—a humming like a distant gong. It came from the waste of swamps and willows opposite, repeated at regular intervals. It was neither a bell nor a steamer's hoot. It sounded like an immense gong suspended in the sky, striking a muffled, metallic note. My heart quickened.

"I've heard it all day," he said. "While you slept, it came all round the island. Sometimes overhead, sometimes under the water. Once, I could have sworn it was *within myself*—like a sound in the fourth dimension."

I was too puzzled to pay much attention. "The wind in the sand-funnels, or the bushes rubbing together?"

"It comes from the whole swamp. From everywhere at once. It comes from the willow bushes somehow."

"But the wind has dropped," I objected.

"It is *because* the wind has dropped we now hear it. It was drowned before. It is the cry of the—"

I dashed back to the fire, warned by the bubbling stew, determined to escape further conversation. I dreaded that he would begin about the gods or elemental forces.

"Come and cut up bread," I called, stirring the mixture.

He came over slowly, taking the provision sack from the tree and emptying its contents onto the ground-sheet.

"Hurry up! It's boiling."

The Swede burst into a roar of laughter that startled me. It was forced, mirthless.

"There's nothing here!" he shouted, holding his sides.

"Bread, I mean."

"It's gone. They've taken it!"

I dropped the spoon and ran up. Everything lay on the sheet, but there was no loaf.

The whole dead weight of my growing fear fell upon me. Then I burst out laughing too. It was the only thing to do. The sound of my laughter made me understand his. It was an explosion of psychical pressure, a safety-valve for repressed forces. With both of us, it ceased suddenly.

"How criminally stupid of me!" I cried, determined to find an explanation. "I forgot to buy a loaf at Pressburg. That chattering woman put everything out of my head."

"The oatmeal, too, is much less than this morning," the Swede interrupted.

"Why draw attention to it?" I thought angrily.

"There's enough for tomorrow," I said, stirring vigorously. "We can get more at Komorn or Gran. In twenty-four hours we'll be miles from here."

"I hope so—to God," he muttered, putting the things back, "unless we're claimed first as victims for the sacrifice," he added with a foolish laugh. He dragged the sack into the tent, and I heard him mumbling indistinctly.

Our meal was gloomy, eaten almost in silence. As we washed up and prepared for the night, the apprehension I had felt

The exhaustion of nerves and body had decreed otherwise, and sleep came over me with a welcome blanket of oblivion. My companion's rapid descent into slumber only quickened its approach. At first, he fidgeted, constantly sitting up to ask if I "heard this" or "heard that," tossing on his cork mattress and claiming the tent moved and the river had risen over the island's point. Each time I ventured out to check, I returned with the report that all was well, until finally he grew calmer and lay still. Soon, his breathing became regular, and I heard unmistakable sounds of snoring—the first and only time in my life that such a sound had been a welcome and calming influence.

This was the last thought in my mind before dozing off.

A difficulty in breathing woke me, and I found the blanket pulled over my face. But something else, besides the heavy fabric, was pressing upon me. My first thought was that my companion had rolled off his mattress onto mine in his sleep. I called to him and sat up, and at that exact moment, a terrible realization struck me: the tent was *surrounded*. The sound of multitudinous soft pattering was again audible outside, filling the night with a primal horror.

I called again, louder this time. He did not answer. The comforting rhythm of his snoring was gone, and I noticed the tent flap was down. This was the unpardonable sin. Crawling out into the darkness to hook it back securely, I realized with a jolt of icy dread that the Swede was not here. He had gone.

Seized by a dreadful agitation, I dashed out in a mad run. The moment I emerged, I plunged into a torrent of humming that surrounded me completely, issuing from every quarter of the heavens at once. It was that same familiar humming, but gone mad! It was as if a swarm of great, invisible bees had taken possession of the air around me. The sound seemed to thicken the very atmosphere, making my lungs work with agonizing difficulty.

But my friend was in danger, and I could not hesitate.

Dawn was just breaking, a faint whitish light spreading upwards over the clouds from a thin strip of clear horizon. There was no wind. I could barely make out the bushes and the river beyond, along with the pale sandy patches. In my excitement, I ran frantically to and fro about the island, calling his name, shouting at the top of my voice the first words that came into my head. But the willows smothered my voice, and the humming muffled it so that the sound traveled only a few feet around me. I plunged among the bushes, tripping headlong, tumbling over roots, and scraping my face as I tore this way and that among the preventing branches.

Then, quite unexpectedly, I came out upon the island's point and saw a dark figure outlined between the water and the sky. It was the Swede. Already, he had one foot in the river! A moment more and he would have taken the plunge.

I threw myself upon him, flinging my arms about his waist and dragging him shorewards with all my strength. Of course, he struggled furiously, making a noise all the time just like that cursed humming, and using the most outlandish phrases in his anger about "going *inside* to Them" and "taking the way of the water and the wind," and God only knows what more besides. I tried in vain to recall them afterwards, but listening to them then turned me sick with horror and amazement. In the end, I managed to get him into the comparative safety of the tent, flinging him breathless and cursing upon the mattress where I held him until the fit had passed.

I think the suddenness with which it all went, and how he grew calm coinciding with the equally abrupt cessation of the humming and pattering outside, was almost the strangest part of the whole business. For he had just opened his eyes and turned his tired face up to me so that the dawn threw a pale light upon it through the doorway. He said, for all the world just like a frightened child: "My life, old man—it's my life I owe you. But it's all over now anyhow. They've found a victim in our place!"

Then he dropped back upon his blankets and went to sleep literally under my eyes. He simply collapsed, beginning to snore again as healthily as though nothing had happened and he had never tried to offer his own life as a sacrifice by drowning. When the sunlight woke him three hours later—hours of ceaseless vigil for me—it became so clear to me that he remembered absolutely nothing of what he had attempted to do, that I deemed it wise to hold my peace and ask no dangerous questions.

He woke naturally and easily, as I have said, when the sun was already high in a windless, hot sky. He at once got up and set about preparing the fire for breakfast. I followed him anxiously as he bathed, but he did not attempt to plunge in, merely dipping his head and making some remark about the extra coldness of the water.

"The river's falling at last," he said, "and I'm glad of it."

"The humming has stopped too," I said.

He looked up at me quietly with his normal expression. Evidently, he remembered everything except his own attempt at suicide.

"Everything has stopped," he said, "because—"

He hesitated. But I knew some reference to that remark he had made just before he fainted was in his mind, and I was determined to know it.

"Because 'They've found another victim'?" I said, forcing a little laugh.

"Exactly," he answered, "exactly! I feel as positive of it as though—as though—I feel quite safe again, I mean," he finished.

He began to look curiously about him. The sunlight lay in hot patches on the sand. There was no wind. The willows were motionless. He slowly rose to his feet.

"Come," he said; "I think if we look, we shall find it."

He started off on a run, and I followed him. He kept to the banks, poking with a stick among the sandy bays, caves, and little back-waters, myself always close on his heels.

"Ah!" he exclaimed presently, "ah!"

The tone of his voice somehow brought back to me a vivid sense of the horror of the last twenty-four hours, and I hurried up to join him. He was pointing with his stick at a large black object that lay half in the water and half on the sand. It appeared to be caught by some twisted willow roots so that the river could not sweep it away. A few hours before, the spot must have been under water.

"See," he said quietly, "the victim that made our escape possible!"

And when I peered across his shoulder, I saw that his stick rested on the body of a man. He turned it over. It was the corpse of a peasant, and the face was hidden in the sand. Clearly the man had been drowned, but a few hours before, and his body must have been swept down upon our island somewhere about the hour of dawn—at the very time the fit had passed.

"We must give it a decent burial, you know."

"I suppose so," I replied. I shuddered a little in spite of myself, for there was something about the appearance of that poor drowned man that turned me cold.

The Swede glanced up sharply at me, an undecipherable expression on his face, and began clambering down the bank. I followed him more leisurely. The current, I noticed, had torn away much of the clothing from the body, so that the neck and part of the chest lay bare.

Halfway down the bank, my companion suddenly stopped and held up his hand in warning; but either my foot slipped, or I had gained too much momentum to bring myself quickly to a halt, for I bumped into him and sent him forward with a sort of leap to save himself. We tumbled together onto the hard sand so that our feet splashed into the water. And, before anything could be done, we had collided a little heavily against the corpse.

The Swede uttered a sharp cry. And I sprang back as if I had been shot.

At the moment we touched the body, there rose from its surface the loud sound of humming—the sound of several hummings—which passed with a vast commotion as of winged things in the air about us and disappeared upwards into the sky, growing fainter and fainter till they finally ceased in the distance. It was exactly as though we had disturbed some living yet invisible creatures at work.

My companion clutched me, and I think I clutched him, but before either of us had time properly to recover from the unexpected shock, we saw that a movement of the current was turning the corpse round so that it became released from the grip of the willow roots. A moment later, it had turned completely over, the dead face uppermost, staring at the sky. It lay on the edge of the main stream. In another moment, it would be swept away.

The Swede started to save it, shouting again something I did not catch about a "proper burial"—and then abruptly dropped upon his knees on the sand and covered his eyes with his hands. I was beside him in an instant.

I saw what he had seen.

For just as the body swung round to the current, the face and the exposed chest turned full towards us, and showed plainly how the skin and flesh were indented with small hollows, beautifully formed, and exactly similar in shape and kind to the sand-funnels that we had found all over the island.

"Their mark!" I heard my companion mutter under his breath. "Their awful mark!"

And when I turned my eyes again from his ghastly face to the river, the current had done its work. The body had been swept away into mid-stream and was already beyond our reach and almost out of sight, turning over and over on the waves like an otter.
