Father Brown knew, better than most, that every man is dignified when he is dead. Yet, even he felt a pang of incongruity when roused at daybreak to learn that Sir Aaron Armstrong had been murdered. There was something absurd and unseemly about secret violence inflicted upon a figure so entirely entertaining and popular. Sir Aaron was a comic figure, legendary in his philanthropy, yet he approached the darkest sides of society with a brightness that bordered on the theatrical. His speeches were cataracts of anecdotes and "loud laughter"; his health was bursting; his ethics were pure optimism. He tackled the Drink Problem—the favorite of all topics—with an immortal gaiety that marked the prosperous total abstainer.

The story of his conversion, familiar on puritanic platforms, told how he had been drawn from Scotch theology to Scotch whisky as a boy, only to rise out of both and become what he was. Yet, with his wide white beard, cherubic face, and sparkling spectacles, it was hard to believe he had ever been as morbid as a dram-drinker or a Calvinist. He was, one felt, the most seriously merry of all men.

He lived on the rural skirt of Hampstead in a handsome, high but not broad tower. Its narrowest side overhung the steep green bank of a railway, shaken constantly by passing trains. Sir Aaron boasted he had no nerves. But that morning, the tables were turned; it was the house that gave a shock to the train.

The engine slowed and stopped just beyond where an angle of the house impinged upon the sharp slope of turf. The arrest of mechanical things is usually slow, but the living cause here had been rapid. A man clad completely in black, even to the dreadful detail of black gloves, appeared on the ridge above the engine. He waved his black hands like some sable windmill. This would hardly have stopped a lingering train, but from him came a cry talked of afterward as utterly unnatural. It was a shout horridly distinct, even when one cannot hear the words. The word was "Murder!"

But the engine-driver swore he would have pulled up just the same if he had heard only the dreadful and definite accent. Once arrested, the tragedy revealed itself to the superficial stare. On the green bank was Sir Aaron's manservant, Magnus, dressed in black. The baronet had often laughed at these gloves, but no one laughed now. Rolled down almost to the bottom of the bank lay the body of an old man in a yellow dressing-gown with a vivid scarlet lining. A scrap of rope seemed caught about his leg, presumably entangled in a struggle. There was a smear of blood, though little, but the body was bent into a posture impossible for any living thing. It was Sir Aaron Armstrong.

Bewildered moments brought out a big fair-bearded man, the dead man's secretary, Patrick Royce, once famous in Bohemian arts. He echoed the agony of the servant. Soon, the third figure, Alice Armstrong, the daughter, came tottering and waving into the garden. The engine-driver blew his whistle and panted on to get help from the next station.

Father Brown was rapidly summoned at the request of Patrick Royce, an Irishman of that casual Catholic strain that never remembers his faith until he is in a hole. The request was complied with promptly because an official detective, Merton, was a friend and admirer of the unofficial Flambeau. As Merton led the little priest across the fields, their talk was confidential.

"As far as I can see," said Mr. Merton candidly, "there is no sense to be made of it at all. Nobody one can suspect. Magnus is a solemn old fool; far too foolish to be an assassin. Royce has been the baronet's best friend for years, and his daughter undoubtedly adored him. Besides, it's all too absurd. Who would kill such a cheery old chap as Armstrong? Who could dip his hands in the gore of an after-dinner speaker? It would be like killing Father Christmas."

"Yes, it was a cheery house," assented Father Brown. "It was a cheery house while he was alive. Do you think it will be cheery now he is dead?"

Merton started, regarding his companion with an enlivened eye. "Now he is dead?" he repeated.

"Yes," continued the priest stolidly. "He was cheerful. But did he communicate his cheerfulness? Frankly, was anyone else in the house cheerful but he?"

A window in Merton's mind let in a strange light of surprise. He had often visited the Armstrongs for little police jobs, and now, recalling it, he saw it was in itself a depressing house. The rooms were high and cold; the decoration mean and provincial; the draughty corridors lit by electricity bleaker than moonlight. Though the old man's scarlet face and silver beard had blazed like a bonfire, it left no warmth behind. The spectral discomfort was partly due to the owner's vitality—he carried his own warmth—but the others were shadows. The moody man-servant, with his monstrous black gloves, was almost a nightmare. Royce, the secretary, was a big bull of a man, but his straw-colored beard was startlingly salted with grey, his broad forehead barred with premature wrinkles. He had the air of a failure in life, a heart-broken sort of good nature. As for Armstrong's daughter, it was almost incredible she was his daughter; she was so pallid, so sensitive, graceful yet quivering like the lines of an aspen. Merton had sometimes wondered if she had learned to quail at the crash of the passing trains.

"You see," said Father Brown, blinking modestly, "I'm not sure that the Armstrong cheerfulness is so very cheerful—for other people. You say nobody could kill such a happy old man, but I'm not sure; *ne nos inducas in tentationem*. If ever I murdered somebody," he added simply, "I dare say it might be an Optimist."

"Why?" cried Merton, amused. "Do you think people dislike cheerfulness?"

"People like frequent laughter," answered Father Brown, "but I don't think they like a permanent smile. Cheerfulness without humour is a very trying thing."

They walked in silence along the windy grassy bank. Just as they came under the shadow of the tall Armstrong house, Father Brown said suddenly, like a man throwing away a troublesome thought: "Of course, drink is neither good nor bad in itself. But I can't help sometimes feeling that men like Armstrong want an occasional glass of wine to sadden them."

Their guide, a grizzled detective named Gilder, stood on the green bank waiting for the coroner, talking to Patrick Royce, whose towering shoulders and bristly beard seemed to bow under a heavy, humbled spirit. Gilder raised his head at the sight of the priest and took him aside. Merton addressed the older detective with respectful impatience.

"Well, Mr. Gilder, have you got much farther with the mystery?"

"There is no mystery," replied Gilder, looking under dreamy eyelids at the rooks.

"Well, there is for me, at any rate," said Merton, smiling.

"It is simple enough, my boy," observed Gilder, stroking his grey, pointed beard. "Three minutes after you'd gone for Mr. Royce's parson the whole thing came out. You know that pasty-faced servant in the black gloves who stopped the train?"

"I should know him anywhere. Somehow he rather gave me the creeps."

"Rather a cool criminal, don't you think, to escape by the very train that went off for the police?" drawled Gilder. "Yes, I'm pretty sure he killed his master, for the trifling reason that he has gone off with twenty thousand pounds in papers that were in his master's desk."

"The only difficulty," Gilder continued, "is how he killed him. The skull seems broken as with some big weapon, but there's no weapon lying about. The murderer would have found it awkward to carry it away, unless the weapon was too small to be noticed."

"Perhaps the weapon was too big to be noticed," said the priest, with an odd little giggle.

Gilder looked round sternly. "What do you mean?"

"Silly way of putting it, I know," said Father Brown apologetically. "Sounds like a fairy tale. But poor Armstrong was killed with a giant's club—a great green club, too big to be seen, and which we call the earth. He was broken against this green bank we are standing on."

"How do you mean?" asked the detective quickly.

Father Brown turned his moon-face up to the narrow façade of the house and blinked hopelessly upward. Following his eyes, they saw that right at the top of the blind back quarter, an attic window stood open.

"Don't you see?" he explained, pointing awkwardly like a child. "He was thrown down from there?"

Gilder frowned. "Possible. But why are you so sure?"

Brown opened his grey eyes wide. "Why, there's a bit of rope round the dead man's leg. Don't you see that other bit of rope up there caught at the corner of the window?"

At that height, it looked like the faintest particle of dust, but the shrewd investigator was satisfied. "You're quite right, sir," said Gilder. "That is certainly one to you."

Almost as he spoke, a special train took the curve on their left, stopping to disgorge another group of policemen, in whose midst
