CHAPTER LXXVII. And how everybody got out again


You, Captain Miles Warrington, have the honour of winning the good
graces of a lady--of ever so many ladies--of the Duchess of Devonshire,
let us say, of Mrs. Crew, of Mrs. Fitzherbert, of the Queen of Prussia,
of the Goddess Venus, of Mademoiselle Hillisberg of the Opera--never
mind of whom, in fine. If you win a lady's good graces, do you always go
to the mess and tell what happened?”

“Not such a fool, Squire!” says the Captain, surveying his side curl in
the glass.

“Have you, Miss Theo, told your mother every word you said to Mr. Joe
Blake, junior, in the shrubbery this morning?”

“Joe Blake, indeed!” cries Theo junior.

“And you, mademoiselle? That scented billet which came to you under Sir
Thomas's frank, have you told us all the letter contains? Look how she
blushes! As red as the curtain, on my word! No, mademoiselle, we all
have our secrets” (says the Squire, here making his best French bow).
“No, Theo, there was nothing in the shrubbery--only nuts, my child!
No, Miles, my son, we don't tell all, even to the most indulgent of
fathers--and if I tell what happened in a landau on the Hampstead Road,
on the 25th of May, 1760, may the Chevalier Ruspini pull out every tooth
in my head!”

“Pray tell, papa!” cries mamma: “or, as Jobson, who drove us, is in your
service now, perhaps you will have him in from the stables! I insist
upon your telling!”

“What is, then, this mystery?” asks mademoiselle, in her pretty French
accent, of my wife.

“Eh, ma fille!” whispers the lady. “Thou wouldst ask me what I said? I
said 'Yes!'--behold all I said.” And so 'tis my wife has peached, and
not I; and this was the sum of our conversation, as the carriage, all
too swiftly as I thought, galloped towards Hampstead, and flew
back again. Theo had not agreed to fly in the face of her honoured
parents--no such thing. But we would marry no other person; no, not if
we lived to be as old as Methuselah; no, not the Prince of Wales
himself would she take. Her heart she had given away with her papa's
consent--nay, order--it was not hers to resume. So kind a father must
relent one of these days; and, if George would keep his promise--were it
now, or were it in twenty years, or were it in another world, she knew
she should never break hers.

Hetty's face beamed with delight when, my little interview over, she
saw Theo's countenance wearing a sweet tranquillity. All the doctor's
medicine has not done her so much good, the fond sister said. The girls
went home after their act of disobedience. I gave up the place which I
had held during a brief period of happiness by my dear invalid's side.
Hetty skipped back into her seat, and Charley on to his box. He told me
in after days, that it was a very dull, stupid sermon he had heard. The
little chap was too orthodox to love dissenting preachers' sermons.

Hetty was not the only one of the family who remarked her sister's
altered countenance and improved spirits. I am told that on the girls'
return home their mother embraced both of them, especially the invalid,
with more than common ardour of affection. “There was nothing like a
country ride,” Aunt Lambert said, “for doing her dear Theo good. She
had been on the road to Hampstead, had she? She must have another ride
to-morrow. Heaven be blessed, my Lord Wrotham's horses were at their
orders three or four times a week, and the sweet child might have the
advantage of them!” As for the idea that Mr. Warrington might have
happened to meet the children on their drive, Aunt Lambert never once
entertained it,--at least spoke of it. I leave anybody who is interested
in the matter to guess whether Mrs. Lambert could by any possibility
have supposed that her daughter and her sweetheart could ever have come
together again. Do women help each other in love perplexities? Do women
scheme, intrigue, make little plans, tell little fibs, provide little
amorous opportunities, hang up the rope-ladder, coax, wheedle, mystify
the guardian or Abigail, and turn their attention away while Strephon
and Chloe are billing and cooing in the twilight, or whisking off in the
postchaise to Gretna Green? My dear young folks, some people there are
of this nature; and some kind souls who have loved tenderly and truly in
their own time, continue ever after to be kindly and tenderly disposed
towards their young successors, when they begin to play the same pretty
game.

Miss Prim doesn't. If she hears of two young persons attached to each
other, it is to snarl at them for fools, or to imagine of them all
conceivable evil. Because she has a hump-back herself, she is for biting
everybody else's. I believe if she saw a pair of turtles cooing in a
wood, she would turn her eyes down, or fling a stone to frighten them;
but I am speaking, you see, young ladies, of your grandmother, Aunt
Lambert, who was one great syllabub of human kindness; and, besides,
about the affair at present under discussion, how am I ever to tell
whether she knew anything regarding it or not?

So, all she says to Theo on her return home is, “My child, the country
air has done you all the good in the world, and I hope you will take
another drive to-morrow, and another, and another, and so on.”

“Don't you think, papa, the ride has done the child most wonderful good,
and must not she be made to go out in the air?” Aunt Lambert asks of the
General, when he comes in for supper.

“Yes, sure, if a coach-and-six will do his little Theo good, she shall
have it,” Lambert says, “or he will drag the landau up Hampstead Hill
himself, if there are no horses;” and so the good man would have spent,
freely, his guineas, or his breath, or his blood, to give his child
pleasure. He was charmed at his girl's altered countenance; she picked
a bit of chicken with appetite: she drank a little negus, which he made
for her: indeed it did seem to be better than the kind doctor's best
medicine, which hitherto, God wot, had been of little benefit. Mamma was
gracious and happy. Hetty was radiant and rident. It was quite like an
evening at home at Oakhurst. Never for months past, never since that
fatal, cruel day, that no one spoke of, had they spent an evening so
delightful.

But, if the other women chose to coax and cajole the good, simple
father, Theo herself was too honest to continue for long even that sweet
and fond delusion. When, for the third or fourth time, he comes back to
the delightful theme of his daughter's improved health, and asks, “What
has done it? Is it the country air? is it the Jesuit's bark? is it the
new medicine?”

“Can't you think, dear, what it is?” she says, laying a hand upon her
father's, with a tremor in her voice, perhaps, but eyes that are quite
open and bright.

“And what is it, my child?” asks the General.

“It is because I have seen him again, papa!” she says.

The other two women turned pale, and Theo's heart too begins to
palpitate, and her cheek to whiten, as she continues to look in her
father's scared face.

“It was not wrong to see him,” she continues, more quickly; “it would
have been wrong not to tell you.”

“Great God!” groans the father, drawing his hand back, and with such
a dreadful grief in his countenance, that Hetty runs to her almost
swooning sister, clasps her to her heart, and cries out, rapidly, “Theo
knew nothing of it, sir! It was my doing--it was all my doing!”

Theo lies on her sister's neck, and kisses it twenty, fifty times.

“Women, women! are you playing with my honour?” cries the father,
bursting out with a fierce exclamation.

Aunt Lambert sobs, wildly, “Martin! Martin! Don't say a word to her!”
 again calls out Hetty, and falls back herself staggering towards the
wall, for Theo has fainted on her shoulder.

I was taking my breakfast next morning, with what appetite I might, when
my door opens, and my faithful black announces, “General Lambert.” At
once I saw, by the General's face, that the yesterday's transaction was
known to him. “Your accomplices did not confess,” the General said,
as soon as my servant had left us, “but sided with you against their
father--a proof how desirable clandestine meetings are. It was from Theo
herself I heard that she had seen you.”

“Accomplices, sir!” I said (perhaps not unwilling to turn the
conversation from the real point at issue). “You know how fondly and
dutifully your young people regard their father. If they side against
you in this instance, it must be because justice is against you. A man
like you is not going to set up sic volo sic jubeo as the sole law in
his family!”

“Psha, George!” cries the General. “For though we are parted, God forbid
I should desire that we should cease to love each other. I had your
promise that you would not seek to see her.”

“Nor did I go to her, sir,” I said, turning red, no doubt; for though
this was truth, I own it was untrue.

“You mean she was brought to you?” says Theo's father, in great
agitation. “Is it behind Hester's petticoat that you will shelter
yourself? What a fine defence for a gentleman!”

“Well, I won't screen myself behind the poor child,” I replied.
“To speak as I did was to make an attempt at evasion, and I am
ill-accustomed to dissemble. I did not infringe the letter of my
agreement, but I acted against the spirit of it. From this moment I
annul it altogether.”

“You break your word given to me!” cries Mr. Lambert.

“I recall a hasty promise made on a sudden at a moment of extreme
excitement and perturbation. No man can be for ever bound by words
uttered at such a time; and, what is more, no man of honour or humanity,
Mr. Lambert, would try to bind him.”

“Dishonour to me! sir,” exclaims the General.

“Yes, if the phrase is to be shuttlecocked between us!” I answered,
hotly. “There can be no question about love, or mutual regard,
or difference of age, when that word is used: and were you my own
father--and I love you better than a father, Uncle Lambert,--I would not
bear it! What have I done? I have seen the woman whom I consider my wife
before God and man, and if she calls me I will see her again. If she
comes to me, here is my home for her, and the half of the little I have.
'Tis you, who have no right, having made me the gift, to resume it.
Because my mother taunts you unjustly, are you to visit Mrs. Esmond's
wrong upon this tender, innocent creature? You profess to love your
daughter, and you can't bear a little wounded pride for her sake. Better
she should perish away in misery, than an old woman in Virginia should
say that Mr. Lambert had schemed to marry one of his daughters. Say
that to satisfy what you call honour and I call selfishness, we part,
we break our hearts well nigh, we rally, we try to forget each other, we
marry elsewhere? Can any man be to my dear as I have been? God forbid!
Can any woman be to me what she is? You shall marry her to the Prince of
Wales to-morrow, and it is a cowardice and treason. How can we, how can
you, undo the promises we have made to each other before Heaven? You may
part us: and she will die as surely as if she were Jephthah's daughter.
Have you made any vow to Heaven to compass her murder? Kill her if you
conceive your promise so binds you: but this I swear, that I am glad
you have come, so that I may here formally recall a hasty pledge which I
gave, and that, call me when she will, I will come to her!”

No doubt this speech was made with the flurry and agitation belonging
to Mr. Warrington's youth, and with the firm conviction that death would
infallibly carry off one or both of the parties, in case their worldly
separation was inevitably decreed. Who does not believe his first
passion eternal? Having watched the world since, and seen the rise,
progress, and--alas, that I must say it!--decay of other amours, I may
smile now as I think of my own youthful errors and ardours; but, if it
be a superstition, I had rather hold it; I had rather think that
neither of us could have lived with any other mate, and that, of all its
innumerable creatures, Heaven decreed these special two should be joined
together.

“We must come, then, to what I had fain have spared myself,” says the
General, in reply to my outbreak; “to an unfriendly separation. When
I meet you, Mr. Warrington, I must know you no more. I must order--and
they will not do other than obey me--my family and children not to
recognise you when they see you, since you will not recognise in
your intercourse with me the respect due to my age, the courtesy of
gentlemen. I had hoped so far from your sense of honour, and the idea
I had formed of you, that, in my present great grief and perplexity,
I should have found you willing to soothe and help me as far as you
might--for, God knows, I have need of everybody's sympathy. But, instead
of help, you fling obstacles in my way. Instead of a friend--a gracious
Heaven pardon me!--I find in you an enemy! An enemy to the peace of my
home and the honour of my children, sir! And as such I shall treat you,
and know how to deal with you, when you molest me!”

And, waving his hand to me, and putting on his hat, Mr. Lambert hastily
quitted my apartment.

I was confounded, and believed, indeed, there was war between us. The
brief happiness of yesterday was clouded over and gone, and I thought
that never since the day of the first separation had I felt so
exquisitely unhappy as now, when the bitterness of quarrel was added to
the pangs of parting, and I stood not only alone but friendless. In the
course of one year's constant intimacy I had come to regard Lambert with
a reverence and affection which I had never before felt for any mortal
man except my dearest Harry. That his face should be turned from me
in anger was as if the sun had gone out of my sphere, and all was dark
around me. And yet I felt sure that in withdrawing the hasty promise I
had made not to see Theo, I was acting rightly--that my fidelity to her,
as hers now to me, was paramount to all other ties of duty or obedience,
and that, ceremony or none, I was hers, first and before all. Promises
were passed between us, from which no parent could absolve either; and
all the priests in Christendom could no more than attest and confirm the
sacred contract which had tacitly been ratified between us.

I saw Jack Lambert by chance that day, as I went mechanically to my not
unusual haunt, the library of the new Museum; and with the impetuousness
of youth, and eager to impart my sorrow to some one, I took him out of
the room and led him about the gardens, and poured out my grief to him.
I did not much care for Jack (who in truth was somewhat of a prig, and
not a little pompous and wearisome with his Latin quotations) except in
the time of my own sorrow, when I would fasten upon him or any one; and
having suffered himself in his affair with the little American,
being haud ignarus mali (as I knew he would say), I found the college
gentleman ready to compassionate another's misery. I told him, what has
here been represented at greater length, of my yesterday's meeting
with his sister; of my interview with his father in the morning; of my
determination at all hazards never to part with Theo. When I found from
the various quotations from the Greek and Latin authors which he uttered
that he leaned to my side in the dispute, I thought him a man of great
sense, clung eagerly to his elbow, and bestowed upon him much more
affection than he was accustomed at other times to have from me. I
walked with him up to his father's lodgings in Dean Street; saw him
enter at the dear door; surveyed the house from without with a sickening
desire to know from its exterior appearance how my beloved fared within;
and called for a bottle at the coffee-house where I waited Jack's
return. I called him Brother when I sent him away. I fondled him as the
condemned wretch at Newgate hangs about the jailor or the parson, or any
one who is kind to him in his misery. I drank a whole bottle of wine at
the coffee-house--by the way, Jack's Coffee-House was its name--called
another. I thought Jack would never come back.

He appeared at length with rather a scared face; and, coming to my box,
poured out for himself two or three bumpers from my second bottle,
and then fell to his story, which, to me at least, was not a little
interesting. My poor Theo was keeping her room, it appeared, being much
agitated by the occurrences of yesterday; and Jack had come home in time
to find dinner on table; after which his good father held forth upon the
occurrences of the morning, being anxious and able to speak more freely,
he said, because his eldest son was present and Theodosia was not in the
room. The General stated what had happened at my lodgings between me and
him. He bade Hester be silent, who indeed was as dumb as a mouse, poor
thing! he told Aunt Lambert (who was indulging in that madefaction of
pocket-handkerchiefs which I have before described), and with something
like an imprecation, that the women were all against him, and pimps (he
called them) for one another; and frantically turning round to Jack,
asked what was his view in the matter?

To his father's surprise and his mother's and sister's delight,
Jack made a speech on my side. He ruled with me (citing what ancient
authorities I don't know), that the matter had gone out of the hands of
the parents on either side; that having given their consent, some months
previously, the elders had put themselves out of court. Though he did
not hold with a great, a respectable, he might say a host of divines,
those sacramental views of the marriage-ceremony--for which there was a
great deal to be said--yet he held it, if possible, even more sacredly
than they; conceiving that though marriages were made before the civil
magistrate, and without the priest, yet they were, before Heaven,
binding and indissoluble.

“It is not merely, sir,” says Jack, turning to his father, “those whom
I, John Lambert, Priest, have joined, let no man put asunder; it is
those whom God has joined let no man separate.” (Here he took off his
hat, as he told the story to me.) “My views are clear upon the point,
and surely these young people were joined, or permitted to plight
themselves to each other by the consent of you, the priest of your own
family. My views, I say, are clear, and I will lay them down at length
in a series of two or three discourses which, no doubt, will satisfy
you. Upon which,” says Jack, “my father said, 'I am satisfied already,
my dear boy,' and my lively little Het (who has much archness) whispers
to me, 'Jack, mother and I will make you a dozen shirts, as sure as eggs
is eggs.'”

“Whilst we were talking,” Mr. Lambert resumed, “my sister Theodosia
made her appearance, I must say very much agitated and pale, kissed our
father, and sate down at his side, and took a sippet of toast--(my dear
George, this port is excellent, and I drink your health)--and took a
sippet of toast and dipped it in his negus.

“'You should have been here to hear Jack's sermon!' says Hester. 'He has
been preaching most beautifully.'

“'Has he?' asks Theodosia, who is too languid and weak, poor thing, much
to care for the exercises of eloquence, or the display of authorities,
such as I must own,” says Jack, “it was given to me this afternoon to
bring forward.

“'He has talked for three quarters of an hour by Shrewsbury clock,' says
my father, though I certainly had not talked so long or half so long
by my own watch. 'And his discourse has been you, my dear,' says papa,
playing with Theodosia's hand.

“'Me, papa?'

“'You and--and Mr. Warrington--and--and George, my love,' says papa.
Upon which” (says Mr. Jack). “my sister came closer to the General, and
laid her head upon him, and wept upon his shoulder.

“'This is different, sir,' says I, 'to a passage I remember in
Pausanias.'

“'In Pausanias? Indeed!' said the General. 'And pray who was he?'

“I smiled at my father's simplicity in exposing his ignorance before his
children. 'When Ulysses was taking away Penelope from her father,
the king hastened after his daughter and bridegroom, and besought his
darling to return. Whereupon, it is related, Ulysses offered her her
choice,--whether she would return, or go on with him? Upon which the
daughter of Icarius covered her face with her veil. For want of a veil
my sister has taken refuge in your waistcoat, sir,' I said, and we all
laughed; though my mother vowed that if such a proposal had been made
to her, or Penelope had been a girl of spirit, she would have gone home
with her father that instant.

“'But I am not a girl of any spirit, dear mother!' says Theodosia, still
in gremio patris. I do not remember that this habit of caressing
was frequent in my own youth,” continues Jack. “But after some more
discourse, Brother Warrington! bethought me of you, and left my parents
insisting upon Theodosia returning to bed. The late transactions have,
it appears, weakened and agitated her much. I myself have experienced,
in my own case, how full of solliciti timoris is a certain passion; how
it racks the spirits; and I make no doubt, if carried far enough, or
indulged to the extent to which women who have little philosophy will
permit it to go--I make no doubt, I say, is ultimately injurious to the
health. My service to you, brother!”

From grief to hope, how rapid the change was! What a flood of happiness
poured into my soul, and glowed in my whole being! Landlord, more port!
Would honest Jack have drunk a binful I would have treated him; and,
to say truth, Jack's sympathy was large in this case, and it had been
generous all day. I decline to score the bottles of port: and place
to the fabulous computations of interested waiters, the amount scored
against me in the reckoning. Jack was my dearest, best of brothers.
My friendship for him I swore should be eternal. If I could do him any
service, were it a bishopric, by George! he should have it. He says I
was interrupted by the watchman rhapsodising verses beneath the loved
one's window. I know not. I know I awoke joyfully and rapturously, in
spite of a racking headache the next morning.

Nor did I know the extent of my happiness quite, or the entire
conversion of my dear noble enemy of the previous morning. It must
have been galling to the pride of an elder man to have to yield to
representations and objections couched in language so little dutiful as
that I had used towards Mr. Lambert. But the true Christian gentleman,
retiring from his talk with me, mortified and wounded by my asperity of
remonstrance, as well as by the pain which he saw his beloved daughter
suffer, went thoughtfully and sadly to his business, as he subsequently
told me, and in the afternoon (as his custom not unfrequently was) into
a church which was open for prayers. And it was here, on his knees,
submitting his case in the quarter whither he frequently, though
privately, came for guidance and comfort, that it seemed to him that his
child was right in her persistent fidelity to me, and himself wrong in
demanding her utter submission. Hence Jack's cause was won almost before
he began to plead it; and the brave, gentle heart, which could bear no
rancour, which bled at inflicting pain on those it loved, which even
shrank from asserting authority or demanding submission, was only too
glad to return to its natural pulses of love and affection.
