CHAPTER LXXXI. Res Angusta Domi


I have already described my present feelings as an elderly gentleman,
regarding that rash jump into matrimony, which I persuaded my dear
partner to take with me when we were both scarce out of our teens. As a
man and a father--with a due sense of the necessity of mutton chops, and
the importance of paying the baker--with a pack of rash children round
about us who might be running off to Scotland to-morrow, and pleading
papa's and mamma's example for their impertinence,--I know that I ought
to be very cautious in narrating this early part of the married life
of George Warrington, Esquire, and Theodosia his wife--to call out
mea culpa, and put on a demure air, and, sitting in my comfortable
easy-chair here, profess to be in a white sheet and on the stool of
repentance, offering myself up as a warning to imprudent and hot-headed
youth.

But, truth to say, that married life, regarding which my dear relatives
prophesied so gloomily, has disappointed all those prudent and
respectable people. It has had its trials; but I can remember them
without bitterness--its passionate griefs, of which time, by God's kind
ordinance, has been the benign consoler--its days of poverty, which
we bore, who endured it, to the wonder of our sympathising relatives
looking on--its precious rewards and blessings, so great that I scarce
dare to whisper them to this page; to speak of them, save with awful
respect and to One Ear, to which are offered up the prayers and thanks
of all men. To marry without a competence is wrong and dangerous,
no doubt, and a crime against our social codes; but do not scores of
thousands of our fellow-beings commit the crime every year with no
other trust but in, Heaven, health, and their labour? Are young people
entering into the married life not to take hope into account, nor dare
to begin their housekeeping until the cottage is completely furnished,
the cellar and larder stocked, the cupboard full of plate, and the
strong-box of money? The increase and multiplication of the world would
stop, were the laws which regulate the genteel part of it to be made
universal. Our gentlefolks tremble at the brink in their silk stockings
and pumps, and wait for whole years, until they find a bridge or a gilt
barge to carry them across; our poor do not fear to wet their bare feet,
plant them in the brook, and trust to fate and strength to bear them
over. Who would like to consign his daughter to poverty? Who would
counsel his son to undergo the countless risks of poor married life, to
remove the beloved girl from comfort and competence, and subject her
to debt, misery, privation, friendlessness, sickness, and the hundred
gloomy consequences of the res angusta domi? I look at my own wife and
ask her pardon for having imposed a task so fraught with pain and danger
upon one so gentle. I think of the trials she endured, and am thankful
for them and for that unfailing love and constancy with which God
blessed her and strengthened her to bear them all. On this question of
marriage, I am not a fair judge: my own was so imprudent--and has been
so happy, that I must not dare to give young people counsel. I have
endured poverty, but scarcely ever found it otherwise than tolerable:
had I not undergone it, I never could have known the kindness of
friends, the delight of gratitude, the surprising joys and consolations
which sometimes accompany the scanty meal and narrow fire, and cheer the
long day's labour. This at least is certain, in respect of the lot of
the decent poor, that a great deal of superfluous pity is often thrown
away upon it. Good-natured fine folks, who sometimes stepped out of the
sunshine of their riches into a narrow obscurity, were blinded as it
were, whilst we could see quite cheerfully and clearly: they stumbled
over obstacles which were none to us: they were surprised at the
resignation with which we drank small beer, and that we could heartily
say grace over such very cold mutton.

The good General, my father-in-law, had married his Molly, when he was a
subaltern of a foot regiment, and had a purse scarce better filled than
my own. They had had their ups and downs of fortune. I think (though my
wife will never confess to this point) they had married, as people could
do in their young time, without previously asking papa's and mamma's
leave. [The Editor has looked through Burn's Registers of Fleet
Marriages without finding the names of Martin Lambert and Mary Benson.]
At all events, they were so well pleased with their own good luck in
matrimony, that they did not grudge their children's, and were by no
means frightened at the idea of any little hardships which we in the
course of our married life might be called upon to undergo. And I
suppose when I made my own pecuniary statements to Mr. Lambert, I was
anxious to deceive both of us. Believing me to be master of a couple
of thousand pounds, he went to Jamaica quite easy in his mind as to his
darling daughter's comfort and maintenance, at least for some years to
come. After paying the expenses of his family's outfit, the worthy man
went away not much richer than his son-in-law; and a few trinkets, and
some lace of Aunt Lambert's, with twenty new guineas in a purse which
her mother and sisters made for her, were my Theo's marriage portion.
But in valuing my stock, I chose to count as a good debt a sum which my
honoured mother never could be got to acknowledge up to the day when the
resolute old lady was called to pay the last debt of all. The sums I
had disbursed for her, she argued, were spent for the improvement and
maintenance of the estate which was to be mine at her decease. What
money she could spare was to be for my poor brother, who had nothing,
who would never have spent his own means had he not imagined himself to
be sole heir of the Virginian property, as he would have been--the good
lady took care to emphasise this point in many of her letters--but for a
half-hour's accident of birth. He was now distinguishing himself in
the service of his king and country. To purchase his promotion was his
mother's, she should suppose his brother's duty! When I had finished my
bar-studies and my dramatic amusements, Madam Esmond informed me that I
was welcome to return home and take that place in our colony to which my
birth entitled me. This statement she communicated to me more than once
through Mountain, and before the news of my marriage had reached her.

There is no need to recall her expressions of maternal indignation when
she was informed of the step I had taken. On the pacification of Canada,
my dear Harry asked for leave of absence, and dutifully paid a visit to
Virginia. He wrote, describing his reception at home, and the splendid
entertainments which my mother made in honour of her son. Castlewood,
which she had not inhabited since our departure for Europe, was thrown
open again to our friends of the colony; and the friend of Wolfe, and
the soldier of Quebec, was received by all our acquaintance with every
becoming honour. Some dismal quarrels, to be sure, ensued, because my
brother persisted in maintaining his friendship with Colonel Washington,
of Mount Vernon, whose praises Harry never was tired of singing.
Indeed I allow the gentleman every virtue; and in the struggles which
terminated so fatally for England a few years since, I can admire as
well as his warmest friends, General Washington's glorious constancy and
success.

If these battles between Harry and our mother were frequent, as, in his
letters, he described them to be, I wondered, for my part, why he should
continue at home? One reason naturally suggested itself to my mind,
which I scarcely liked to communicate to Mrs. Warrington; for we had
both talked over our dear little Hetty's romantic attachment for my
brother, and wondered that he had never discovered it. I need not say, I
suppose, that my gentleman had found some young lady at home more to his
taste than our dear Hester, and hence accounted for his prolonged stay
in Virginia.

Presently there came, in a letter from him, not a full confession but an
admission of this interesting fact. A person was described, not named--a
Being all beauty and perfection, like other young ladies under similar
circumstances. My wife asked to see the letter: I could not help showing
it, and handed it to her, with a very sad face. To my surprise she read
it, without exhibiting any corresponding sorrow of her own.

“I have thought of this before, my love,” I said. “I feel with you for
your disappointment regarding poor Hetty.”

“Ah! poor Hetty,” says Theo, looking down at the carpet.

“It would never have done,” says I.

“No--they would not have been happy,” sighs Theo.

“How strange he never should have found out her secret!” I continued.

She looked me full in the face with an odd expression. “Pray, what does
that look mean?” I asked.

“Nothing, my dear--nothing! only I am not surprised!” says Theo,
blushing.

“What,” I ask, “can there be another?”

“I am sure I never said so, George,” says the lady, hurriedly. “But if
Hetty has overcome her childish folly, ought we not all to be glad? Do
you gentlemen suppose that you only are to fall in love and grow tired,
indeed?”

“What!” I say, with a strange commotion of my mind. “Do you mean to tell
me, Theo, that you ever cared for any one but me?”

“Oh, George,” she whimpers, “when I was at school, there was--there was
one of the boys of Doctor Backhouse's school, who sate in the loft next
to us; and I thought he had lovely eyes, and I was so shocked when I
recognised him behind the counter at Mr. Grigg's the mercer's, when I
went to buy a cloak for baby, and I wanted to tell you, my dear, and I
didn't know how!”

I went to see this creature with the lovely eyes, having made my wife
describe the fellow's dress to me, and I saw a little bandy-legged
wretch in a blue camlet coat, with his red hair tied with a dirty
ribbon, about whom I forbore generously even to reproach my wife; nor
will she ever know that I have looked at the fellow, until she reads the
confession in this page. If our wives saw us as we are, I thought, would
they love us as they do? Are we as much mistaken in them, as they in us?
I look into one candid face at least, and think it never has deceived
me.

Lest I should encourage my young people to an imitation of my own
imprudence, I will not tell them with how small a capital Mrs. Theo and
I commenced life. The unfortunate tragedy brought us nothing; though the
reviewers, since its publication of late, have spoken not unfavourably
as to its merits, and Mr. Kemble himself has done me the honour to
commend it. Our kind friend Lord Wrotham was for having the piece
published by subscription, and sent me a bank-note, with a request that
I would let him have a hundred copies for his friends; but I was always
averse to that method of levying money, and, preferring my poverty sine
dote, locked up my manuscript, with my poor girl's verses inserted at
the first page. I know not why the piece should have given such offence
at court, except for the fact that an actor who had run off with an
earl's daughter, performed a principal part in the play; but I was told
that sentiments which I had put into the mouths of some of the Indian
characters (who were made to declaim against ambition, the British
desire of rule, and so forth), were pronounced dangerous and
unconstitutional; so that the little hope of royal favour, which I might
have had, was quite taken away from me.

What was to be done? A few months after the failure of the tragedy, as
I counted up the remains of my fortune (the calculation was not long or
difficult), I came to the conclusion that I must beat a retreat out
of my pretty apartments in Bloomsbury, and so gave warning to our good
landlady, informing her that my wife's health required that we should
have lodgings in the country. But we went no farther than Lambeth, our
faithful Gumbo and Molly following us; and here, though as poor as might
be, we were waited on by a maid and a lackey in livery, like any folks
of condition. You may be sure kind relatives cried out against our
extravagance; indeed, are they not the people who find our faults out
for us, and proclaim them to the rest of the world?

Returning home from London one day, whither I had been on a visit to
some booksellers, I recognised the family arms and livery on a grand
gilt chariot which stood before a public-house near to our lodgings. A
few loitering inhabitants were gathered round the splendid vehicle, and
looking with awe at the footmen, resplendent in the sun, and quaffing
blazing pots of beer. I found my Lady Castlewood seated opposite to
my wife in our little apartment (whence we had a very bright, pleasant
prospect of the river, covered with barges and wherries, and the ancient
towers and trees of the Archbishop's palace and gardens), and Mrs. Theo,
who has a very droll way of describing persons and scenes, narrated to
me all the particulars of her ladyship's conversation, when she took her
leave.

“I have been here this ever-so-long,” says the Countess, “gossiping with
cousin Theo, while you have been away at the coffee-house, I dare say,
making merry with your friends, and drinking your punch and coffee.
Guess she must find it rather lonely here, with nothing to do but work
them little caps and hem them frocks. Never mind, dear; reckon you'll
soon have a companion who will amuse you when cousin George is away at
his coffee-house! What a nice lodging you have got here, I do declare!
Our new house which we have took is twenty times as big, and covered
with gold from top to bottom; but I like this quite as well. Bless you
being rich is no better than being poor. When we lived to Albany, and
I did most all the work myself, scoured the rooms, biled the kettle,
helped the wash, and all, I was just as happy as I am now. We only
had one old negro to keep the store. Why don't you sell Gumbo, cousin
George? He ain't no use here idling and dawdling about, and making love
to the servant-girl. Fogh! guess they ain't particular, these English
people!” So she talked, rattling on with perfect good-humour, until her
hour for departure came; when she produced a fine repeating watch, and
said it was time for her to pay a call upon her Majesty at Buckingham
House. “And mind you come to us, George,” says her ladyship, waving a
little parting hand out of the gilt coach. “Theo and I have settled all
about it.”

“Here, at least,” said I, when the laced footmen had clambered up behind
the carriage, and our magnificent little patroness had left us;--“here
is one who is not afraid of our poverty, nor ashamed to remember her
own.”

“Ashamed!” said Theo, resuming her lilliputian needlework. “To do her
justice, she would make herself at home in any kitchen or palace in the
world. She has given me and Molly twenty lessons in housekeeping. She
says, when she was at home to Albany, she roasted, baked, swept the
house, and milked the cow.” (Madam Theo pronounced the word cow
archly in our American way, and imitated her ladyship's accent very
divertingly.)

“And she has no pride,” I added. “It was good-natured of her to ask us
to dine with her and my lord. When will Uncle Warrington ever think of
offering us a crust again, or a glass of his famous beer?”

“Yes, it was not ill-natured to invite us,” says Theo, slily. “But,
my dear, you don't know all the conditions!” And then my wife, still
imitating the Countess's manner, laughingly informed me what these
conditions were. “She took out her pocket-book, and told me,” says Theo,
“what days she was engaged abroad and at home. On Monday she received a
Duke and a Duchess, with several other members of my lord's house,
and their ladies. On Tuesday came more earls, two bishops, and an
ambassador. 'Of course you won't come on them days?' says the Countess.
'Now you are so poor, you know, that fine company ain't no good for you.
Lord bless you! father never dines on our company days! he don't
like it; he takes a bit of cold meat anyways.' On which,” says Theo,
laughing, “I told her that Mr. Warrington did not care for any but the
best of company, and proposed that she should ask us on some day when
the Archbishop of Canterbury dined with her, and his Grace must give
us a lift home in his coach to Lambeth. And she is an economical little
person, too,” continues Theo. “'I thought of bringing with me some of
my baby's caps and things, which his lordship has outgrown 'em, but they
may be wanted again, you know, my dear.' And so we lose that addition
to our wardrobe,” says Theo, smiling, “and Molly and I must do our best
without her ladyship's charity. 'When people are poor, they are poor,'
the Countess said, with her usual outspokenness, 'and must get on the
best they can. What we shall do for that poor Maria, goodness only
knows! we can't ask her to see us as we can you, though you are so
poor: but an earl's daughter to marry a play-actor! La, my dear, it's
dreadful: his Majesty and the Princess have both spoken of it! Every
other noble family in this kingdom as has ever heard of it pities us;
though I have a plan for helping those poor unhappy people, and have
sent down Simons, my groom of the chambers, to tell them on it.' This
plan was, that Hagan, who had kept almost all his terms at Dublin
College, should return thither and take his degree, and enter into holy
orders, 'when we will provide him with a chaplaincy at home, you know,'
Lady Castlewood added.” And I may mention here, that this benevolent
plan was executed a score of months later; when I was enabled myself to
be of service to Mr. Hagan, who was one of the kindest and best of
our friends during our own time of want and distress. Castlewood
then executed his promise loyally enough, got orders and a colonial
appointment for Hagan, who distinguished himself both as soldier and
preacher, as we shall presently hear; but not a guinea did his lordship
spare to aid either his sister or his kinsman in their trouble. I never
asked him, thank Heaven, to assist me in my own; though, to do him
justice, no man could express himself more amiably, and with a joy which
I believe was quite genuine, when my days of poverty were ended.

As for my Uncle Warrington, and his virtuous wife and daughters, let
me do them justice likewise, and declare that throughout my period of
trial, their sorrow at my poverty was consistent and unvarying. I still
had a few acquaintances who saw them, and of course (as friends will)
brought me a report of their opinions and conversation; and I never
could hear that my relatives had uttered one single good word about me
or my wife. They spoke even of my tragedy as a crime--I was accustomed
to hear that sufficiently maligned--of the author as a miserable
reprobate, for ever reeling about Grub Street, in rags and squalor. They
held me out no hand of help. My poor wife might cry in her pain,
but they had no twopence to bestow upon her. They went to church a
half-dozen times in the week. They subscribed to many public charities.
Their tribe was known eighteen hundred years ago, and will flourish as
long as men endure. They will still thank Heaven that they are not as
other folks are; and leave the wounded and miserable to other succour.

I don't care to recall the dreadful doubts and anxieties which began to
beset me; the plan after plan which I tried, and in which I failed, for
procuring work and adding to our dwindling stock of money. I bethought
me of my friend Mr. Johnson, and when I think of the eager kindness with
which he received me, am ashamed of some pert speeches which I own
to have made regarding his manners and behaviour. I told my story and
difficulties to him, the circumstance of my marriage, and the prospects
before me. He would not for a moment admit they were gloomy, or, si male
nunc, that they would continue to be so. I had before me the chances,
certainly very slender, of a place in England; the inheritance which
must be mine in the course of nature, or at any rate would fall to the
heir I was expecting. I had a small stock of money for present actual
necessity--a possibility, “though, to be free with you, sir” (says
he), “after the performance of your tragedy, I doubt whether nature
has endowed you with those peculiar qualities which are necessary for
achieving a remarkable literary success”--and finally a submission to
the maternal rule, and a return to Virginia, where plenty and a home
were always ready for me. “Why, sir!” he cried, “such a sum as you
mention would have been a fortune to me when I began the world, and my
friend Mr. Goldsmith would set up a coach-and-six on it. With youth,
hope, to-day, and a couple of hundred pounds in cash--no young fellow
need despair. Think, sir, you have a year at least before you, and who
knows what may chance between now and then. Why, sir, your relatives
here may provide for you, or you may succeed to your Virginian property,
or you may come into a fortune!” I did not in the course of that year,
but he did. My Lord Bute gave Mr. Johnson a pension, which set all Grub
Street in a fury against the recipient, who, to be sure, had published
his own not very flattering opinion upon pensions and pensioners.

Nevertheless, he did not altogether discourage my literary projects,
promised to procure me work from the booksellers, and faithfully
performed that kind promise. “But,” says he, “sir, you must not appear
amongst them in forma pauperis.--Have you never a friend's coach, in
which we can ride to see them? You must put on your best laced hat and
waistcoat; and we must appear, sir, as if we were doing them a favour.”
 This stratagem answered, and procured me respect enough at the first
visit or two; but when the booksellers knew that I wanted to be paid for
my work, their backs refused to bend any more, and they treated me with
a familiarity which I could ill stomach. I overheard one of them, who
had been a footman, say, “Oh, it's Pocahontas, is it? let him wait.” And
he told his boy to say as much to me. “Wait, sir?” says I, fuming
with rage and putting my head into his parlour, “I'm not accustomed to
waiting, but I have heard you are.” And I strode out of the shop into
Pall Mall in a mighty fluster.

And yet Mr. D. was in the right. I came to him, if not to ask a favour,
at any rate to propose a bargain, and surely it was my business to wait
his time and convenience. In more fortunate days I asked the gentleman's
pardon, and the kind author of the Muse in Livery was instantly
appeased.

I was more prudent, or Mr. Johnson more fortunate, in an application
elsewhere, and Mr. Johnson procured me a little work from the
booksellers in translating from foreign languages, of which I happen to
know two or three. By a hard day's labour I could earn a few shillings;
so few that a week's work would hardly bring me a guinea: and that was
flung to me with insolent patronage by the low hucksters who employed
me. I can put my finger upon two or three magazine articles written at
this period, and paid for with a few wretched shillings, which papers as
I read them awaken in me the keenest pangs of bitter remembrance.
[Mr. George Warrington, of the Upper Temple, says he remembers a book,
containing his grandfather's book-plate, in which were pasted various
extracts from reviews and newspapers in an old type, and lettered
outside Les Chains de l'Esclavage. These were no doubt the contributions
above mentioned; but the volume has not been found, either in the
town-house or in the library at Warrington Manor. The Editor, by
the way, is not answerable for a certain inconsistency, which may be
remarked in the narrative. The writer says earlier, that he speaks
without bitterness of past times, and presently falls into a fury with
them. The same manner of forgiving our enemies is not uncommon in the
present century.] I recall the doubts and fears which agitated me,
see the dear wife nursing her infant and looking up into my face with
hypocritical smiles that vainly try to mask her alarm: the struggles of
pride are fought over again: the wounds under which I smarted re-open.
There are some acts of injustice committed against me which I don't know
how to forgive; and which, whenever I think of them, awaken in me the
same feelings of revolt and indignation. The gloom and darkness gather
over me--till they are relieved by a reminiscence of that love and
tenderness which through all gloom and darkness have been my light and
consolation.
