The morning sun broke over Tergou with a brilliance that seemed to defy the season, casting a velvet glow upon the cobblestones where horses' hooves clattered in rhythmic haste. The air buzzed with the murmur of a city holding its breath, windows and balconies crowded with faces straining to catch a glimpse of the spectacle unfolding below. The French Ambassador rode through the streets, a figure of diplomatic grandeur, yet his procession was dominated by the eccentricities of the Duke of Burgundy's retinue.

Leading the way was the Duke's tumbler, a man of such sedate and grave majesty that his more noble companions appeared by comparison to be mere frivolous children. Yet, whenever the weight of the crowd's awe became too heavy, the tumbler would perform antics so ignoble and comical that even the stoic Ambassador could not suppress a laugh. He would roll from his horse with a graceless tumble, only to scramble back up by the tail, playing his part with a provoking display of buffoonery. Bringing up the rear of this motley parade was a creature that drew far more attention: the Duke's leopard. Mounted on a Flemish steed of monstrous size and power, a huntsman carried a long box strapped to his loins, upon which a bright leopard crouched, chained securely. The townspeople pressed close, mesmerized by her glossy hide and spotted coat, until the huntsman's voice cut through the air like a whip.

"Beware!" he roared. "In Antwerp, a man dared but throw a handful of dust at her, and the Duke made dust of him!"

"Gramercy!" someone whispered.

"I speak truth," the huntsman continued, his voice trembling with theatrical menace. "The good Duke imprisoned him in a cell beneath the earth, and the rats stripped the flesh from his bones in a single night. He served him right for molesting the beast."

A ripple of fear swept through the Tergovians; they shrank back, terrified to even tickle the sovereign's leopard. But the tension broke with the arrival of the final member of the procession: the Duke's giant. Standing seven feet four inches tall, this Hungarian brute possessed a treble, fluty voice of negligible power. He was vain, utterly unaware of his vocal defect, and now, catching sight of Giles perched atop a balcony, he stopped to mock him.

"Hallo! Brother!" the giant squeaked, his voice a shrill whistle. "I nearly passed without seeing thee."

"You are plain enough to see," Giles bellowed back, his bass tones shaking the air.

"Come on my shoulder, brother," the giant squealed again, extending a shoulder like a mutton fist to help him down.

"If I do, I'll cuff your ears," roared the dwarf.

The giant, sensing the homunculus's irascibility and encouraged by the crowd's laughter, played upon him. He failed to realize that the people laughed not at his wit, but at the absurd incongruity of the two voices—the gigantic body emitting a feeble fife-like sound, and the tiny dwarf belching out thunder.

The singular duet ended as abruptly as it began. Giles, losing all patience and self-command, dropped onto the giant's neck, seizing his hair with one hand and punching his head with the other. The giant's first impulse was to laugh, but the sudden weight and rapidity of the blows corrected that inclination instantly.

"He! he! Ah! ha! hallo! oh! oh! Holy saints! Here! Help! Or I must throttle the imp! I can't! I'll split your skull against the—"

He made a wild run backward toward the balcony. Giles saw his danger, grabbed the stone railing with both hands, and whipped over it just as the giant's head struck it with a stunning crack. The crowd roared with laughter and exultation at the little champion's address. The indignant giant, enraged, seized two of the laughers, knocked them together like dumbbells, and shook them flat. Catherine shrieked, throwing her apron over Giles, before the giant strode wrathfully away after the party.

Though no one present foresaw the consequences, the immediate result was agreeable. The Tergovians turned proud of Giles, listening with newfound affability to his pleas for parchment. He conducted a regular trade with his brother Gerard in this article, begging it gratis while Gerard supplied the coppers.

That afternoon, Catherine and her daughter Kate sat chatting about their favorite theme: Gerard, his goodness, his benefice, and the brightened prospects of the family. Their good fortune had arrived in the very shape they desired. Beyond the advantage of a benefice the Countess Charolois would not disdain, there lay the feminine delight of having a priest, a holy man, within their own household.

"He will marry Cornelis and Sybrandt," Catherine declared. "For they can wed, good housewives, now, if they will. Gerard will take care of you and Giles when we are gone."

"Yes, mother, and we can confess to him instead of to a stranger," Kate said.

"Ay, girl! And he can give the sacred oil to your father and me, and close our eyes when our time comes."

"Oh, mother! Not for many, many years, I do pray Heaven. Pray speak not of that; it always makes me sad. I hope to go before you, mother dear. No; let us be gay today. I am out of pain, mother, quite out of all pain; it does seem so strange. I feel so bright and happy that—mother, can you keep a secret?"

"Nobody better, child. Why, you know I can."

"Then I will show you something so beautiful. You never saw the like, I trow. Only Gerard must never know; for sure he means to surprise us with it; he covers it up so, and sometimes he carries it away altogether."

Kate took her crutches and moved slowly away, leaving her mother in an exalted state of curiosity. Soon she returned with something wrapped in a cloth. Uncovering it, she revealed a lovely picture of the Virgin, adorned with all her insignia, wearing her tiara over a wealth of beautiful hair flowing loose over her shoulders. Catherine was struck with awe.

"It is herself," she cried. "It is the Queen of Heaven. I never saw one like her to my mind before."

"And her eyes, mother: lifted to the sky, as if they belonged there, and not to a mortal creature. And her beautiful hair of burning gold."

"And to think I have a son that can make the saints live again upon a piece of wood!"

"The reason is, he is a young saint himself, mother. He is too good for this world; he is here to portray the blessed, and then to go away and be with them forever."

Before they had finished admiring the image, a strange voice was heard at the door. Driven by instinct, the women hastily hid the picture in the cloth, though there was no real need. The next moment, a man entered, casting furtive eyes around the room: Ghysbrecht Van Swieten, the burgomaster, who had not visited the house in ten years.

The two women stared at him, exchanging a glance of contemptuous incredulity.

"The burgomaster!" they said in a tone so expressive that Ghysbrecht felt compelled to answer.

"Yes! I own the last time I came here was not on a friendly errand. Men love their own interest—Eli's and mine were contrary. Well, let this visit atone for the last. Today I come on your business and none of mine."

Catherine and her daughter exchanged a swift glance of disbelief. They knew the man better than he thought.

"It is about your son Gerard."

"Ay! Ay! You want him to work for the town all for nothing. He told us."

"I come on no such errand. It is to let you know he has fallen into bad hands."

"Now Heaven and the saints forbid! Man, torture not a mother! Speak out, and quickly: speak ere you have time to coin falsehood: we know thee."

Ghysbrecht turned pale at this affront, spite mingling with his other motives. "Thus it is, then," he said, grinding his teeth and speaking very fast. "Your son Gerard is more likely to be a father of a family than a priest: he is forever with Margaret, Peter Brandt's red-haired girl, and loves her like a cow her calf."

Mother and daughter both burst out laughing. Ghysbrecht stared at them, bewildered.

"What! You knew it?"

"Carry this tale to those who know not my son, Gerard. Women are nought to him."

"Other women, mayhap. But this one is the apple of his eye to him, or will be, if you part them not, and soon. Come, dame, make me not waste time and friendly counsel: my servant has seen them together a score of times, handing and reading babies in one another's eyes like—you know, dame—you have been young, too."

"Girl, I am ill at ease. Yea, I have been young, and know how blind and foolish the young are. My heart! He has turned me sick in a moment. Kate, if it should be true?"

"Nay, nay!" cried Kate eagerly. "Gerard might love a young woman: all young men do: I can't find what they see in them to love so; but if he did, he would let us know; he would not deceive us. You wicked man! No, dear mother, look not so! Gerard is too good to love a creature of earth. His love is for our Lady and the saints. Ah! I will show you the picture there: if his heart was earthly, could he paint the Queen of Heaven like that—look! Look!"

She held the picture out triumphantly. More radiant and beautiful in this moment of enthusiasm than any dead picture ever was or would be, she overwhelmed the burgomaster with her eloquence and her feminine proof of Gerard's purity. His eyes and mouth opened wide, remaining fixed in that state as he turned, face and all as if on a pivot, from the picture to the women, and from the women to the picture.

"Why, it is herself," he gasped.

"Isn't it!" cried Kate, her hostility softening. "You admire it? I forgive you for frightening us."

"Am I in a mad-house?" said Ghysbrecht Van Swieten, thoroughly puzzled. "You show me a picture of the girl; and you say he painted it; and that is a proof he cannot love her. Why, they all paint their sweethearts, painters do."

"A picture of the girl?" exclaimed Kate, shocked. "Fie! This is no girl; this is our blessed Lady."

"No, no; it is Margaret Brandt."

"Oh blind! It is the Queen of Heaven."

"No; only of Sevenbergen village."

"Profane man! Behold her crown!"

"Silly child! Look at her red hair! Would the Virgin be seen in red hair? She who had the pick of all the colors ten thousand years before the world began."

At that moment, an anxious face insinuated itself around the edge of the open door: their neighbor Peter Buyskens.

"What is to do?" he asked in a cautious whisper. "We can hear you all across the street. What on earth is to do?"

"Oh, neighbor! What is to do? Why, here is the burgomaster blackening our Gerard."

"Stop!" cried Van Swieten. "Peter Buyskens is come in the nick of time. He knows father and daughter both. They cast their glamour on him."

"What! Is she a witch too?"

"Else the egg takes not after the bird. Why is her father called the magician? I tell you they bewitched this very Peter here; they cast unholy spells on him, and cured him of the colic: now, Peter, look and tell me who is that? And you be silent, women, for a moment, if you can; who is it, Peter?"

"Well, to be sure!" said Peter, in reply; and his eye seemed fascinated by the picture.

"Who is it?" repeated Ghysbrecht impetuously.

Peter Buyskens smiled. "Why, you know as well as I do; but what have they put a crown on her for? I never saw her in a crown, for my part."

"Man alive! Can't you open your great jaws, and just speak a wench's name plain out to oblige three people?"

"I'd do a great deal more to oblige one of you than that, burgomaster. If it isn't as natural as life!"

"Curse the man! He won't, he won't—curse him!"

"Why, what have I done now?"

"Oh, sir!" said little Kate. "For pity's sake tell us; are these the features of a living woman, of—of—Margaret Brandt?"

"A mirror is not truer, my little maid."

"But is it she, sir, for very certain?"

"Why, who else should it be?"

"Now, why couldn't you say so at once?" snarled Ghysbrecht.

"I did say so, as plain as I could speak," snapped Peter; and they growled over this small bone of contention so zealously that they did not see Catherine and her daughter had thrown their aprons over their heads, rocking to and fro in deep distress.

The next moment Elias came in from the shop, standing aghast. Catherine, though her face was covered, knew his footsteps.

"That is my poor man," she sobbed. "Tell him, good Peter Buyskens, for I have not the courage."

Elias turned pale. The presence of the burgomaster in his house, after so many years of coolness, coupled with his wife's and daughter's distress, made him fear some heavy misfortune.

"Richart! Jacob!" he gasped.

"No, no!" said the burgomaster. "It is nearer home, and nobody is dead or dying, old friend."

"God bless you, burgomaster! Ah! Something
