Gerard encountered a small group on the road. Two men in sober suits leaned lazily against a horse, conversing idly. The rider, clad in a silk doublet and a bright green jerkin of English cloth, lay flat on his stomach in the afternoon sun, resembling an enormous lizard. His flaming yellow velvet cloak was carefully spread over the horse's loins.

"Is aught amiss?" Gerard inquired.

"Not that I wot of," one of the servants replied.

"But your master lies like a corpse. Are ye not ashamed to let him grovel on the ground?"

"Go to; the bare ground is the best cure for his disorder. If you get sober in bed, it gives you a headache; but you leap up from the hard ground like a lark in spring. Eh, Ulric?"

"He speaks sooth, young man," Ulric said warmly.

"What, is the gentleman drunk?" Gerard asked.

The servants burst into a hoarse laugh at the simplicity of his question. Suddenly, Ulric stopped, eyeing Gerard gravely. "Who are you, and where born, that know not the Count is ever drunk at this hour?" Gerard found himself a suspected character.

"I am a stranger," Gerard said, "but a true man, and one that loves knowledge; therefore ask I questions, and not for love of prying."

"If you be a true man," Ulric said shrewdly, "then give us trinkgeld for the knowledge we have given you."

Gerard looked blank but put on a good face. "Trinkgeld you shall have, such as my lean purse can spare, an if you will tell me why ye have ta'en his cloak from the man and laid it on the beast."

Inspired by the prospect of payment, two solutions were instantly offered. First, that if the Count came to himself and found his horse sweating in the cold while a cloak lay idle, he would fall to cursing and perhaps violence. Second, that a horse is a poor milksop requiring warmth, whereas a master, filled with good beer, possesses an inward heat that renders a cloak a mere shred of idle vanity. Each speaker fell in love with his theory, and having taken a hair or two of the dog that had bitten their master to the brain, their voices rose so high that the green sot began to growl instead of snoring.

Ere long, the argument took a turn certain to enliven a discussion in that age. Hans, holding the bridle, gave Ulric a sound cuff; Ulric returned it with interest. They went at it, ding dong, over the horse's mane, pummelling one another and jagging the poor beast until he ran backward, treading with an iron heel upon a promontory of the green lord. Like a toad stung by Ithuriel's spear, the Count started up howling, one hand clapped to the smart and the other tugging at his hilt. The servants, amazed with terror, let the horse go. He galloped off whinnying, the men in pursuit crying out with fear, and the green noble after them, volleying curses, his naked sword in hand, his body rebounding from hedge to hedge in his headlong but zigzag career down the narrow lane.

"In which hurtling" Gerard turned his back on them all, went calmly south, glad to have saved the four tin farthings he had prepared for trinkgeld, but far too heavy-hearted even to smile at their drunken extravagance.

The sun was nearly setting, and Gerard, who had hoped in vain to find an inn, was very ill at ease. Black clouds gathered over the sky. Gerard quickened his pace almost to a run. It was in vain; down came the rain in torrents, drenching the bewildered traveller and seeming to extinguish the very sun. Gerard trudged on, dark, wet, and in an unknown region. "Fool! to leave Margaret," he said.

Presently, the darkness thickened. He was entering a great wood. Huge branches shot across the narrow road, and the benighted stranger groped his way in what seemed an interminable and inky cave with a rugged floor, on which he stumbled repeatedly. On, and on, and on, with shivering limbs and an empty stomach, till the wolves rose from their lairs and bayed all round the wood. His hair bristled, but he grasped his cudgel, prepared to sell his life dear.

There was no wind; his excited ear heard light feet patter over the newly fallen leaves and low branches rustle with creatures gliding swiftly past. Presently, in the sea of ink, there was a great fiery star close to the ground. He hailed it as he would his patron saint. "CANDLE! a CANDLE!" he shouted, trying to run. But the dark and rugged way soon stopped him. The light was more distant than he had thought. At last, in the very heart of the forest, he found a house with lighted candles and loud voices inside. He looked up for a signboard; there was none. "Not an inn after all!" he said sadly. "No matter; what Christian would turn a dog out into this wood to-night?" With this, he made for the door leading to the voices. He opened it slowly and put his head in timidly. He drew it out abruptly, as if slapped in the face, and recoiled into the rain and darkness.

He had peeped into a large but low room, the middle of which was filled by a huge round stove or clay oven reaching to the ceiling. Round this, wet clothes were drying—some on lines, and some more compendiously on rustics. These latter habiliments, impregnated with the wet of the day, the dirt of a life, and lined with what another foot traveller called "rammish clowns," evolved rank vapours and compound odours inexpressible in steaming clouds. In one corner was a travelling family, a large one; thence flowed into the common stock the peculiar sickly smell of neglected brats. Garlic filled the interstices of the air. All this, with closed windows and the intense heat of the central furnace, created the breath of at least forty persons.

They had just supped. Now Gerard, like most artists, had sensitive organs, and the potent effluvia struck dismay into him. But the rain lashed him outside, and the light and fire tempted him in. He could not force his way all at once through the palpable perfumes, but he returned to the light again and again, like a singed moth. At last he discovered that the various smells did not entirely mix; odour of family predominated in two corners, stewed rustic reigned supreme in the centre, and garlic in the noisy group by the window. He found, too, by hasty analysis, that of these the garlic described the smallest aerial orbit, and the scent of reeking rustic darted farthest—a flavour as if ancient goats or the fathers of all foxes had been drawn through a river and dried by Nebuchadnezzar.

So Gerard crept into a corner close to the door. But though the solidity of the main fetors isolated them somewhat, the heat and reeking vapours circulated, making the walls drip. The home-nurtured novice found something like a cold snake wind about his legs, his head turning to a great lump of lead, and next he felt like choking, sweetly slumbering, and dying, all in one. He was within an ace of swooning, but recovered to a deep sense of disgust and discouragement, settling to go back to Holland at peep of day. This resolution formed, he plucked up a little heart; being faint with hunger, he asked one of the men of garlic whether this was not an inn after all.

"Whence come you, who know not 'The Star of the Forest'?" was the reply.

"I am a stranger; and in my country inns have aye a sign."

"Droll country yours! What need of a sign to a public-house—a place that every soul knows?"

Gerard was too tired and faint for the labour of argument, so he turned the conversation, asking where he could find the landlord. At this fresh display of ignorance, the native's contempt rose too high for words. He pointed to a middle-aged woman seated on the other side of the oven and turned to his mates, letting them know what an outlandish animal was in the room. Thereat the loud voices stopped, one by one, as the information penetrated the mass; and each eye turned, as on a pivot, following Gerard, and his every movement, silently and zoologically.

The landlady sat on a chair an inch or two higher than the rest, between two bundles. From the first, a huge heap of feathers and wings, she was taking the downy plumes, pulling the others from the quills, filling bundle two littering the floor ankle-deep, and contributing to the general stock a stuffy little malaria. Gerard asked her if he could have something to eat.

She opened her eyes with astonishment. "Supper is over this hour and more."

"But I had none of it, good dame."

"Is that my fault? You were welcome to your share for me."

"But I was benighted, and a stranger; and belated sore against my will."

"What have I to do with that? All the world knows 'The Star of the Forest' sups from six till eight. Come before six, ye sup well; come before eight, ye sup as pleases Heaven; come after eight, ye get a clean bed, and a stirrup cup, or a horn of kine's milk, at the dawning."

Gerard looked blank. "May I go to bed, then, dame?" he said sulkily, "for it is ill sitting up wet and fasting, and the byword saith, 'He sups who sleeps.'"

"The beds are not come yet," replied the landlady. "You will sleep when the rest do. Inns are not built for one."

It was Gerard's turn to be astonished. "The beds were not come! what, in Heaven's name, did she mean?" But he was afraid to ask for every word he had spoken hitherto had amazed the assembly, and zoological eyes were upon him—he felt them. He leaned against the wall and sighed audibly.

At this fresh zoological trait, a titter went round the watchful company. "So this is Germany," thought Gerard; "and Germany is a great country by Holland. Small nations for me." He consoled himself by reflecting it was to be his last, as well as his first, night in the land. His reverie was interrupted by an elbow driven into his ribs. He turned sharp on his assailant, who pointed across the room. Gerard looked, and a woman in the corner was beckoning him. He went towards her gingerly, being surprised and irresolute, so that to a spectator her beckoning finger seemed to be pulling him across the floor with a gut-line. When he had got up to her, "Hold the child," she said in a fine hearty voice; and in a moment she plumped the bairn into Gerard's arms.

He stood transfixed, jelly of lead in his hands, and sudden horror in his elongated countenance. At this ruefully expressive face, the lynx-eyed conclave laughed loud and long.

"Never heed them," said the woman cheerfully; "they know no better; how should they, bred an' born in a wood?" She was rummaging among her clothes with the two penetrating hands, one of which Gerard had set free. Presently she fished out a small tin plate and a dried pudding; and resuming her child with one arm, held them forth to Gerard with the other, keeping a thumb on the pudding to prevent it from slipping off.

"Put it in the stove," she said; "you are too young to lie down fasting."

Gerard thanked her warmly. But on his way to the stove, his eye fell on the landlady. "May I, dame?" he said beseechingly.

"Why not?" she said.

The question was evidently another surprise, though less startling than its predecessors. Coming to the stove, Gerard found the oven door obstructed by "the rammish clowns." They did not budge. He hesitated a moment. The landlady saw, calmly put down her work, and coming up, pulled a hircine man or two hither and pushed a hircine man or two thither, with the impassive countenance of a housewife moving her furniture. "Turn about is fair play," she said; "ye have been dry this ten minutes and better."

Her experienced eye was not deceived; Gorgonii had done stewing and begun baking. Debarred the stove, they trundled home, all but one, who stood like a table, where the landlady had moved him to, like a table. And Gerard baked his pudding; and getting to the stove, burst into steam.

The door opened, and in flew a bundle of straw. It was hurled by a hind with a pitchfork. Another and another came flying after it, till the room was like a clean farmyard. These were then dispersed round the stove in layers, like the seats in an arena, and in a moment the company was all on its back. The beds had come.

Gerard took out his pudding and found it delicious. While he was relishing it, the woman who had given it him, and who was now abed, beckoned him again. He went to her bundle side. "She is waiting for you," whispered the woman. Gerard returned to the stove and gobbled the rest of his sausage, casting uneasy glances at the landlady, seated silent as fate amid the prostrate multitude. The food bolted, he went to her, and said, "Thank you kindly, dame, for waiting for me."

"You are welcome," she said calmly, making neither much nor little of the favour; and with that began to gather up the feathers. But Gerard stopped her. "Nay, that is my task;" and he went down on his knees and collected them with ardour. She watched him demurely.

"I wot not whence ye come," she said, with a relic of distrust; adding, more cord
