Denys caught at Gerard, halting his descent, though it was doubtful whether this grasp alone could have spared him a broken neck or shattered limb. His only salvation was the dying bear, whose hairy carcass bore the weight of Denys's head and shoulders. With frantic strength, Denys tore the beast from him. It was futile; the animal panted, her limbs trembling, yet she was no harmless hare. Soon, she drew her final breath. The sensible Denys propped Gerard against her soft, cooling form and fanned him. Gerard regained consciousness gradually, though confused and disoriented by the sensation of the bear around him, until he rolled away in a scream.

"Courage!" cried Denys. "The devil is dead."

"Is it dead? Quite dead?" Gerard inquired from behind a tree, his courage feverish and his chill returning.

"Behold," said Denys, pulling the brute's ear playfully, opening her jaws, and inserting his head with other insulting antics. In the midst of this, Gerard was violently sick.

Denys laughed at him.

"What is the matter now?" he asked. "Also, why tumble off your perch just when we had won the day?"

"I swooned, I trow."

"But why?"

Receiving no answer, Denys continued, "Green girls faint as soon as they look at you, but then they choose time and place. What woman ever fainted up a tree?"

"She sent her nasty blood all over me. I think the smell must have overpowered me! Faugh! I hate blood."

"I do believe it potently."

"See what a mess she has made of me."

"But with her blood, not yours. I pity the enemy that strives to satisfy you."

"You need not brag, Maitre Denys; I saw you under the tree, the color of your shirt."

"Let us distinguish," said Denys, blushing. "It is permitted to tremble for a friend."

Gerard, in answer, flung his arms around Denys's neck in silence.

"Look here," whined the stout soldier, moved by this sudden gush of nature and youth. "Was ever anything so like a woman? I love thee, little milksop—go on. Good! Behold him on his knees now. What new caprice is this?"

"Oh, Denys, ought we not to return thanks to Him who has saved both our lives against such fearful odds?" Gerard knelt and prayed aloud. Presently, he found Denys kneeling quietly beside him, his hands crossed over his bosom in the fashion of his nation, with a face as long as his arm. When they rose, Gerard's countenance was beaming.

"Good Denys," he said, "Heaven will reward thy piety."

"Ah, bah! I did it out of politeness," said the Frenchman. "It was to please thee, little one. *C'est égal*, 'twas well and orderly prayed, and edified me to the core while it lasted. A bishop had scarce handled the matter better; so now our evensong being sung, and the saints enlisted with us—*marchons*."

Before taking two steps, he stopped. "By-the-by, the cub!"

"Oh, no, no!" cried Gerard.

"You are right. It is late. We have lost time climbing trees, tumbling off them, swooning, vomiting, and praying; and the brute is heavy to carry. And now I think on't, we shall have Papa after it next; these bears make such a coil about an odd cub. What is this? You are wounded! You are wounded!"

"Not I."

"He is wounded; miserable that I am!"

"Be calm, Denys. I am not touched; I feel no pain anywhere."

"You? You only feel when another is hurt," cried Denys, with great emotion. Throwing himself on his knees, he examined Gerard's leg with glistening eyes.

"Quick! Quick! Before it stiffens," he cried, hurrying him on.

"Who makes the coil about nothing now?" inquired Gerard composedly.

Denys's reply was very indirect.

"Be pleased to note," said he, "that I have a bad heart. You were man enough to save my life, yet I must sneer at you, a novice in war. Was not I a novice once myself? Then you fainted from a wound, and I thought you swooned for fear, and called you a milksop. Briefly, I have a bad tongue and a bad heart."

"Denys!"

"Plait-il?"

"You lie."

"You are very good to say so, little one, and I am eternally obliged to you," mumbled the remorseful Denys.

Ere they had walked many furlongs, the muscles of the wounded leg contracted and stiffened, until Gerard could barely put his toe to the ground, and that with great pain.

At last he could bear it no longer.

"Let me lie down and die," he groaned, "for this is intolerable."

Denys argued that it was afternoon and the nights were now frosty, that cold and hunger were ill companions, and that it would be unreasonable to lose heart, especially since a certain great personage was notoriously defunct. So Gerard leaned upon his axe and hobbled on; but presently he gave in all at once and sank helpless in the road.

Denys drew him aside into the wood. To his surprise, he gave Gerard his crossbow and bolts, enjoining him strictly to lie quiet. If any ill-looking fellows should find him and come to him, he was to bid them keep aloof; and should they refuse, to shoot them dead at twenty paces. "Honest men keep the path; and, knaves in a wood, none but fools do parley with them." With this, he snatched up Gerard's axe and set off running—not, as Gerard expected, toward Düsseldorf, but on the road they had come.

Gerard lay aching and smarting. To him, Rome, which seemed so near at the start, looked far, far off now that he was two hundred miles nearer it. But soon all his thoughts turned toward Sevenbergen. How sweet it would be one day to hold Margaret's hand and tell her all he had gone through for her! The very thought of it, and of her, soothed him; and amidst pain and nerve irritation, he lay resigned, sweetly though faintly smiling.

He had lain thus more than two hours when suddenly there were shouts. The next moment, something struck a tree hard by and quivered in it.

He looked; it was an arrow.

He started to his feet. Several missiles rattled among the boughs, and the wood echoed with battle cries. Whence they came he could not tell, for noises in these huge woods are so reverberated that a stranger is always at fault regarding their source; but they seemed to fill the whole air. Presently there was a lull, then he heard the fierce galloping of hooves; and still louder shouts and cries arose, mingled with shrieks and groans. Above all, strange and terrible sounds, like fierce claps of thunder, bellowed loudly and then died off in cracking echoes. Red tongues of flame shot out ever and anon among the trees, and clouds of sulphurous smoke drifted over his head. And all was still.

Gerard was struck with awe. "What will become of Denys?" he cried. "Oh, why did you leave me? Oh, Denys, my friend! My friend!"

Just before sunset, Denys returned, almost sinking under a hairy bundle. It was the bear's skin.

Gerard welcomed him with a burst of joy that astonished him.

"I thought never to see you again, dear Denys. Were you in the battle?"

"No. What battle?"

"The bloody battle of men, or fiends, that raged in the wood a while ago;" and with this he described it to the life, more fully than I have done.

Denys patted him indulgently on the back.

"It is well," said he. "Thou art a good limner; and fever is a great spur to the imagination. One day I lay in a cart-shed with a cracked skull and saw two hosts manoeuvre and fight a good hour on eight feet square, the which I did fairly describe to my comrade in due order, only not so gorgeously as thou, for want of book learning."

"What, then, you believe me not? When I tell you the arrows whizzed over my head, and the combatants shouted, and—"

"May the foul fiends fly away with me if I believe a word of it."

Gerard took his arm and quietly pointed to a tree close by.

"Why, it looks like—it is—a broad arrow, as I live!" He went close and looked up at it.

"It came out of the battle. I heard it, and saw it."

"An English arrow."

"How know you that?"

"Marry, by its length. The English bowmen draw the bow to the ear; others only to the right breast. Hence the English loose a three-foot shaft, and this is one of them, perdition seize them! Well, if this is not glamour, there has been a trifle of a battle. And if there has been a battle in so ridiculous a place for a battle as this, why then 'tis no business of mine, for my Duke hath no quarrel hereabouts. So let's to bed," said the professional. With this, he scraped together a heap of leaves and made Gerard lie on it, his axe by his side. He then lay down beside him, with one hand on his arbalest, and drew the bear-skin over them, hair inward. They were soon as warm as toast and fast asleep.

But long before the dawn, Gerard woke his comrade.

"What shall I do, Denys? I die of famine?"

"Do? Why, go to sleep again incontinent: *qui dort dine*."

"But I tell you I am too hungry to sleep," snapped Gerard.

"Let us march, then," replied Denys, with paternal indulgence.

He had a brief paroxysm of yawns, then made a small bundle of bear's ears, rolling them up in a strip of the skin cut for the purpose; and they took the road.

Gerard leaned on his axe, propped by Denys on the other side, hobbling along, not without sighs.

"I hate pain," said Gerard viciously.

"Therein you show judgment," replied Papa smoothly.

It was a clear starlight night, and soon the moon rising revealed the end of the wood at no great distance: a pleasant sight, since Düsseldorf they knew was but a short league further.

At the edge of the wood, they came upon something so mysterious that they stopped to gaze at it before going up to it. Two white pillars rose in the air, distant a few paces from each other; and between them stood many figures that looked like human forms.

"I go no farther till I know what this is," said Gerard, in an agitated whisper. "Are they effigies of the saints for men to pray to on the road? Or live robbers waiting to shoot down honest travelers? Nay, living men they cannot be, for they stand on nothing that I see. Oh! Denys, let us turn back till daybreak; this is no mortal sight."

Denys halted and peered long and keenly. "They are men," he said at last. Gerard was for turning back all the more. "But men that will never hurt us, nor we them. Look not to their feet, for that they stand on!"

"Where, then, i' the name of all the saints?"

"Look over their heads," said Denys gravely.

Following this direction, Gerard presently discerned the outline of a dark wooden beam passing from pillar to pillar. As the pair got nearer, walking now on tiptoe, one by one dark, snake-like cords came out in the moonlight, each pendent from the beam to a dead man, tight as wire.

Now as they came under this awful monument of crime and wholesale vengeance, a light air swept by, and several of the corpses swung, or gently gyrated, and every rope creaked. Gerard shuddered at this ghastly salute. So thoroughly had the gibbet, with its sickening load, seized and held their eyes, that it was but now they perceived a fire right underneath, and a living figure sitting huddled over it. His axe lay beside him, the bright blade shining red in the glow. He was asleep.

Gerard started, but Denys only whispered, "Courage, comrade, here is a fire."

"Ay! But there is a man at it."

"There will soon be three;" and he began to heap some wood on it that the watcher had prepared. During which, the prudent Gerard seized the man's axe and sat down tight on it, grasping his own and examining the sleeper. There was nothing outwardly distinctive in the man. He wore the dress of the country folk and the hat of the district, a three-cornered hat called a Brunswicker, stiff enough to turn a sword cut, and with a thick brass hat-band. The weight of the whole thing had turned his ears entirely down, like a fancy rabbit's in our century; but even this, though it spoiled him as a man, was nothing remarkable. They had of late met scores of these dog's-eared rustics. The peculiarity was, this clown watching under a laden gallows. What for?

Denys, if he felt curious, would not show it. He took out two bear's ears from his bundle, running sticks through them, and began to toast them. "'Twill be eating coined money," said he; "for the burgomaster of Düsseldorf had given us a rix-dollar for these ears, as proving the death of their owners; but better a lean purse than a lere stomach."

"Unhappy man!" cried Gerard. "Could you eat food here?"

"Where the fire is lighted there must the meat roast, and where it roasts there must it be eaten; for nought travels worse than your roasted
