The afternoon following the injury found Gerard no longer dizzy, but plagued by a restless irritability and a succession of vivid, troubling fancies. In one such fit, he implored Denys to procure a lemon for him to suck. Denys, transformed from a rough soldier into a figure of tender, grandfatherly affection, rose hastily. "Lemons shall be yours in the twinkling of a quart pot," he promised, rushing out to scour the shops. They were rare commodities in the North, and his absence stretched long. Gerard's patience wore thin as the minutes ticked by. Finally, the door creaked open, but it was not Denys who entered.

Instead, a commanding figure glided softly into the room. He was an elderly gentleman clad in a long, sober gown trimmed with rich fur, wearing cherry-colored hose and pointed shoes. A sword hung at his side in a morocco scabbard, and around his neck sat a ruff, starched with severe rigidity and treacherously stiffened into deep furrows by hidden wooden frameworks. Upon his head rested a four-cornered cap with a fur border, and a majestic white beard framed his chin and bosom. Gerard needed no introduction; barring the weapon, this was the full dress of a physician. Trailing behind him was a boy carrying a basket filled with phials, lint, and surgical tools that seemed to invite inspection.

The old gentleman approached the bedside with a mild, hushed tone. "How fares it with thee, my son?"

Gerard answered gratefully that his wound caused little pain, though his throat felt parched and his head heavy.

"A wound!" the doctor exclaimed, feigning surprise. "They told me not of that. Let me see it. Ay, ay, a clean bite. The mastiff had sound teeth that took this out, I warrant me." His sympathy seemed to drift entirely toward the canine culprit he had conjured, his jackal.

"This must be cauterized immediately, or we shall find you retreating from water and performing somersaults in bed under our hands. 'Tis the year for raving curs, and one has done your business; but we shall baffle him yet. Boy, heat the iron."

"But, sir," Gerard interjected, "it was no dog, but a bear."

"A bear! Young man," the senior chided severely, "consider your words. It is ill jesting with the man of art who brings his grey hairs and long study to heal you. A bear, quotha! Had you dissected as many bears as I, or even a tenth thereof, and drawn their teeth to keep your hand in, you would know that no bear's jaw ever made this trifling wound. I tell you 'twas a dog, and since you force my hand, I even deny it was a dog of magnitude, but merely one of these furious curs so rife, running devious paths, biting manly legs and laying their wearers low. Were it not for me and my learned brethren, who still stay the mischief with knife and cautery, you would be lost."

"Alas, sir!" Gerard protested. "When did I say 'bear's jaw'? I said, 'A bear'; it was his paw, now."

"And why didst not tell me that at once?"

"Because you kept telling me instead."

"Never conceal anything from your leech, young man," the senior continued, a good talker though one of the worst listeners in Europe. "Well, it is an ill business. All the horny excrescences of animals—claws of tigers, panthers, badgers, cats, bears, and the like—and the horn of deer, and the nails of humans, especially children, are imbued with direst poison. You would have been better bitten by a cur than gored by a bull or stag, or scratched by a bear. Nevertheless, you shall receive a good biting cataplasm for your leg. Meanwhile, keep the body cool: put out your tongue! Good! Fever. Let me feel your pulse: good! Fever. I ordain flebotomy, and on the instant."

"Flebotomy! That is bloodletting: humph! Well, no matter, if it is sure to cure me, for I will not lie idle here." The doctor assured him that flebotomy was infallible, especially in this case.

"Hans, fetch the necessary things, and I will entertain the patient with reasons in the meantime."

The man of art then explained to Gerard that in disease, the blood becomes hot, distempered, and poisonous. By removing a portion of this unhealthy fluid, Nature is compelled to create a purer one to fill the void. Thus, bleeding served as both a cooler and a purifier, a specific remedy for all diseases, for all diseases were febrile, regardless of what empirics claimed.

"But think not," he said warmly, "that bleeding alone suffices. Any paltry barber can open a vein (though not all can close it again). The art lies in knowing which vein to empty for which disease. The other day, they brought me one tormented with earache. I let him bleed from the right thigh, and away flew his pain. By the way, he has since died. Another came with toothache. I bled him behind the ear, and relieved him instantly. He too has since passed away, as fate would have it. I bled our bailiff between the thumb and forefinger for rheumatism. Soon he returned with a headache and drumming in his ears, holding out his hand over the basin. I smiled at his folly, bled him in the left ankle against his will, and made his head as light as a nut."

Diverging from the immediate theme with the enthusiasm of a zealot, the reverend teacher proceeded:

"Know, young man, that two schools of art contend throughout Europe at this moment. The Arabian school, whose ancient oracles are Avicenna, Rhazes, and Albucazis; and its revivers are Chauliac and Lanfranc. And the Greek school, whose modern champions are Bessarion, Platinus, and Marsilius Ficinus, but whose pristine doctors were medicine's very oracles: Phoebus, Chiron, Aesculapius, and his sons Podalinus and Machaon, Pythagoras, Democritus, Praxagoras, who invented the arteries, and Dioctes, 'qui primus urinae animum dedit.' All these taught orally. Then came Hippocrates, the eighteenth from Aesculapius, and of him we have manuscripts. To him we owe 'the vital principle.' He also invented the bandage and tapped for water on the chest; and above all, he dissected—yet only quadrupeds, for the brutal prejudices of the pagan vulgar withheld the human body from the knife of science. Him followed Aristotle, who gave us the aorta, the largest blood-vessel in the human body."

"Surely, sir," Gerard objected humbly, "the Almighty gave us all that is in our bodies, and not Aristotle, nor any Grecian man."

"Child! Of course He gave us the thing; but Aristotle gave us the name of the thing. But young men will still talk. The next great light was Galen; he studied at Alexandria, then the home of science. He, justly malcontent with quadrupeds, dissected apes, as coming nearer to man, and bled like a Trojan. Then came Theophilus, who gave us the nerves, the lacteal vessels, and the pia mater."

This worried Gerard. "I cannot lie still and hear it said that mortal man bestowed the parts which Adam our father took from Him, who made him of the clay, and us his sons."

"Was ever such perversity?" the doctor asked, his color rising. "Who is the real donor of a thing to man? He who plants it secretly in the dark recesses of man's body, or the learned wight who reveals it to his intelligence, enriching his mind with the knowledge of it? Comprehension is your only true possession. Are you answered?"

"I am put to silence, sir."

"And that is better still; for garrulous patients are ill to cure, especially in fever. I say, then, that Eristratus gave us the cerebral nerves and the milk vessels; nay, more, he was the inventor of lithotomy, whatever you may say. Then came another whom I forget; you do somewhat perturb me with your petty exceptions. Then came Ammonius, the author of lithotrity, and here comes Hans with the basin—to stay your volubility. Blow thy chafer, boy, and hand me the basin; 'tis well. Arabs, quotha! What are they but a sect of yesterday who, about the year 1000, fell in with the writings of those very Greeks and read them awry, having no concurrent light of their own? For their demigod, and camel-driver, Mahound, impostor in science as in religion, had strictly forbidden them anatomy, even of lower animals, the which he who severeth from medicine, 'tollit solem e mundo,' as Tully quoth. Nay, wonder not at my fervour, good youth; where the general weal stands in jeopardy, a little warmth is civic, humane, and honourable. Now there is settled of late in this town a pestilent Arabist, a mere empiric, who, despising anatomy and scarce knowing Greek from Hebrew, hath yet spirited away half my patients; and I tremble for the rest. Put forth thine ankle; and thou, Hans, breathe on the chafer."

Just as matters reached this posture, Denys entered with the lemons, standing surprised. "What sport is toward?" he asked, raising his brows.

Gerard colored slightly and told him the learned doctor was going to flebotomize and cauterize him; that was all.

"Ay! Indeed; and yon imp, what blows he hot coals for?"

"What should it be for," the doctor said to Gerard, "but to cauterize the vein when opened and the poisonous blood let free? 'Tis the only safe way. Avicenna indeed recommends a ligature of the vein; but how 'tis to be done he saith not, nor knew he himself I wot, nor any of the spawn of Ishmael. For me, I have no faith in such tricky expedients; and take this with you for a safe principle: 'Whatever an Arab or Arabist says is right, must be wrong.'"

"Oh, I see now what 'tis for," said Denys. "And art thou so simple as to let him put hot iron to thy living flesh? Didst ever keep thy little finger but ten moments in a candle? And this will be as many minutes. Art not content to burn in purgatory after thy death? Must thou needs buy a foretaste on't here?"

"I never thought of that," said Gerard gravely. "The good doctor spake not of burning, but of cautery; to be sure 'tis all one, but cautery sounds not so fearful as burning."

"Imbecile! That is their art; to confound a plain man with dark words till his hissing flesh lets him know their meaning. Now listen to what I have seen. When a soldier bleeds from a wound in battle, these leeches say, 'Fever. Blood him!' and so they burn the wick at the other end too. They bleed the bled. Now at fever's heels comes desperate weakness; then the man needs all his blood to live; but these prickers and burners, having no forethought, recking nought of what is sure to come in a few hours, and seeing like brute beasts only what is under their noses, having meantime robbed him of the very blood his hurt had spared him to battle that weakness withal; and so he dies exhausted. Hundreds have I seen so scratched and pricked out of the world, Gerard, and tall fellows too; but lo! if they have the luck to be wounded where no doctor can be had, then they live; this too have I seen. Had I ever outlived that field in Brabant but for my most lucky mischance, lack of chirurgery? The frost chocked all my bleeding wounds, and so I lived. A chirurgeon had pricked yet one more hole in this my body with his lance, and drained my last drop out, and my spirit with it. Seeing them thus distraught in bleeding of the bleeding soldier, I place no trust in them; for what slays a veteran may well lay a milk-and-water bourgeois low."

"This sounds like common sense," sighed Gerard languidly, "but no need to raise your voice so; I was not born deaf, and just now I hear acutely."

"Common sense! Very common sense indeed," shouted the bad listener. "Why, this is a soldier; a brute whose business is to kill men, not cure them." He added in very tolerable French, "Woe be to you, unlearned man, if you come between a physician and his patient; and woe be to you, misguided youth, if you listen to that man of blood."

"Much obliged," said Denys, with mock politeness. "But I am a true man, and would rob no man of his name. I do somewhat in the way of blood, but not worth mention in this presence. For one I slay, you slay a score; and for one spoonful of blood I draw, you spill a tubful. The world is still gulled by shows. We soldiers vapour with long swords, and even in war be-get two foes for every one we kill; but you smooth gownsmen, with soft phrases and bare bodkins, 'tis you that thin mankind."

"A sick chamber is no place for jesting," cried the physician.

"No, doctor, nor for bawling," said the patient peevishly.

"Come, young man," said the senior kindly, "be reasonable. *Cuilibet in sua arte credendum est*. My whole life has been given to this art. I studied at Montpellier; the first school in France, and by consequence in Europe. There learned I Dririmancy, Scatomancy, Pathology, Therapeus
