Gerard felt a fervor for this promised land nearly matching Denys's own. The soldier was a relentless evangelist for Burgundy, singing its praises at every turn. Whenever a minor inconvenience arose, he would remind Gerard that "they did things better in Burgundy," specifically playing upon the Hollander's deepest weakness: the promise of clean bedclothes. "I ask no more," Gerard would sigh, "than to think I have not slept in a naked bed since leaving home! When I gaze upon their linen, I wish my eyes and nose were sealed shut."

Denys carried his patriotism to absurd lengths. He had once walked twenty leagues in shoes that had long since blown apart, refusing to purchase new ones from a German peasant who, in his view, threw every conceivable obstacle—incivility, poor food, and physical discomfort—in a traveler's path.

As the sun began to dip below the horizon, they found themselves equidistant between a small town and a monastery, though the latter lay off the main road. Denys favored the inn; Gerard preferred the convent. Denys yielded, but only on the condition that once they crossed into Burgundy, they would henceforth stay only at inns. Gerard agreed all the more readily, for his chart of safe havens ended precisely here. They turned off the road.

Now, Gerard asked with genuine surprise where this sudden aversion to places that had fed and lodged them freely so often had come from. The soldier hesitated, hemming and hawing, until finally, his grievances burst forth. It was not a sudden dislike, he confessed, but an ancient and abiding horror he had suppressed with infinite difficulty and mere politeness.

"I saw they had put powder in your drink," he said, "so I forbore them. However, since this is the last, why not ease my mind? Know then I have been like a fish out of water in all those great dungeons. You straightway leave with some old friar; so you see not my purgatory."

"Forgive me! I have been selfish."

"Ay, ay, I forgive thee, little one; 'tis not thy fault: thou art not the first fool that has been priest-rid and monk-hit. But I will not forgive them my misery." Then, speaking of a century before Henry VIII.'s commissioners, he delivered his indictment. These gloomy piles were all built alike. Inns differed, but here all was monotony. A great gate, a little gate, so many steps, and then a gloomy cloister. There was the dortoir, the great cold refectory where one must sit silent, or at least inaudible, if one wished to speak one's mind.

"And then," he continued, "nobody is a man here, but all are slaves, and of what? Of a peevish, tinkling bell that never sleeps. An 'twere a trumpet now, sounding alarums, 'twouldn't freeze a man's heart so. *Tinkle, tinkle, tinkle*, and you must sit to meat with perhaps no stomach for food. Ere your meat settles in your stomach, *tinkle, tinkle!* and ye must go to church with perhaps no stomach for devotion: I am not a hog at prayers, for one. *Tinkle, tinkle*, and now you must go to bed with your eyes open. Well, by then you have contrived to shut them, some uneasy imp of darkness has got to the bell-rope, and *tinkle, tinkle!* it behoves you say a prayer in the dark, whether you know one or not. If they heard the sort of prayers I mutter when they break my rest with their tinkle! Well, you drop off again and get about an eyeful of sleep: lo, it is *tinkle, tinkle* for matins."

"And the only clapper you love is a woman's," put in Gerard, half-contemptuously.

"Because there is some music in that even when it scolds," was the stout reply. "And then to be always checked. If I do but put my finger in the salt-cellar, straightway I hear, 'Have you no knife that you finger the salt?' And if I but wipe my knife on the cloth to save time, then 'tis, 'Wipe thy knife dirty on the bread, and clean upon the cloth!' Oh, small of soul! These little peevish pedantries fall chill upon good fellowship like wee icicles melting down from strawen eaves."

"I hold cleanliness no pedantry," said Gerard. "Thou shouldst learn better manners once for all."

"Nay; 'tis they who lack manners. They stop a fellow's mouth at every word."

"At every other word, you mean; every obscene or blasphemous one."

"Exaggerator, go to! Why, at the very last of these dungeons, I found the poor travelers sitting all chilled and mute round one friar, like rogues awaiting their turn to be hanged; so to cheer them up, I did but cry out, 'Courage, tout le monde, le dia--'"

"Connu! What befell?"

"Marry, this. 'Blaspheme not!' quoth the executioner. 'Plait-il,' say I. Doesn't he wheel and wryte on me in a sort of Alsatian French, turning all the P's into B's? I had much ado not to laugh in his face."

"Being thyself unable to speak ten words of his language without a fault."

"Well, all the world ought to speak French. What avail so many jargons except to put a frontier atwixt men's hearts?"

"But what said he?"

"What signifies it what a fool says?"

"Oh, not all the words of a fool are folly, or I should not listen to you."

"Well, then, he said, 'Such as begin by making free with the devil's name, aye end by doing it with all the names in heaven.' 'Father,' said I, 'I am a soldier, and this is but my consigne or watchword.' 'Oh, then, it is just a custom?' said he. I, not divining the old fox, and thinking to clear myself, said, 'Ay, it was.' 'Then that is ten times worse,' said he. ''Twill bring him about your ears one of these days. He still comes where he hears his name often called.' Observe! No gratitude for the tidings which neither his missals nor his breviary had ever let him know. Then he was so good as to tell me soldiers do commonly commit the crimes for which all other men are broken on the wheel; a savoir murder, rape, and pillage."

"And is't not true?"

"True or not, it was ill manners," replied Denys guardedly. "And so says this courteous host of mine, 'Being the foes of mankind, why make enemies of good spirits into the bargain, by still shouting the names of evil ones?' and a lot more stuff."

"Well, but, Denys, whether you hearken his rede or slight it, wherefore blame a man for raising his voice to save your soul?"

"How can his voice save my soul, when he keeps turning of his P's into B's."

Gerard was staggered. Ere he could recover from this thunderbolt of Gallicism, Denys went triumphant off at a tangent, stigmatizing all monks as hypocrites. "Do but look at them, how they creep about and cannot eye you like honest men."

"Nay," said Gerard eagerly, "that modest downcast gaze is part of their discipline, 'tis custodia oculorum."

"Cussed toads eating hoc hac horum? No such thing; just so looks a cutpurse. Can't meet a true man's eye. Doff cowl, monk; and behold, a thief; don cowl thief, and lo, a monk. Tell me not they will ever be able to look God Almighty in the face, when they can't even look a true man in the face down here. Ah, here it is, black as ink! Into the well we go, comrade. Misericorde, there goes the tinkle already. 'Tis the best of tinkles though; 'tis for dinner: stay, listen! I thought so: the wolf in my stomach cried 'Amen!'" This last statement he confirmed with two oaths, and marched like a victorious gamecock into the convent, thinking by Gerard's silence he had convinced him, and not dreaming how profoundly he had disgusted him.
