The landlord appeared in the passage, bowing low as he removed his cap. "Welcome, messieurs," he said.

"Come, we are not in Germany," Gerard replied, his tone sharp.

Inside the public room, they encountered the mistress, a robust woman of forty. She curtsied warmly and smiled. "Give yourself the trouble of sitting ye down, fair sir," she addressed Gerard, dusting two chairs with her apron despite their apparent cleanliness.

"Thank you, dame," Gerard murmured, inwardly sighing. *This is a polite nation,* he thought. *The trouble of sitting down? I shall endure it with singular patience. And presently, the labour of eating, the toil of digestion, and finally, by Hercules' aid, the strain of going to bed, and the struggle of sinking fast asleep.*

"Why, Denys, what are you doing? Ordering supper for only two?"

"Why not?"

"What, can we sup without waiting for forty more? Burgundy forever!"

"Aha! Courage, camarade. Le dia—"

"C'est convenu."

The Salic Law seemed absent from this French inn. Here, wimples and kirtles reigned supreme; doublets and hose were few and feeble. The landlord wandered aimlessly, eternally removing his cap for want of thought, while the women, passing him in turn, shoved him aside quietly without a glance, as one removes a live twig while bustling through a wood.

A maid brought in supper, followed by the mistress, empty-handed.

"Fall to, my masters," she said cheerily. "Y'have but one enemy here; and he lies under your knife." (I shrewdly suspect this of formula.)

They ate. The mistress drew her chair closer, providing company as well as meat, gossiping genially like old acquaintances. Once this formality passed, she departed, sending in her daughter, a beautiful young woman of about twenty. She was not quite as broad and genial as the elder, but gentle and cheerful, showing womanly tenderness upon learning the distance the poor boy had traveled and the journey he must undertake. She stayed nearly half an hour, and when she left, Gerard remarked, "This an inn? Why, it is like home."

"Qui fit Francois il fit courtois," said Denys, bursting with gratified pride.

"Courteous? Nay, Christian; to welcome us like home guests and old friends, us vagrants, here to-day and gone to-morrow. But indeed, who better merits pity and kindness than the worn traveller far from his folk? Hola! Here's another."

The newcomer was the chambermaid, a woman of about twenty-five, with a cocked nose, a large laughing mouth, and a sparkling black eye, her bare arm stout but not shapely.

The moment she entered, one traveler passed a somewhat free jest on her; the next, the whole company was roaring at his expense, so swiftly had her practiced tongue done his business. Even as, in a passage of arms between a novice and a master of fence, foils clash—the novice pinked. On this another, and then another, must break a lance with her; but Marion stuck her great arms upon her haunches and held the whole room in play. This country girl possessed in perfection that rude and ready humor which looks mean and vulgar on paper but carries all before it spoken: not wit's rapier, its bludgeon. Nature had done much for her in this way, and daily practice in an inn the rest.

Yet shall she not be photographed by me, but feebly indicated: for it was just four hundred years ago, the raillery was coarse, she returned every stroke in kind, and though a virtuous woman, said things without winking which no decent man of our day would say even among men.

Gerard sat gaping with astonishment. This was to him almost a new variety of "that interesting species," homo. He whispered, "Denys, now I see why you Frenchmen say 'a woman's tongue is her sword,'" just then she levelled another assailant; and the chivalrous Denys, to console and support "the weaker vessel," the iron kettle among the clay pots, administered his consigne, "Courage, ma mie, le—" etc.

She turned on him directly. "How can he be dead as long as there is an archer left alive?" (General laughter at her ally's expense.)

"It is 'washing day,' my masters," she said with sudden gravity.

"Apres? We travellers cannot strip and go bare while you wash our clothes," objected a peevish old fellow by the fireside, who had kept mumchance during the raillery but crept out into the sunshine of commonplaces.

"I aimed not your way, ancient man," replied Marion superciliously. "But since you ask me" (here she scanned him slowly from head to foot), "I trow you might take a turn in the tub, clothes and all, and no harm done" (laughter). "But what I spoke for, I thought this young sire might like his beard starched."

Poor Gerard's turn had come; his chin crop was thin and silky.

The loudest of all the laughers this time was the traitor Denys, whose beard was of a good length and singularly stiff and bristly; so that Shakespeare, though he never saw him, hit him in the bull's eye.

"Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the pard."
--As You Like It.

Gerard bore the Amazonian satire mighty calmly. He had little personal vanity. "Nay, 'chambriere,'" said he with a smile, "mine is all unworthy your pains; take you this fair growth in hand!" and he pointed to Denys's vegetable.

"Oh, time for that, when I starch the besoms."

Whilst they were all shouting over this palpable hit, the mistress returned, and in no more time than it took her to cross the threshold, did our Amazon turn to a seeming Madonna meek and mild. Mistresses are wonderful subjugators. Their like I think breathes not on the globe. Housemaids, decide! It was a waste of histrionic ability though; for the landlady had heard, and did not at heart disapprove, the peals of laughter.

"Ah, Marion, lass," she said good-humouredly, "if you laid me an egg every time you cackle, 'L'es Trois Poissons' would never lack an omelet."

"Now, dame," said Gerard, "what is to pay?"

"What for?"

"Our supper."

"Where is the hurry? Cannot you be content to pay when you go? Lose the guest, find the money, is the rule of 'The Three Fish.'"

"But, dame, outside 'The Three Fish' it is thus written—'Ici-on ne loge—'"

"Bah! Let that flea stick on the wall! Look hither," and she pointed to the smoky ceiling, which was covered with hieroglyphics. These were accounts, vulgo scores; intelligible to this dame and her daughter, who wrote them at need by simply mounting a low stool and scratching with a knife so as to show lines of ceiling through the deposit of smoke. The dame explained that the writing on the wall was put there to frighten moneyless folk from the inn altogether, or to be acted on at odd times when a non-paying face should come in and insist on being served. "We can't refuse them plump, you know. The law forbids us."

"And how know you mine is not such a face?"

"Out fie! It is the best face that has entered 'The Three Fish' this autumn."

"And mine, dame?" said Denys; "dost see no knavery here?"

She eyed him calmly. "Not such a good one as the lad's; nor ever will be. But it is the face of a true man. For all that," added she drily, "an I were ten years younger, I'd as lieve not meet that face on a dark night too far from home."

Gerard stared. Denys laughed. "Why, dame, I would but sip the night dew off the flower; and you needn't take ten years off, nor ten days, to be worth risking a scratched face for."

"There, our mistress," said Marion, who had just come in, "said I not t'other day you could make a fool of them still, an if you were properly minded?"

"I dare say ye did; it sounds like some daft wench's speech."

"Dame," said Gerard, "this is wonderful."

"What? Oh! No, no, that is no wonder at all. Why, I have been here all my life; and reading faces is the first thing a girl picks up in an inn."

Marion. "And frying eggs the second; no, telling lies; frying eggs is the third, though."

The Mistress. "And holding her tongue the last, and modesty the day after never at all."

Marion. "Alack! Talk of my tongue. But I say no more. She under whose wing I live now deals the blow. I'm sped—'tis but a chambermaid gone. Catch what's left on't!" and she staggered and sank backwards onto the handsomest fellow in the room, which happened to be Gerard.

"Tic! tic!" cried he peevishly; "there, don't be stupid! That is too heavy a jest for me. See you not I am talking to the mistress?"

Marion resumed her elasticity with a grimace, made two little bounds into the middle of the floor, and there turned a pirouette. "There, mistress," said she, "I give in; 'tis you that reigns supreme with the men, leastways with male children."

"Young man," said the mistress, "this girl is not so stupid as her deportment; in reading of faces, and frying of omelets, there we are great. 'Twould be hard if we failed at these arts, since they are about all we do know."

"You do not quite take me, dame," said Gerard. "That honesty in a face should shine forth to your experienced eye, that seems reasonable: but how by looking on Denys here could you learn his one little foible, his insanity, his miserable mulierosity?" Poor Gerard got angrier the more he thought of it.

"His mule--his what?" (crossing herself with superstitious awe at the polysyllable).

"Nay, 'tis but the word I was fain to invent for him."

"Invent? What, can a child like you make other words than grow in Burgundy by nature? Take heed what ye do! Why, we are overrun with them already, especially bad ones. Lord, these be times. I look to hear of a new thistle invented next."

"Well then, dame, mulierose—that means wrapped up, body and soul, in women. So prithee tell me; how did you ever detect the noodle's mulierosity?"

"Alas! good youth, you make a mountain of a molehill. We that are women be notice-takers; and out of the tail of our eye see more than most men can, glaring through a prospect glass. Whiles I move to and fro doing this and that, my glance is still on my guests, and I did notice that this soldier's eyes were never off the womenfolk: my daughter, or Marion, or even an old woman like me, all was gold to him: and there a sat glowering; oh, you foolish, foolish man! Now you still turned to the speaker, her or him, and that is common sense."

Denys burst into a hoarse laugh. "You never were more out. Why, this silky, smooth-faced companion is a very Turk—all but his beard. He is what d'ye call 'em oser than ere an archer in the Duke's body-guard. He is more wrapped up in one single Dutch lass called Margaret, than I am in the whole bundle of ye, brown and fair."

"Man alive, that is just the contrary," said the hostess. "Yourn is the bane, and hisn the cure. Cling you still to Margaret, my dear. I hope she is an honest girl."

"Dame, she is an angel."

"Ay, ay, they are all that till better acquainted. I'd as lieve have her no more than honest, and then she will serve to keep you out of worse company. As for you, soldier, there is trouble in store for you. Your eyes were never made for the good of your soul."

"Nor of his pouch either," said Marion, striking in, "and his lips, they will sip the dew, as he calls it, off many a bramble bush."

"Overmuch clack! Marion overmuch clack."

"Ods bodikins, mistress; ye didn't hire me to be one o' your three fishes, did ye?" and Marion sulked thirty seconds.

"Is that the way to speak to our mistress?" remonstrated the landlord, who had slipped in.

"Hold your whisht," said his wife sharply; "it is not your business to check the girl; she is a good servant to you."

"What, is the cock never to crow, and the hens at it all day?"

"You can crow as loud as you like, my man out o' doors. But the hen means to rule the roost."

"I know a byword to that tune," said Gerard.

"Do ye, now? Out wi't then."

"Femme veut en toute saison,
Estre dame en sa mason."

"I never heard it afore; but 'tis as sooth as gospel. Ay, they that set these bywords a rolling had eyes and tongues, and tongues and eyes. Before all the world give me an old saw."

"And me a young husband," said Marion. "Now there was a chance for you all, and nobody spoke. Oh! It is too late now, I've changed my mind."

"All the better for some poor fellow," suggested Denys.

And now the arrival of the young mistress, or, as she was called, the little mistress, was the signal for
