The condemned were ordered to stand pinioned in the marketplace for two hours, a punishment designed to allow any witnesses to identify them for future trials. They endured the full duration, standing like statues in the square, for they were creatures of the night—vampires who preyed upon weary travelers in the dark. Yet, just as the officers prepared to release them, a scream tore through the crowd. A woman pointed a trembling finger at one of the men, her eyes wide with horror, before collapsing into the arms of those who rushed to support her.

When she regained consciousness, the crowd erupted in speculation. "It was him!" someone cried. "No, it was the other!" another insisted. "Nay, it was the hangdog with the hair!" a third shouted. But their conjectures were cut short. The woman, her mind clearing in a flash of maternal instinct, lunged at the man with the golden hair hanging from his neck like a lioness. "My child! Give me back my child!" she shrieked, tearing the hair from his neck and burying her face in it. In that moment of confusion, she realized her daughter was dead. She sank to the ground, sobbing over the lock of hair, and the mob surged forward with a savage roar. The assassin's life ended instantly; in those days, every man carried death at his girdle.

Denys drew his sword immediately, shouting, "A moi, camarades!" and held the frenzied crowd at bay. "Who lays a finger on him dies," he commanded. Supported by archers, he kept the mob at a distance while appealing to their reason. "What sort of vengeance is this?" he asked, his voice cutting through the noise. "Would you rob the wheel and give the vermin an easy death?" The steel of the archers kept the mob passive, though they growled with flashing eyes. Seeing the danger, the municipal officers gathered with the guards and prudently escorted the accused back to the gaol. The mob hooted them and the prisoners alike, but Denys ensured the latter were safely lodged before heading to "The White Hart" to find Gerard.

On his way, Denys paused at a first-floor window where two girls were working. He saluted them, and they smiled, their manners easy and their complexions high. He invited them to dine at the inn; they initially refused, then consented. In this charming society, Denys momentarily forgot his concern for Gerard, who was currently being carted off to prison.

Gerard, meanwhile, had recovered his presence of mind and demanded to know by whose authority he was arrested. "By the vice-baillie's," the constable replied. "The vice-baillie?" Gerard protested, feigning innocence. "Alas! what have I, a stranger, done to offend a vice-baillie? This charge of sorcery must be a blind. I am a poor true lad far from my home." The officer's disgust was evident. "Show him the capias, Jacques," he ordered.

Jacques held the writ a yard and a half from Gerard's face, while the large constable pinned him down, fearing the prisoner might snatch the document, which they regarded with superstitious dread. Gerard, however, had no such thoughts. He craned his neck, read the writ, and to his infinite surprise discovered that the vice-bailiff who had signed it was the friendly alderman. Taking courage, he assured his captors there was an error and demanded to be taken before the alderman.

"What say you to that, Jacques?" the officer asked.
"Impossible. We have no orders to take him before his worship," Jacques replied.
"Nay, but good kind fellows, what harm can it be? I will give you each an ecu," Gerard pleaded.
"Jacques, what say you to that?"
"Humph! I say we have no orders *not* to take him to his worship," Jacques countered.
"Then say we take him to prison round by his worship."
It was agreed. They accepted the money and bade Gerard observe they were doing him a favor. Gerard saw they wanted gratitude as well as silver, but feigning was not his forte.

He entered the alderman's presence with his heart in his mouth, begging to know what offense he had committed since leaving the room with Manon and Denys. "Nought that I know of," the alderman replied. Upon seeing the writ, he explained he had signed it at daybreak, forgetting the specific offense until Gerard reminded him. "All is well. You are he I committed for sorcery. Stay! ere you go to gaol, you shall hear what your accuser says: run and fetch him."

The accuser could not be found immediately. The impatient alderman then informed Gerard that the main charge was setting a dead body ablaze with diabolical fire that flamed but did not consume. "And if 'tis true, young man, I'm sorry for thee, for thou wilt assuredly burn with fire of good pine logs in the market-place of Neufchasteau."

"Oh, sir, for pity's sake let me have speech with his reverence the cure," Gerard pleaded.
The alderman advised against it, noting that the Church was harder upon sorcerers than the corporation. "Officer, go with him to the cure; but see he 'scape you not," the alderman commanded.

They found the cure repairing a wheelbarrow. Gerard told him his tale, appealing piteously to his mercy. "Just for using a little phosphorus in self-defence against cut-throats they are going to hang."

Lucky for Gerard, he had already told his full story to the cure, who now held the situation firmly. The corporation held it by the ferule; the cure held it by the stick. The cure looked grave, summoning Gerard to a private room and ordering the officer to guard the door. The big constable stood outside, quaking, expecting to see the room fly away and leave a stench of brimstone. Instantly alone, the cure unlocked his countenance and became curious.

"Show me the trick on't," he said.
"I cannot, sir, unless the room be darkened."
The cure quickly closed out the light with a wooden shutter. "Now, then."
"But on what shall I put it?" Gerard asked. "Here is no dead face. 'Twas that made it look so dire."
The cure groped about the room and found an image of his patron saint. "Good; here is an image."
"Heaven forbid! That were profanation," Gerard objected.
"Pshaw! 'twill rub off, will't not?"
"Ay, but it goes against me to take such liberty with a saint."
"Fiddlestick!" said the divine.
"To be sure, by putting it on his holiness will show your reverence it is no Satanic art."
"Mayhap 'twas for that I did propose it," the cure said subtly.

Encouraged, Gerard fired the eyes and nostrils of the image, making the cure jump. He then lighted up the hair in patches, setting the whole face shining like a glow-worm's. "By'r Lady," shouted the cure, " 'tis strange, and small my wonder that they took you for a magician, seeing a dead face thus fired. Now come thy ways with me!"

He donned his grey gown and great hat, and in a few minutes they stood before the alderman. By his side stood the accuser, a singular figure in red hose, red shoes, a black gown with blue bands, and a cocked hat. After saluting the alderman, the cure turned to the accuser, Mangis, with good humor. "So, Mangis, at thy work again, babbling away honest men's lives! Come, your worship, this is the old tale! two of a trade can ne'er agree. Here is Mangis, who professes sorcery, and would sell himself to Satan to-night, but that Satan is not so weak as to buy what he can have gratis. This Mangis, who would be a sorcerer, but is only a quacksalver, accuses of magic a true lad, who did but use in self-defence a secret of chemistry well-known to me and all churchmen."

"But he is no churchman, to dabble in such mysteries," the alderman objected.
"He is more churchman than layman, being convent bred, and in the lesser orders," the ready cure retorted. "Therefore, sorcerer, withdraw thy plaint without more words!"
"That I will not, your reverence," Mangis replied stoutly. "A sorcerer I am, but a white one, not a black one. I make no pact with Satan... I ne'er profane the sacraments... nor turn myself into a cat and go sucking infants' blood... I but tell the peasants when their cattle and their hens are possessed... above all, it is my art and my trade to detect the black magicians..."

"Ay, Mangis. And what is the upshot of that famous fire thy tongue did kindle?" the cure asked.
"Why, their ashes were cast to the wind."
"Ay. But the true end of thy comedy is this. The parliament of Dijon hath since sifted the matter, and found they were no sorcerers, but good and peaceful citizens... Now 'tis our custom in this land, when we have slain the innocent by hearkening false knaves like thee, not to blame our credulous ears, but the false tongue that gulled them. Therefore bethink thee that, at a word from me to my lord bishop, thou wilt smell burning pine nearer than e'er knave smelt it and lived..."

The cure pointed at Mangis with his staff. "That is true i'fegs," said the alderman, "for red and black be the foul fiendys colours."
By this time, the white sorcerer's cheek was as colourless as his dress was fiery. He stammered, "I respect Holy Church and her will; he shall fire the churchyard, and all in it, for me: I do withdraw the plaint."
"Then withdraw thyself," said the vice-bailiff.

The moment Mangis was gone, the cure took a conversational tone, telling the alderman that the accused had received the chemical substance from Holy Church and had restored it by giving it all to him. "Then 'tis in good hands," the alderman replied. "Young man, you are free. Let me have your reverence's prayers."
"Doubt it not! Humph! Vice-bailiff, the town owes me four silver franks, this three months and more."
"They shall be paid, cure, ay, ere the week be out."

On this good understanding, Church and State parted. As soon as he was in the street, Gerard caught the priest's hand and kissed it. "Oh, sir! Oh, your reverence. You have saved me from the fiery stake. What can I say, what do? what?"
"Nought, foolish lad. Bounty rewards itself. Natheless--Humph?--I wish I had done't without leasing. It ill becomes my function to utter falsehoods."
"Falsehood, sir?" Gerard was mystified.
"Didst not hear me say thou hadst given me that same phosphorus? 'Twill cost me a fortnight's penance, that light word." The cure sighed, his eye twinkling cunningly.
"Nay, nay," cried Gerard eagerly. "Now Heaven forbid! That was no falsehood, father: well you knew the phosphorus was yours, is yours." And he thrust the bottle into the cure's hand. "But alas, 'tis too poor a gift: will you not take from my purse somewhat for Holy Church?" and he held out his purse with glistening eyes.
"Nay," said the other brusquely, putting his hands quickly behind him; "not a doit. Fie! fie! art pauper et exul. Come thou rather each day at noon and take thy diet with me; for my heart warms to thee;" and he went off very abruptly.

They itched. But they itched in vain. Where there's a heart there's a Rubicon.

Gerard went hastily to the inn to relieve Denys of the anxiety so long and mysterious an absence must have caused him. He found him seated at his ease, playing dice with two young ladies whose manners were unreserved and complexion high. Gerard was hurt. "N'oubliez point la Jeanneton!" he said, coloring up.
"What of her?" Denys asked, gaily rattling the dice.
"She said, 'Le peu que sont les femmes.'"
"Oh, did she? And what say you to that, mesdemoiselles?"
"We say that none run women down, but such as are too old, or too ill-favoured, or too witless to please them."
"Witless, quotha? Wise men have not folly enough to please them, nor madness enough to desire to please them," said Gerard loftily. "But 'tis to my comrade I speak, not to you, you brazen toads, that make so free with a man at first sight."
"Preach away, comrade. Fling a byword or two at our heads. Know, girls, that he is a very Solomon for bywords. Methinks he was brought up by hand on 'em."
"Be thy friendship a byword!" retorted Gerard. "The friendship that melts to nought at sight of a farthingale."
"Malheureux!" cried Denys, "I speak but pellets, and thou answerest daggers."
"Would I could," was the reply. "Adieu."
"What a little savage!" said one of the girls.
Gerard opened the door and put in his head. "I have thought of a byword," he said spitefully.
"Qui hante femmes et dez / Il mourra en pauvretez."
"There." And having delivered this thunderbolt of antique wisdom, he slammed the door viciously ere any of them could retort.

Exhausted by his anxieties, Gerard went to the bar for a morsel of bread and a cup of wine. The landlord would sell
