Catherine was a woman of domestic routine, rarely venturing beyond the walls of her home, and when she did, chaos invariably followed. Acutely aware of this fragility, she had postponed her journey to Sevenbergen for days, waiting for a lull in household affairs. Finally, on an afternoon when Peter Buyskens' mule was conveniently out of the way, the opportunity arose. Yet, before she could depart, Eli summoned the family.

"Eli asked her publicly if she intended to visit Margaret Brandt."

"Ay, my man," she admitted.

"Then I forbid it," Eli declared.

"Oh, do you?" she challenged, her face flushing.

"I do," he replied sternly.

"There is nothing more to be said," she conceded, though her defiance simmered beneath the surface. Alone later with her daughter, Catherine berated herself for her lack of discretion. "I acted like a cat cornered by a robin," she lamented. "Next time, let us act immediately and say nothing until the deed is done. If questioned, we can claim ignorance. For two pins, I would have gone there openly."

Such wild defiance staggered Kate. "Nay, mother, with patience father will come round."

"And so will Michaelmas," Catherine retorted. "But when? I was determined you see the girl. Say what they will, one judges a beast only by the eye. Were I to have fifty sons, I would never thwart one's fancy until I had seen the woman myself. Life is a school, and the lesson never ends; we put down one fault and pick up another until we stumble into our graves."

"Mother," Kate whispered timidly.

"What is coming now? No good news by your look. What frightens the poor wretch?"

"An avowal she must make," Kate faltered.

"A noble word," Catherine said proudly. "Gerard taught you that. Speak."

"Well then, truthfully, I have seen her."

"And?"

"And spoken with her as well."

"And never told me? After this, miracles are dust."

"Mother, you were so angry against her. I waited until I could speak without worsening your temper."

"Ay," Catherine said, half sadly, half bitterly. "Like mother, like daughter; cowardice is our bane. I buffet the others, or how would the house fare? Did you, Kate, ever receive a harsh word from your poor mother that you... Nay, I will not have you cry. Rise, brave heart, and tell me all. Better late than never. First and foremost, when and how did you go to Sevenbergen with your crutches, and I not know?"

"I never was there in my life," Kate replied. "And, mammy dear, to say that I never wished to see her that I will not, but I never went nor sought to see her."

"There now," Catherine disputed. "Did I not say it was unlike my girl to seek her secretly? Come, I am all agog."

"Thus it was. It came to my ears, pray do not ask how, that Gerard was a prisoner in the Stadthouse tower."

"Ah," Catherine sighed, a sound almost of a moan. "Blacker than I thought."

"Giles and I went out at night to bid him be of good cheer. At the foot of the tower stood a brave lass, quite strange to me, on the same errand."

"Lookee there now, Kate."

"At first we frightened one another, the place being filled with his bad name and our heads full of devils, and we paled in the moonlight. But the next moment, she said, 'You are Margaret.' And I said, 'And you are Kate.' Think on't!"

"Did one ever?" Catherine marveled. "Gerard must have been talking backwards and forwards of you to her, and her to you."

In return, Kate bestowed upon Catherine one of nature's prettiest gifts—the composite kiss. She pressed a single kiss to her cheek that conveyed: *Quite correct; good, clever mother for guessing so quickly; how sweet for us to be of one mind again.*

"Now then, speak thy mind, child. Gerard is not here. Alas, what am I saying? Would to Heaven he were."

"Well then, mother, she is comely and wrongs her picture but little."

"Eh, dear; hark to young folk! I am for good acts, not good looks. Does she love my boy as he ought to be loved?"

"Sevenbergen is farther from the Stadthouse than we are," Kate thoughtfully noted. "Yet she was there before me."

Catherine nodded intelligently.

"Nay, more, she had gotten him out ere I came. Ay, down from the captive's tower."

Catherine shook her head in disbelief. "The highest tower for miles! It is not feasible."

"'Tis sooth though," Kate insisted. "She and an old man found means and wit to send him up a rope. There he dangled from his prison, and our Giles went up it. When first I saw it hang, I said, 'This is glamour.' But when the frank lass's arms came round me, and her bosom beat against mine, and her cheeks wet, then said I, 'Tis not glamour: 'tis love.' For she is not like me, but lusty and able. Even I, poor frail creature, feel sometimes as I could move the world for them I love: I love you, mother. And she loves Gerard."

"God bless her for't! God bless her!"

"But..."

"But what, lamb?"

"Her love, is it for very certain honest? 'Tis most strange; but that very thing which hath warmed your heart hath somewhat cooled mine towards her. Poor soul. She is no wife, you know, mother, when all is done."

"Humph! They have stood at the altar together."

"Ay, but they went as they came, maid and bachelor."

"The parson saith so?"

"Nay, for that I know not."

"Then I'll take no man's word but his in such a tangled skein." After reflection, she added, "Natheless, art right, girl. I'll go to Sevenbergen alone. A wife I am, but not a slave. We are all in the dark here. She holds the clue. I must question her, and no one by; least of all you. I'll not take any lily to a house with a spot, no, not to a palace of gold and silver."

The more Catherine pondered this conversation, the more she felt drawn towards Margaret. Curiosity, a potent and nearly omnipotent passion, seized her. One fine day after dinner, she whispered to Kate, "Keep the house from going to pieces, an ye can," and donned her best kirtle and hood, her scarlet clocked hose, and new shoes. She trudged briskly off to Sevenbergen, troubling no man's mule.

Upon arrival, she inquired where Margaret Brandt lived. The first person she asked shook his head, claiming the name was strange to him. She walked a little farther and asked a girl of about fifteen standing at a door. "Father," the girl called into the house, "here is another after that magician's daughter." The man emerged and informed Catherine that Peter Brandt's cottage was just outside the town on the east side. "You may see the chimney hence," he pointed out. "But you will not find them there, neither father nor daughter; they have left the town this week, bless you."

"Say not so, good man, and me walken all the way from Tergou."

"From Tergou? Then you must have met the soldier."

"What soldier? Ay, I did meet a soldier."

"Well, then, yon soldier was here seeking that self-same Margaret."

"Ay, and wasn't mad with us because she was gone?" the girl interjected. "His long beard and her cheek are no strangers, I warrant."

"Say no more than ye know," Catherine said sharply. "You are young to slander your elders. Stay! Tell us more about this soldier, good man."

"Nay, I know no more than that he came hither seeking Margaret Brandt, and I told him she and her father had made a moonlight flight this day sennight, and that some thought the devil had flown away with them, being magicians. 'And,' says he, 'the devil fly away with thee for thy ill news;' that was my thanks. 'But I doubt 'tis a lie,' said he. 'An you think so,' said I, 'go and see.' 'I will,' said he, and burst out with a handful of gibberish; my wife thinks 'twas curses; and hied him to the cottage. Presently back he comes, and sings the other tune. 'You were right and I was wrong,' says he, and shoves a silver coin in my hand. Show it the wife, some of ye; then she'll believe me; I have been called a liar once to-day."

"It needs not," said Catherine, inspecting the coin all the same.

"And he seemed quiet and sad like, didn't he now, wench?"

"That he did," said the young woman warmly. "And, dame, he was just as pretty a man as ever I clapped eyes on. Cheeks like a rose, and shining beard, and eyes in his head like sloes."

"I saw he was well bearded," Catherine said. "But, for the rest, at my age I scan them not as when I was young and foolish. But he seemed right civil: doffed his bonnet to me as I had been a queen, and I did drop him my best reverence, for manners beget manners. But little I wist he had been her light of love, and most likely the... Who bakes for this town?"

The man, not being acquainted with her, opened his eyes at this swift transition.

"Well, dame, there be two; John Bush and Eric Donaldson, they both bide in this street."

"Then, God be with you, good people," she said, proceeding. But her sprightly foot came flat on the ground now, and no longer struck it with little jerks and cocking heel. She asked the bakers whether Peter Brandt had gone away in their debt. Bush said they were not customers. Donaldson said, "Not a stiver: his daughter had come round and paid him the very night they went. Didn't believe they owed a copper in the town." So Catherine got all the information of that kind she wanted with very little trouble.

"Can you tell me what sort this Margaret was?" she asked as she turned to go.

"Well, somewhat too reserved for my taste. I like a chatty customer—when I'm not too busy. But she bore a high character for being a good daughter."

"'Tis no small praise. A well-looking lass, I am told?"

"Why, whence come you, wyfe?"

"From Tergou."

"Oh, ay. Well you shall judge: the lads clept her 'the beauty of Sevenbergen;' the lasses did scout it merrily, and terribly pulled her to pieces, and found so many faults no two could agree where the fault lay."

"That is enough," said Catherine. "I see, the bakers are no fools in Sevenbergen, and the young women no shallower than in other burghs."

She bought a manchet of bread, partly out of sympathy and justice (she kept a shop), partly to show her household how much better bread she gave them daily; and returned to Tergou dejected.

Kate met her outside the town with beaming eyes.

"Well, Kate, lass, it is a happy thing I went; I am heartbroken. Gerard has been sore abused. The child is none of ourn, nor the mother from this hour."

"Alas, mother, I fathom not your meaning."

"Ask me no more, girl, but never mention her name to me again. That is all."

Kate acquiesced with a humble sigh, and they went home together.

They found a soldier seated tranquilly by their fire. The moment they entered the door he rose, and saluted them civilly. They stood and looked at him; Kate with some little surprise, but Catherine with a great deal, and with rising indignation.

"What makes you here?" was Catherine's greeting.

"I came to seek after Margaret."

"Well, we know no such person."

"Say not so, dame; sure you know her by name, Margaret Brandt."

"We have heard of her for that matter—to our cost."

"Come, dame, prithee tell me at least where she bides."

"I know not where she bides, and care not."

Denys felt sure this was a deliberate untruth. He bit his lip. "Well, I looked to find myself in an enemy's country at this Tergou; but maybe if ye knew all ye would not be so dour."

"I do know all," replied Catherine bitterly. "This morn I knew nought." Then suddenly setting her arms akimbo, she told him with a raised voice and flashing eyes she wondered at his cheek sitting down by that hearth of all hearths in the world.

"May Satan fly away with your hearth to the lake of fire and brimstone," shouted Denys, who could speak Flemish fluently. "Your own servant bade me sit there till you came, else I had ne'er troubled your hearth. My malison on it, and on the churlish roof-tree that greets an unoffending stranger this way," and he strode scowling to the door.

"Oh! oh!" ejaculated Catherine, frightened, and also a little conscience-stricken; and the virago sat suddenly down and burst into tears. Her daughter followed suit quietly, but without loss of time.

A shrewd writer, now unhappily lost to us, has somewhere the following dialogue:

She. "I feel all a woman's weakness."
He. "Then you are invincible."

Denys, by anticipation, confirmed that valuable statement; he stood at the door looking rue
