Catherine sat in a paroxysm of dread, her mind racing through the terrifying arithmetic of time. Gerard would return within a week, perhaps no more than a month at the utmost. The thought paralyzed her: how could she confess to him that she had failed to watch over his betrothed? The uncertainty gnawed at her, twisting into a sickening certainty of the worst possible outcome.

"Oh, Kate," she groaned, her voice trembling, "what if she has already gone and made herself away!"

"Mother, she would never be so wicked," Little Kate pleaded, her small hands clutching her mother's apron.

"Ah, my lass, you know not the folly of young hearts untethered by a mother's hand," Catherine replied, her eyes clouded with a mixture of maternal wisdom and deep-seated cynicism. "They will cast themselves into the water for a man whom the next stranger would cure in a week. I have seen them leap in like brass one moment and scream for help the next, unable to command their own minds even over such a trifling matter. Worse still, there are times when their bodies ail in ways unknown to any other creature, tightening their feelings until the patience they possess seems to vanish entirely, leaving them to plunge into the water without a second thought. Therefore, I say, men are monsters."

"Mother!"

"Monsters, and no less," Catherine insisted, her tone sharpening. "They dig these vast canals solely to tempt poor women. They know we shall not cut our throats, for we hate the sight of blood and value our skins and lives too highly. As for hanging, while she waits for the nail to be fixed and the noose to be made, she has time to change her mind. But a jump into a canal is no different than jumping into bed; the water does all the washing, whether you will it or not. Why, look at me, the mother of nine—was I not eager to make a hole in our canal just now?"

"Nay, mother, I will never believe it of you."

"You may, though," Catherine laughed, a dry, hollow sound. "It was in the first year we kept house together. Eli had not yet discovered my weak stitches, nor I his; so we made a rent, pulling in opposite directions, until we had a quarrel. I ran crying to tell some gossiping fool what I had no business saying outside the house, save to the saints. There stood one of our precious canals. Do they take us for teal? Oh, how tempting it looked! I told myself, 'Since he has let me go out of his door quarreling, he shall see me drowned next, and then he will change his key. He will weep a good one, and I shall look down from heaven—and see him take on, and oh, but that will be sweet!' I was on tiptoes, ready to step in, until suddenly I thought better of it. I had a new gown being made, after all, and nearly finished. So I went home instead. What was Eli's first word? 'Let yon flea stick in the wall, my lass,' he said. 'Not a word of all I said to anger thee was true, but this: I love thee.' These were his very words; I remembered them because it was our first quarrel. I threw my arms around his neck and sobbed a little, thinking of the canal, and he was no colder to me than I to him, being a man and a young one. That was better than lying in the water. I spoiled my wedding kirtle and my fine new shoes, made by old John Bush, who keeps the shop now and is his uncle. And what was my grief compared to hers?"

Little Kate, seeking comfort in logic, hoped that Margaret loved her father too deeply to consider leaving him so old and alone. "He is father and mother and all to her, you know."

"Nay, Kate," Catherine countered, her voice dropping to a grim whisper. "They forget all such things in a moment of despair when the sky seems black above them. I place more faith in him that is unborn than in him that is ripe for the grave to keep her out of mischief. For certainly, it goes sore against us to die when there is a little innocent pulling at our hearts to let it live, feeding at our very veins."

"Well, then, keep up a good heart, mother." Catherine added, trying to soothe her daughter's anxiety, that very likely all these fears were exaggerated. She ended by solemnly entreating her mother not to persist in naming the sex of Margaret's infant. It was so unlucky, all the gossips told her; "dear heart, as if there were not as many girls born as boys."

This reflection, though reasonable, was met with a clamor of protest.

"Have you the cruelty to threaten me with a girl!!?" Catherine cried out, her temper flaring. "I want no more girls while I have you. What use would a lass be to me? Can I set her on my knee and see my Gerard again as I can a boy? I tell thee 'tis all settled."

"How may that be?"

"In my mind," Catherine declared firmly. "And if I am to be disappointed in the end, 'tis not for you to disappoint me beforehand by telling me it is not to be a child, but only a girl."
