Margaret Brandt had always kept herself aloof from the bustling life of Sevenbergen, a reserve that the townsfolk mistook for haughty pride. Whispers of jealousy and malice had reached her ears, and she knew that many hearts were festering with resentment. She feared the moment her condition could no longer be hidden; she dreaded the triumph of her enemies. This thought gnawed at her day and night, driving her to seclude herself within the house, avoiding the daylight even when she ventured abroad.

In her secret heart, however, Margaret did not mistake her moral standing, unlike the unlearned observers of her time. Though she lacked knowledge of the fine legal distinctions of the era, she understood that a betrothal was a binding marriage contract, as unbreakable as any written agreement witnessed by others. She knew that marrying another party would have been annulled by both Church and State, and that betrothed couples often united without further ceremony, their children deemed legitimate.

What crushed her simple medieval mind was not the law, but the absence of the contract itself. It was not in her possession; Gerard had taken it, and he was far away. She hated and despised herself for the miserable oversight that had left her at the mercy of false opinion. Though she had never heard Horace's famous couplet regarding the slowness of anger, she possessed a Horatian clarity of judgment, a trait often found in women when feeling does not blind them. She measured the world's understanding precisely. With her marriage lines lost in Italy, they could never balance her visible pregnancy or the sight of her unborn child. What story would she tell to silence slanderous tongues? "I have my marriage lines, but I cannot show them to you." Which woman would believe her, or even pretend to? As one of the most modest girls in Holland, she craved the good opinion of women, not men.

Slander attacks a woman's sex with a certain advantage, but here was slander wearing a face of truth. The concept of the "strong-minded woman" had not yet been invented. Margaret, though naturally resolute and accustomed to managing a household, was weak as water in this specific trial. Like the elite of her sex, she was a fragile leaf trembling at every gust of public opinion, whether true or false. Much misery lies in few words. It is doubtful that any man's pen could describe the anguish of a virtuous woman foreseeing herself paraded as a frail one. Had she been frail at heart, she might have brazened it out. But she was pure as snow, and she saw the pitch approaching. The poor girl sat listless for hours, moaning with inner anguish. Often, when her father spoke to her and she offered mechanical replies, her cheek would burn like fire, and the old man would wonder what had discomposed her. Nothing. His words were less than air to her; it was the ever-present dread that sent the color of shame into her burning face, regardless of her topic.

Shame and fear reached a climax when she returned that night from Margaret Van Eyck's house. Her condition had been discovered by women of her own sex. The old artist, secluded like herself, might not betray her, but Catherine, a gossip at the center of a family and a thick neighborhood? One spark of hope remained. Catherine had spoken kindly, even lovingly. The situation admitted no middle course; Gerard's mother, thus roused, would either be her best friend or her worst enemy. She waited in racking anxiety for news. None came. Hope faded. Catherine was not going to be her friend. Then she would expose her, for she possessed no strong, kindly feeling to balance the natural love of babbling.

From that moment, the desire to flee this neighborhood grew, gnawing at her until it became a wild, passionate longing. But how persuade her father to leave? Old people cling to their places. He was very old and infirm to change his abode. There was no choice but to make him her confidant; running away from him would be the alternative. Now, between her uncontrollable desire to hide and her invincible aversion to speak to a man, even her father, she vibrated in a suspense full of lively torture. Presently, betwixt these two forces came the fatal thought: "End all!" Foolishly worded thoughts are not always foolish. One of Catherine's bugbears, the numerous canals, sorely tempted this fluctuating girl. She stood on the bank one afternoon, eyeing the calm, deep water. It seemed an image of repose, and she was so harassed. No more trouble. No more fear of shame. If Gerard had not loved her, she doubted she would have ended there.

As it was, she knelt by the water's edge and prayed fervently to God to keep such wicked thoughts from her. "Oh! selfish wretch," she whispered, "to leave thy father. Oh, wicked wretch, to kill thy child, and make thy poor Gerard lose all his pain and peril undertaken for thy sight. I will tell father all, ay, ere this sun shall set." She hurried home with eager haste, lest her good resolution ooze away before she arrived.

In domestic matters, the learned Peter was simple as a child, while Margaret, since the age of sixteen, had governed the house gently but absolutely. It was therefore strange to see her young, despotic mistress address him with such faltering irresolution—a manner less suited to him than to Martin Wittenhaagen or even the little girl who washed the vessels for a pittance.

"Father, I would speak to thee."

"Speak on, girl."

"Wilt you listen to me? And—and—try to excuse my faults?"

"We have all our faults, Margaret, thou no more than the rest of us; but fewer, unless parental feeling blinds me."

"Alas, no, father: I am a poor foolish girl, that would fain do well, but have done ill, most ill, most unwisely; and now must bear the shame. But, father, I love you, with all my faults, and will not you forgive my folly, and still love your motherless girl?"

"That ye may count on," said Peter cheerfully.

"Oh, well, smile not. For then how can I speak and make you sad?"

"Why, what is the matter?"

"Father, disgrace is coming on this house: it is at the door. And I the culprit. Oh, father, turn your head away. I—I—father, I have let Gerard take away my marriage lines."

"Is that all? 'Twas an oversight."

"'Twas the deed of a mad woman. But woe is me! that is not the worst."

Peter interrupted her. "The youth is honest, and loves you dear. You are young. What is a year or two to you? Gerard will assuredly come back and keep troth."

"And meantime know you what is coming?"

"Not I, except that I shall be gone first for one."

"Worse than that. There is worse pain than death. Nay, for pity's sake turn away your head, father."

"Foolish wench!" muttered Peter, but he turned his head.

She trembled violently, and with her cheeks on fire, she began to falter, "I did look on Gerard as my husband—we being betrothed—and he was in so sore danger, and I thought I had killed him, and I—oh, if you were but my mother I might find courage: you would question me. But you say not a word."

"Why, Margaret, what is all this coil about? and why are thy cheeks crimson, speaking to no stranger, but to thy old father?"

"Why are my cheeks on fire? Because—because—father, kill me; send me to heaven! bid Martin shoot me with his arrow! And then the gossips will come and tell you why I blush so this day. And then, when I am dead, I hope you will love your girl again for her mother's sake."

"Give me thy hand, mistress," said Peter, a little sternly.

She put it out to him trembling. He took it gently and began, with some anxiety in his face, to feel her pulse.

"Alas, nay," said she. "'Tis my soul that burns, not my body, with fever. I cannot, will not, bide in Sevenbergen." And she wrung her hands impatiently.

"Be calm now," said the old man soothingly, "nor torment thyself for nought. Not bide in Sevenbergen? What need to bide a day, as it vexes thee, and puts thee in a fever: for fevered thou art, deny it not."

"What!" cried Margaret, "would you yield to go hence, and—and ask no reason but my longing to be gone?" Suddenly throwing herself on her knees beside him, in a fervor of supplication she clutched his sleeve, and then his arm, and then his shoulder, imploring him to quit this place and not ask her why. "Alas! what needs it? You will soon see it. And I could never say it. I would liever die."

"Foolish child, who seeks thy girlish secrets? Is it I, whose life hath been spent in searching Nature's? And for leaving Sevenbergen, what is there to keep me in it, thee unwilling? Is there respect for me here, or gratitude? Am I not yclept quacksalver by those that come not near me, and wizard by those I heal? And give they not the guerdon and the honor they deny me to the empirics that slaughter them? Besides, what is't to me where we sojourn? Choose thou that, as did thy mother before thee."

Margaret embraced him tenderly, and wept upon his shoulder.

She was respited.

Yet as she wept, respited, she almost wished she had had the courage to tell him everything.

After a while, nothing would content him but her taking a medicament he went and brought her. She took it submissively, to please him. It was the least she could do. It was a composing draught, and though administered under an error, and a common one, it did her more good than harm: she awoke calmed by a long sleep, and that very day began her preparations.

Next week they went to Rotterdam, bag and baggage, and lodged above a tailor's shop in the Brede-Kirk Straet.

Only one person in Tergou knew whither they were gone.

The Burgomaster.

He locked the information in his own breast.

The use he made of it ere long, my reader will not easily divine: for he did not divine it himself.

But time will show.
