Among strangers, Margaret Brandt found a comparative happiness, until a new and unexpected cause of contentment arose. A civic dignitary, fanciful in proportion to his illness, wandered from doctor to doctor until he reached the brink of death. Desperate, he summoned Peter. The old man found the patient reduced to nothing by excessive bleeding and purging. With characteristic vigor, Peter flung a battalion of bottles from the window, leaving them to shatter; he beat egg yolks in neat Schiedam wine, administered them in small doses, and followed this with meat stewed in red water, shredded with mild febrifugal herbs. Finally, the patient recovered, looking somewhat like a man stuffed into a pillow-case. Being a voluble dignitary, he spread Peter's fame through every street. The artist, who had long merited a reputation in vain, suddenly made one by luck. Things looked bright. The old man's pride was cheered, and his purse began to fill. Yet he spent much of his gain on sovereign herbs and choice drugs, intending to invest them all, but Margaret, white-mailed by necessity, secured a portion. The victory came too late; its happy excitement proved fatal.

One evening, bidding her good-night, his voice seemed inarticulate. The next morning, he was found speechless and barely sensible. Margaret, her father's attentive pupil for years, immediately recognized a paralytic stroke. Distrusting herself, she ran for a doctor. One who had not been obstructed by Peter came cheerfully, confirming her fears, and proposed bleeding the patient. She declined. "He was always against bleeding," she said, "especially the old." Peter lived, but was never the same man again. His memory became much affected, rendering him untrustworthy to prescribe. Several patients, bent on being cured by the new doctor and no other, awaited his convalescence. Misery stared her in the face. Resolved to seek advice and comfort, she turned to her cousin William Johnson, from whom she had hitherto kept aloof out of pride and poverty.

She found him and his servant sitting in the same room, neither the better for liquor. Mastering her surprise, she greeted them and announced she had come to discuss a family matter, glancing quietly at the servant by way of hint. The woman took it, but not as expected. "Oh, you can speak before me, can she not, my old man?" At this familiarity, Margaret turned very red. "I cry you mercy, mistress. I knew not my cousin had fallen into the custom of this town. Well, I must take a fitter opportunity," she said, rising to go. "I wot not what ye mean by custom o' the town," the woman bounced up, retorting, "But this I know; 'tis the part of a faithful servant to keep her master from being preyed on by his beggarly kin." Margaret retorted sharply: "Ye are too modest, mistress. Ye are no servant. Your speech betrays you. 'Tis not till the ape hath mounted the tree that she shows her tail so plain. Nay, there sits the servant; God help him! And while so it is, fear not thou his kin will ever be so poor in spirit as come where the likes of you can flout their dole." Casting a look of mute reproach at her cousin for his passive silence, she turned and went haughtily out, nor shedding a single tear until she reached home. Now there were two men to be lodged and fed by one pregnant girl, and another mouth coming into the world. But this last, though the most helpless, was their best friend.

Nature was strong in Margaret Brandt; that same nature which makes brutes, birds, and insects cunning at providing food and shelter for their progeny. Stimulated by this instinct, she sat and brooded, thinking how to be beforehand with destitution. Though she still had five gold pieces left, she saw starvation approaching with inevitable foot. Her sex, when deviating from custom to think with male intensity, thinks just as much to the purpose. She rose, bade Martin move Peter to another room, made her own chamber neat and clean, polished a glass globe, suspended it from the ceiling, dusted a crocodile, and nailed it to the outside wall. After instructing Martin, she set him to play the lounging sentinel at the street door, telling the crocodile-bitten that a great, aged, and learned alchemist abode there, who in his moments of recreation would sometimes amuse himself by curing mortal diseases.

Patients soon came, demanding to see the leech. "That might not be. He was deep in his studies, searching for the grand elixir, and not princes could have speech of him. They must tell her their symptoms and return in two hours." And oh, mysterious powers! When they returned, the drug or draught was always ready. Sometimes, with a worshipful patient, she would scan his face, feel his pulse and skin, and hear his story, then go softly to Peter's room. There, thinking and asking herself how her father would have treated the case, she would write an illegible scrawl with cabalistic letters, bring it down reverently, and show it to the patient. "Could he read that?" she would ask. It would be either, "I am no reader," or, with admiration, "Nay, mistress, nought can I make on't." "Ay, but I can. 'Tis sovereign. Look on thyself as cured!" If she had materials, she would let the patient see her compound them, anxiously consulting the sacred prescription lest great Science should suffer in her hands. Thus she sent them away relieved of cash but with pockets full of medicine and minds full of faith, humbugged to their hearts' content. *Populus vult decipi.* When they were gone, she took down two little boxes Gerard had made her; on one she wrote "To-day," and on the other "To-morrow," putting smaller coins into "To-day" and larger ones into "To-morrow," along with surviving gold pieces from Sevenbergen and housekeeping expenses. She met current needs and laid by for the rainy day she foresaw, mixing drugs with simples and vice with virtue. On this last score, her conscience pricked her sore, and after each day's comedy, she knelt to pray God to forgive her "for the sake of her child." But lo and behold, cures were reported; so her conscience began to harden.

Martin Wittenhaagen had become a dead weight on her hands. Like most men who had endured great hardships, he had stiffened rather suddenly. Though less supple, he was as strong as ever and could have carried the doctor herself round Rotterdam. He carried her slops instead. In this new business, he showed the qualities of a soldier: unreasoning obedience, punctuality, accuracy, despatch, and drunkenness. He fell among "good fellows"; the blackguards plied him with Schiedam. He babbled and bragged. Doctor Margaret had risen very high in his estimation. All this brandishing of a crocodile for a standard, setting a dotard in ambush, and getting rid of slops struck him not as Science but as Strategy. He boasted in his cups how "me and my General we are a biting of the burghers."

When this revelation had time to leaven the city, his General, Doctor Margaret, received a call from the constables. They took her, trembling and begging subordinate machines to forgive her before the burgomaster, where real physicians in long robes and square caps accused her of practicing unlawfully on the duke's lieges. At first, she was too frightened to speak. Novice-like, the very name of "Law" paralyzed her. But questioned closely, she told the truth: she had long been her father's pupil, following his system, and had cured many. "And it is not for myself in very deed, sirs, but I have two poor helpless honest men at home upon my hands, and how else can I keep them? Ah, good sirs, let a poor girl make her bread honestly; ye hinder them not to make it idly and shamefully; and oh, sirs, ye are husbands, ye are fathers; ye cannot but see I have reason to work and provide as best I may." Ere this appeal left her lips, she would have given the world to recall it, standing with one hand upon her heart and one before her face, hiding it, but not the tears trickling underneath. All went to the wrong address. Perhaps a female bailiff might have yielded, but the burgomaster asked only if she pledged to break the law no more. On this, Doctor Margaret clasped her hands and vowed most penitently never, never, never to cure body or beast again. Being dismissed with the constables to pay the fine, she turned at the door, curtsied, and thanked the gentlemen for their forbearance.

To pay the fine, the "To-morrow box" must be opened instantly. With excess of caution, she had nailed it up, fearing temptation. Now she could not draw the nails. The constables grew impatient, doubting its contents, and said, "Let us break it for you." She refused. "Ye will break it worse than I shall." Taking a hammer, she struck too faintly, lost all strength for a minute, and wept hysterically. At last, she broke it, and a little cry bubbled from her when it shattered. She paid the fine, using all her unlawful gains and two gold pieces to boot. When the men were gone, she drew the broken pieces of the box and the little money they had left her onto the table. Her arms went round them, her rich hair escaped and fell loose, and she bowed her forehead on the wreck, sobbing, "My love's box it is broken, and my heart withal." Martin Wittenhaagen came in; she could not lift her head but sighed out to him what had befallen her, ending, "My love his box is broken, and so mine heart is broken."

Martin was not so sad as wroth. Some traitor had betrayed him. What stony heart had told and brought her to this pass? Whoever it was should feel his arrow's point. "Idle chat! idle chat!" moaned Margaret, without lifting her brow. "When you have slain all the gossips in this town, can we eat them? Tell me how to keep you all, or prithee hold thy peace, and let the saints get leave to whisper me." Martin held his tongue, casting uneasy glances at his defeated General.

Towards evening, she rose, washed her face, and did up her hair, doggedly biding Martin take down the crocodile and put out a basket instead. "I can get up linen better than they seem to do it in this street," she said. "You must carry it in the basket." "That will I for thy sake," said the soldier. "Good Martin! forgive me that I spake shrewishly to thee." Even while they talked, a male came for advice. Margaret told him the mayor had forbidden her to sell drugs. "But," she said, "I will gladly iron and starch your linen for you, and I will come and fetch it from your house." "Are ye mad, young woman?" said the male. "I come for a leech, and ye proffer me a washerwoman." It went out in dudgeon. "There is a stupid creature," said Margaret sadly.

Presently, a female came to tell the symptoms of her sick child. Margaret stopped her. "We are forbidden by the bailiff to sell drugs. But I will gladly wash, iron, and starch your linen... and I will come and fetch it from your house." "Oh, ay," said the female. "Well, I have some smocks and ruffs foul. Come for them; and when you are there, you can look at the boy." An introduction is an introduction. Two or three patients out of all those denied medicine made Doctor Margaret their washerwoman.

"Now, Martin, you must help. I'll no more cats than can slay mice." "Mistress, the stomach is not awanting for't, but the headpiece, worst luck." "Oh! I mean not the starching and ironing; that takes a woman and a handy one. But the bare washing; a man can surely contrive that. Why, a mule has wit enough in's head to do't with his hoofs, an' ye could drive him into the tub. Come, off doublet, and try." "I am your man," said the brave old soldier, stripping for the unwonted toil. "I'll risk my arm in soapsuds, an you will risk your glory." "My what?" "Your glory and honour as a--washerwoman." "Gramercy! if you are man enough to bring me half-washed linen t' iron, I am woman enough to fling't back i' the suds." And so the brave girl and the brave soldier worked with a will, keeping the wolf from the door. More they could not do. Margaret had repaired the "To-morrow box," and as she leaned over the glue, her tears mixed with it, cementing her exiled lover's box with them. A smile is allowable, but an intelligent smile tipped with pity, please, and not the empty guffaw of the nineteenth-century-jackass, burlesquing Bibles. But when mended, it stood unreplenished. They kept the weekly rent paid and the pot boiling, but no more.

Now came a concatenation. Recommended from one to another, Margaret washed for the mayor. Bringing home clean linen one day, she heard in the kitchen that his worship's only daughter was stricken with disease, not like to live. Poor Margaret could not help cross-questioning, and a female servant gave her such symptoms as she had observed. They were too general. However, one gossip would add one fact, and another another. Margaret pondered them all.

At last, she met the mayor himself. He recognized her directly. "Why, you are the unlicensed doctor." "I was," she said, "but now I'm your worship's washerwoman." The dignitary coloured, saying that was rather a come-down. "Nay, I bear no malice; for your worship might have been harder. Rather would I do you a good turn. Sir,
