Margaret descended the stairs a transformed creature. The storm of tears had washed away her bitterness and feverish excitement, leaving her eyes wet but serene.

"Denys," she whispered, "I possess my orders. I am to read my lover's letter to his kin."

"You will never do that?" Denys asked, his voice trembling with disbelief.

"I shall."

"I perceive something in that letter has softened your heart toward them."

"Not a single jot, Denys. Not a jot. Yet, though I loathed them as poison, I could not disobey my love. Denys, it is sweet to obey, but sweeter still to obey one who stands afar, unable to enforce command, forced to trust solely in the fidelity of my love. Ah, Gerard, my darling; had you stood before me, I might have slighted your commands, repelled by your people as I have cause to be. But now, if you had bidden me wade into the raging sea to read your sweet letter to the sharks, I would have gone. Therefore, Denys, tell his mother I have the letter. If she and hers wish to hear it, I am their servant. Let them name the hour, and I will seat them as best I can and welcome them with all my power."

Denys hastened to Catherine with this tidings. He found the family gathered at dinner and announced that a long letter from Gerard had arrived. Amidst the rising joy, he added, "And her heart is softened; she will read it to you herself. You may choose your own time."

"What does she suppose no one else can read it?" Catherine asked. "Let her send the letter, and we shall read it."

"Nay, mother," little Kate interjected, "perhaps she cannot bear to part with it from her hand; she loves him so dearly."

"Do you think she fears we shall steal it?"

Cornelis suggested she merely sought to wedge herself into the family through this token of affection.

Denys cast a look of scorn upon the speaker. "There spoke a base heart," he declared. "La camarade hates you all like poison. Oh, mistake me not, dame; I defend her not, for so it is. Yet, despite her spleen at a word from Gerard, she offers to read you his letter with her own pretty mouth, possessing a voice like honey—surely a fair offer."

"'Tis so, mine honest soldier," the father, Eli, replied gravely. "It merits a civil response. Hold your tongues, ye women, and I shall answer her. Tell her that I, his father, setting aside all past grudges, do hereby thank her for this grace. If she desires double thanks, let her send my son's letter by your faithful hand. I shall read it to his flesh and blood, and then return to her so surely and faithfully as I am Eli a Dierich, a William a Luke, free burgher of Tergou, like my forbears, and like them, a man of my word."

"Ay, and a man who is better than his word," cried Catherine, "the only one I have ever encountered."

"Hold thy peace, wife."

"Art a man of sense, Eli, a dirk, a chose," shouted Denys. "The she-comrade will be right glad to obey Gerard yet avoid facing you all, whom she hates as wormwood, save in your presence. Bless ye, the world hath changed; she is all submission today: 'Obedience is honey,' quoth she; and in truth, 'tis a sweetmeat she cannot but savor, eating so little of it. What with her fair face and mellow tongue, and what with flying in fits to terrify us soldiers to death when we thwart her, and what with chiding us one moment and petting us like lambs the next, she hath made two of the crawlingest slaves ever you saw out of two honest swashbucklers. I am the ironing ruffian, the other washes."

"What next?"

"Why, whenever the brat enters the world, I shall rock the cradle, and the other knave shall wash the tucker and bib. So, I shall fetch the letter on the instant. Will you let me stay and hear it read?"

"Else our hearts were black as coal," said Catherine.

Denys departed for the letter and returned crestfallen. "She will not let it out of her hand, neither to me nor you, nor any living soul."

"I knew she would not," Cornelis remarked.

"Hush! Hush!" Eli commanded. "Let Denys tell his story."

"Nay," Denys replied, recounting the exchange, "'be ruled by me.' 'Not I,' quoth she. 'Well, but that same honey Obedience ye spake of.' 'You are a fool,' she said; 'obedience to Gerard is sweet, but obedience to any other body, whoever said that was sweet?' At last she seemed to soften a bit and gave me a written paper for you, mademoiselle. Here it is."

"For me?" little Kate blushed, taking the paper.

"Give that here!" Eli demanded, scanning the writing and speaking almost in a whisper, "These be words from the letter. Hearken!"

"And, sweetheart, if these lines should travel safe to thee, make thou trial of my people's hearts withal. Maybe they are somewhat turned towards me, being far away. If 'tis so they will show it to thee, since now to me they may not. Read, then, this letter! But I do strictly forbid thee to let it from thy hand; and if they still hold aloof from thee, why, then say nought, but let them think me dead. Obey me in this; for, if thou dost disrespect my judgment and my will in this, thou lovest me not."

A heavy silence fell upon the room as Gerard's words, copied by Margaret, were handed round and inspected.

"Well," said Catherine, "that is another matter. But methinks 'tis for her to come to us, not we to her."

"Alas, mother! what odds does that make?"

"Much," Eli replied. "Tell her we are over many to come to her, and bid her hither, the sooner the better."

When Denys had gone, Eli confessed it was a bitter pill for him. "When that lass crosses my threshold, all the mischief and misery she hath made here will seem to come in doors in one heap. But what could I do, wife? We must hear the news of Gerard. I saw that in thine eyes, and felt it in my own heart. And she is backed by our undutiful but still beloved son, and so is she stronger than we, bringing our noses down to the grindstone, the sly, cruel jade. But never heed. We will hear the letter; and then let her go unblessed as she came unwelcome."

"Make your mind easy," said Catherine. "She will not come at all." A tone of regret was visible in her voice.

Shortly thereafter, Richart arrived from Amsterdam, grave and dignified in his burgher's robe, gold chain, ruff, and furred cap. He was received not only with affection but with respect, for he had risen a step higher than his parents, and such ascents were marked in medieval society almost as visibly as those on staircases.

Admitted to the family council, he showed plainly, though not discourteously, that his pride was deeply wounded by their having deigned to treat with Margaret Brandt. "I see the temptation," he said. "But which of us hath not at times to wish one way and do another?" This threw a considerable chill over the older members. Little Kate ventured a word. "Vex not thyself, dear Richart. Mother says she will not come."

"All the better, sweetheart. I fear me, if she do, I shall hie me back to Amsterdam."

Just then, Denys popped his head into the door and announced, "She will be here at three on the great dial."

They all looked at one another in silence.
