Margaret awoke with her head resting upon Catherine's arm, surrounded by the sturdy, honest members of the household who had gathered like a protective wall around her. Among them stood Giles, who roared with boisterous encouragement, insisting that she cease her lamentations. "Gerard is alive and well!" he declared, his voice booming with conviction. "If he were not, this letter—the largest, most magnificent, and most moving document ever penned by mankind—would not exist!"

Margaret sighed weakly, her voice trembling. "Ay, good Master Giles, he lives. But how can I know what has befallen him since? Why did he leave Holland to wander among strangers fierce as lions? And why did I not drive him from me sooner, rather than part him from his own flesh and blood? Forgive me, you who are his mother!"

Gently removing Catherine's arm, Margaret made a feeble attempt to slide from the chair to her knees. After a brief struggle against gravity and her own weakness, she found herself settled upon Catherine's lap. With a faint but sweet smile, she extended the letter to Eli. "I will trust it to your hand now," she whispered. "In truth, I am little fit to read any more... and loth to leave this comfort." She then wound her other arm tightly around Catherine's neck.

"Read thou, Richart," Eli instructed gently. "Thine eyes are younger than mine."

Richart accepted the parchment. "Well," he remarked, examining the script. "Such writing I have never seen. It is penned with a needle's point, clear and legible. Why is he not in my counting-house at Amsterdam instead of vagabonding it out there?"

"When I came to myself," Richart began reading, "I was seated in the litter, my good merchant holding my hand. I babbled nonsense, then shuddered in silence. He put a horn of wine to my lips."

"Bless him! Bless him!" Catherine exclaimed.

"Whisht!" Eli cautioned softly.

"I told him what had befallen," Richart continued. "He examined my leg; it was sprained sore and swollen at the ankle. All my points were broken; I could scarce keep up my hose. I said, 'Sir, I shall be but a burden to you, and can make you no harmony now; my poor psaltery is broken.' I grieved over my broken music, the companion of so many weary leagues. But he patted my cheek, bidding me not fret. He placed my leg on a pillow and tended me like a kind father."

"January 19," Richart read on. "I sit all day in the litter, for we push forward with haste. At night, the good, kind merchant sends me to bed and forbids me to work. Strange! Whenever I fall in with men like fiends, the next moment God sends me some good man or woman, lest I turn away from humankind. Oh, Margaret! How strangely mixed they are, and how old I feel compared to what I was three months ago. And lo! If good Master Fugger has not already bought me a psaltery."

"Eli, my man," Catherine interrupted, her eyes brightening, "if that merchant comes our way, let us buy a hundred ells of cloth from him, and not haggle."

"That will I, take your oath on't!" Eli replied eagerly.

As Richart prepared to continue, Kate glanced at her mother. With a faint blush, she drew a piece of work from under her apron and began to sew, her head bowed slightly lower than necessary. Her mother followed suit, pulling a similar piece from her pocket. Both specimens, now exposed to observation for the first time, were babies' caps, more than half finished. They told a silent tale; horror-struck, one might say they resembled little monks' cowls in their shape and delicacy.

"January 20," Richart read. "Laid up in the litter, as good as blind, yet halting to bait, the Lombardy plains burst upon me. Oh, Margaret! A land flowing with milk and honey; all sloping plains, goodly rivers, jocund meadows, delectable orchards, and blooming gardens. Though winter, it looks warmer than poor beloved Holland at midsummer, making the wanderer's face shine and his heart leap for joy to see earth so kind and smiling. Here be vines, cedars, olives, and cattle plenty, but three goats to a sheep. The draught oxen wear white linen on their necks, and standing by dark green olive-trees, each one is a picture. The folk, especially women, wear delicate strawen hats with flowers and leaves fairly imitated in silk, mixed with silver. This day we crossed a river prettily in a chained ferry-boat. On either bank was a windlass, and a single man, by turning it, drew our whole company to his shore, which I admired greatly, being a stranger. Passed over with us some country folk. An old woman, looking at a young wench, hid her face with her hand and held her crucifix out like a knight holding his sword in a tourney, dreading the evil eye."

"January 25," Richart continued, his voice taking on a scholarly tone. "Safe at Venice. A place whose strange and passing beauty is well known to thee by report of our mariners. Dost mind too how Peter would oft fill our ears withal? We handed beneath the table, and he still discoursed of this sea-enthroned and peerless city, in shape a bow, and its great canal and palaces on piles, and its watery ways plied by scores of gilded boats; and that market-place of nations, *orbis non urbis*, forum, St. Mark, his place? And his statue with the peerless jewels in his eyes, and the lion at his gate? But I, lying at my window in pain, may see none of these beauties as yet, but only a street, fairly paved, which is dull, and houses with oiled paper and linen in lieu of glass, which is rude; and the passers-by, their habits and their gestures, wherein they are superfluous. Therefore, not to miss my daily comfort of whispering to thee, I will e'en turn mine eyes inward, and bind my sheaves of wisdom reaped by travel. For I love thee so, that no treasure pleases me not shared with thee; and what treasure so good and enduring as knowledge? This then have I, Sir Footsore, learned: that each nation hath its proper wisdom, and its proper folly. Methinks, could a great king, or duke, tramp like me, and see with his own eyes, he might pick the flowers, and eschew the weeds of nations, and go home and set his own folk on Wisdom's hill. The Germans in the north were churlish, but frank and honest; in the south, kindly and honest too. Their general blot is drunkenness, which they carry even to mislike and contempt of sober men. They say commonly, 'Kanstu niecht sauffen und fressen so kanstu kienem hern wol dienen.' In England, the vulgar sort drink as deep, but the worshipful hold excess in this a reproach, and drink a health or two for courtesy, not gluttony, and still sugar the wine. In their cups the Germans use little mirth or discourse, but ply the business sadly, crying 'Seyte frolich!' The best of their drunken sport is 'Kurlemurlehuff,' a way of drinking with touching deftly of the glass, the beard, the table, in due turn, intermixed with whistlings and snappings of the finger so curiously ordered as 'tis a labour of Hercules, but to the beholder right pleasant and mirthful. Their topers, by advice of German leeches, sleep with pebbles in their mouths. For, as of a boiling pot the lid must be set ajar, so with these fleshy wine-pots, to vent the heat of their inward parts: spite of which many die suddenly from drink; but 'tis a matter of religion to slur it, and gloze it, and charge some innocent disease therewith. Yet 'tis more a custom than very nature, for their women come among the tipplers, and do but stand a moment, and as it were, kiss the wine-cup; and are indeed most temperate in eating and drinking, and of all women, modest and virtuous, and true spouses and friends to their mates; far before our Holland lasses, that being maids, put the question to the men, and being wived, do lord it over them. Why, there is a wife in Tergou, not far from our door. One came to the house and sought her man. Says she, 'You'll not find him: he asked my leave to go abroad this afternoon, and I did give it him.'"

"'Tis sooth! 'Tis sooth! 'Twas Beck Hulse, Jonah's wife," Catherine confirmed. "This comes of a woman wedding a boy."

"In the south where wine is, the gentry drink themselves bare; but not in the north: for with beer a noble shall sooner burst his body than melt his lands. They are quarrelsome, but 'tis the liquor, not the mind; for they are none revengeful. And when they have made a bad bargain drunk, they stand to it sober. They keep their windows bright; and judge a man by his clothes. Whatever fruit or grain or herb grows by the roadside, gather and eat. The owner seeing you shall say, 'Art welcome, honest man.' But an ye pluck a wayside grape, your very life is in jeopardy. 'Tis eating of that Heaven gave to be drunken. The French are much fairer spoken, and not nigh so true-hearted. Sweet words cost them nought. They call it *payer en blanche*."

"Les coquins! ha! ha!" Denys laughed.

"Natheless, courtesy is in their hearts, ay, in their very blood. They say commonly, 'Give yourself the trouble of sitting down.' And such straws of speech show how blows the wind. Also at a public show, if you would leave your seat, yet not lose it, tie but your napkin round the bench, and no French man or woman will sit here; but rather keep the place for you."

"Gramercy! That is manners. France for me!" Catherine declared.

Denys rose and placed his hand gracefully to his breastplate.

"Natheless, they say things in sport which are not courteous, but shocking. 'Le diable t'emporte!' 'Allez au diable!' and so forth. But I trow they mean not such dreadful wishes: custom belike. Moderate in drinking, and mix water with their wine, and sing and dance over their cups, and are then enchanting company. They are curious not to drink in another man's cup. In war the English gain the better of them in the field; but the French are their masters in attack and defence of cities; witness Orleans, where they besieged their besiegers and hashed them sore with their double and treble culverines; and many other sieges in this our century. More than all nations they flatter their women, and despise them. No. She may be their sovereign ruler. Also they often hang their female malefactors, instead of drowning them decently, as other nations use. The furniture in their inns is walnut, in Germany only deal. French windows are ill. The lower half is of wood, and opens; the upper half is of glass, but fixed; so that the servant cannot come at it to clean it. The German windows are all glass, and movable, and shine far and near like diamonds. In France many mean houses are not glazed at all. Once I saw a Frenchman pass a church without unbonneting. This I ne'er witnessed in Holland, Germany, or Italy. At many inns they show the traveller his sheets, to give him assurance they are clean, and warm them at the fire before him; a laudable custom. They receive him kindly and like a guest; they mostly cheat him, and whiles cut his throat. They plead in excuse hard and tyrannous laws. And true it is their law thrusteth its nose into every platter, and its finger into every pie. In France worshipful men wear their hats and their furs indoors, and go abroad lighter clad. In Germany they don hat and furred cloak to go abroad; but sit bareheaded and light clad round the stove.

"The French intermix not the men and women folk in assemblies, as we Hollanders use. Round their preachers the women sit on their heels in rows, and the men stand behind them. Their harvests are rye, and flax, and wine. Three mules shall you see to one horse, and whole flocks of sheep as black as coal.

"In Germany the snails be red. I lie not. The French buy minstrelsy, but breed jests, and make their own mirth. The Germans foster their set fools, with ear-caps, which move them to laughter by simulating madness; a calamity that asks pity, not laughter. In this particular I deem that lighter nation wiser than the graver German. What sayest thou? Alas! canst not answer me now.

"In Germany the petty laws are wondrous wise and just. Those against criminals, bloody. In France bloodier still; and executed a trifle more cruelly there. Here the wheel is common, and the fiery stake; and under this king they drown men by the score in Paris river, Seine yclept. But the English are as peremptory in hanging and drowning for a light fault; so travellers report. Finally, a true-hearted Frenchman, when ye chance on one, is a man as near perfect as earth affords; and such a man is my Denys, spite of his foul mouth."

"My foul mouth! Is that so writ, Master Richart?" Denys asked, inspecting the letter gravely.

"Ay, in sooth; see else," Richart replied.

"Humph! Ahem! Why, just the contrary," Denys countered. "It is kittle work perusing of these black scratches men are agreed
