Fra Colonna possessed the keys to the Pope's library, a privilege that allowed him to wander the city with Gerard whenever the friar's scholarly duties permitted. On these excursions, the artist's spirit soared; he viewed the Eternal City through rose-tinted spectacles, intoxicated by the grandeur of its churches, palaces, and crumbling ruins. Fra Colonna, however, granted the ruins their due reverence but poured cold water upon the rest of the city's splendor.

"This place Rome?" the friar would muse, gesturing to the modern thoroughfares. "It is merely the tomb of mighty Rome." He guided Gerard's gaze downward, pointing out how twenty or thirty feet of ancient triumphal arches lay buried beneath the cobblestones, and how the contemporary streets ran directly over the rooftops of ancient palaces and the severed tops of columns. Coupling the cramped boundaries of the modern city with the gigantic, sporadic vestiges of antiquity that poked through the soil, the friar offered a striking simile. "I tell thee, this village they call Rome is but as one of those swallow's nests ye shall see built on the eaves of a decayed abbey."

"Old Rome must indeed have been fair then," Gerard remarked, captivated.

"Judge for yourself, my son," the friar insisted. "You see the great sewer, a work of the Romans in their infancy, destined to outlast Vesuvius. You see fragments of the Temple of Peace. Imagine the Capitol with its twenty-five temples! Note this Monte Savello; what is it, if you please, but the ruins of the ancient Theatre of Marcellus? And as for Testaccio, one of the highest hills in modern Rome, it is but an ancient dust heap; the women of old Rome flung their broken pots and pans there, and lo—a mountain."

Gerard listened with respectful attention, but when the holy friar proceeded to imply, by analogy, that the moral superiority of the heathen Romans was proportionally grand, the artist resisted stoutly. "Has then the world lost anything by Christ's coming?" he asked, though he immediately blushed, sensing he was reproaching his benefactor.

"Saints forbid!" the friar exclaimed. "'Twere heresy to say so." Having made this direct concession, he gradually evaded the implication through subtle circumlocution until they reached the forbidden door via a spiral staircase.

In the midst of their journey, they arrived at a church where a knot of people gathered in the porch. Inside, a demon was being exorcised. Fra Colonna had a peculiar habit of uttering a curious, low moan when facts that Zeno or Epicurus would reject were presented to him. This moan conveyed to those who knew it not only strong dissent but also a profound pity for human credulity, ignorance, and error—especially when such blindness obscured the merits of Paganism.

The friar moaned and said, "Then come away."

"Nay, father, prithee! prithee! I ne'er saw a devil cast out."

The friar accompanied Gerard into the church, though he first gave a good shrug. Inside, they found the demoniac forced down on his knees before the altar, a scarf tied tightly around his neck by which the officiating priest held him like a dog on a chain. Few people were present, for rumor had spread that the last demon cast out in that church had fled no farther than into the next person in the congregation: *"as a cony ferreted out of one burrow runs to the next."*

When Gerard and the friar arrived, the priest seemed to deem the number of spectators sufficient and began his ritual. He faced the demoniac, breviary in hand, first attempting to identify the entity.

"Come out, Ashtaroth. Oho! it is not you then. Come out, Belial. Come out, Tatzi. Come out, Eza. No; he trembles not. Come out, Azymoth. Come out, Feriander. Come out, Foletho. Come out, Astyma. Come out, Nebul."

"Aha! what, have I found ye? 'Tis thou, thou reptile; at thine old tricks. Let us pray!"

"Oh, Lord, we pray thee to drive the foul fiend Nebul out of this thy creature: out of his hair, and his eyes, out of his nose, out of his mouth, out of his ears, out of his gums, out of his teeth, out of his shoulders, out of his arms, legs, loins, stomach, bowels, thighs, knees, calves, feet, ankles, finger-nails, toe-nails, and soul. Amen."

The priest rose from his knees and turned to the company with quiet geniality. "Gentles, we have here as obstinate a devil as you may see in a summer day." Facing the patient, he spoke with great rigor, alternating between addressing the man and the fiend. They answered in turn through the same mouth, now claiming hatred for the holy names the priest uttered, now complaining of internal misery.

It was the priest who first confused the victim and the culprit in the minds of the onlookers, cuffing the man soundly, kicking him, and spitting repeatedly in his face. He then took a candle, lit it, and held it down until it burned his fingers, dropping it quickly. Next, he produced the custodial and showed the patient the *Corpus Domini*. He burned another candle cautiously, then spoke civilly to the demoniac in his human guise, dismissed him, and received the compliments of the assembly.

"Good father," said Gerard, "how you have their names by heart. Our northern priests possess no such exquisite knowledge of the hellish squadrons."

"Ay, young man, here we know all their names, and eke their ways, the reptiles. This Nebul is a bitter hard one to hunt out."

The friar then recounted several of his experiences to the company in an affable manner, concluding with a feat from the previous day when he drove a great hulking fiend out of a woman by her mouth, leaving behind nails, pins, and a tuft of hair. The creature had cried out in anguish, *"Tis not thou that conquers me. See that stone on the window sill. Know that the angel Gabriel coming down to earth once lighted on that stone: 'tis that has done my business."*

The friar moaned. "And you believed him?"

"Certes! who but an infidel has discredited a revelation so precise."

"What, believe the father of lies? That is pushing credulity beyond the age."

"Oh, a liar does not always lie."

"Ay, doth he whenever he tells an improbable story to begin, and shows you a holy relic; arming you against the Satanic host. Fiends (if any) are not so simple. You should have answered him out of antiquity—*'Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes.'* Some blackguard chopped his wife's head off on that stone, young man; you take my word for it." And the friar hurried Gerard away.

"Alack, father, I fear you abashed the good priest."

"Ay, by Pollux," said the friar, chuckling. "I blistered him with a single touch of 'Socratic interrogation.' What modern can parry the weapons of antiquity."

One afternoon, after Gerard finished his day's work, a fine lackey demanded his attendance at the Palace Cesarini. He was ushered into a noble apartment where a girl sat working on a tapestry. She rose and left, promising to inform her mistress. Gerard waited a good hour in the vast room, beginning to fret. "These nobles think nothing of a poor fellow's time." Just as he decided to slip out, the door opened and a superb beauty entered, followed by two maids. It was the young princess of the house of Cesarini. She entered talking loudly and haughtily to her dependents, but at the sight of Gerard, her voice softened to a very feminine tone.

"Are you the writer, messer?"

"I am, Signora."

"'Tis well."

She seated herself; Gerard and the maids remained standing.

"What is your name, good youth?"

"Gerard, signora."

"Gerard? Body of Bacchus! Is that the name of a human creature?"

"It is a Dutch name, signora. I was born at Tergou, in Holland."

"A harsh name, girls, for so well-favoured a youth; what say you?"

The maids assented warmly.

"What did I send for him for?" the lady inquired with lofty languor. "Ah, I remember. Be seated, Ser Gerardo, and write me a letter to Ercole Orsini, my lover; at least he says so."

Gerard seated himself, took out paper and ink, and looked up for instructions. The princess, seated on a much higher chair, almost a throne, looked down at him with inquiring eyes.

"Well, Gerardo."

"I am ready, your excellence."

"Write, then."

"I but await the words."

"And who, think you, is to provide them?"

"Who but your grace, whose letter it is to be?"

"Gramercy! What, you writers, find you not the words? What avails your art without the words? I doubt you are an impostor, Gerardo."

"Nay, Signora, I am none. I might make shift to put your highness's speech into grammar, as well as writing. But I cannot interpret your silence. Therefore speak what is in your heart, and I will empaper it before your eyes."

"But there is nothing in my heart. And sometimes I think I have got no heart."

"What is in your mind, then?"

"But there is nothing in my mind; nor my head neither."

"Then why write at all?"

"Why, indeed? That is the first word of sense either you or I have spoken, Gerardo. Pestilence seize him! Why writeth he not first? Then I could say nay to this, and ay to that, withouten headache. Also, is it a lady's part to say the first word?"

"No, signora: the last."

"It is well spoken, Gerardo. Ha! ha! Shalt have a gold piece for thy wit. Give me my purse!"

She paid him for the article on a nail à la moyen âge. Money never yet chilled zeal. Gerard, after getting a gold piece so cheap, felt bound to pull her out of her difficulty if the wit of man might achieve it.

"Signorina," said he, "these things are only hard because folk attempt too much, are artificial and labour phrases. Do but figure to yourself the signor you love—"

"I love him not."

"Well, then, the signor you love not—seated at this table, and dictate to me just what you would say to him."

"Well, if he sat there, I should say, 'Go away.'"

Gerard, who was flourishing his pen by way of preparation, laid it down with a groan.

"And when he was gone," said Floretta, "your highness would say, 'Come back.'"

"Like enough, wench. Now silence, all, and let me think. He pestered me to write, and I promised; so mine honour is engaged. What lie shall I tell the Gerardo to tell the fool?" She turned her head away and fell into deep thought, her noble chin resting on her white hand, half clenched.

She was so lovely and statuesque, looking so inspired with celestial thoughts as she sat thus, impregnating herself with mendacity, that Gerard forgot all except art, and proceeded eagerly to transfer that exquisite profile to paper. He had very nearly finished when the fair statue turned brusquely round and looked at him.

"Nay, Signora," said he, a little peevishly; "for Heaven's sake change not your posture—'twas perfect. See, you are nearly finished."

All eyes were instantly on the work, and all tongues active.

"How like! and done in a minute: nay, methinks her highness's chin is not quite so."

"Oh, a touch will make that right."

"What a pity 'tis not coloured. I'm all for colours. Hang black and white! And her highness hath such a lovely skin. Take away her skin, and half her beauty is lost."

"Peace. Can you colour, Ser Gerardo?"

"Ay, signorina. I am a poor hand at oils; there shines my friend Pietro; but in this small way I can tint you to the life, if you have time to waste on such vanity."

"Call you this vanity? And for time, it hangs on me like lead. Send for your colours now—quick, this moment—for love of all the saints."

"Nay, signorina, I must prepare them. I could come at the same time."

"So be it. And you, Floretta, see that he be admitted at all hours. Alack! Leave my head! leave my head!"

"Forgive me, Signora; I thought to prepare it at home to receive the colours. But I will leave it. And now let us despatch the letter."

"What letter?"

"To the Signor Orsini."

"And shall I waste my time on such vanity as writing letters—and to that empty creature, to whom I am as indifferent as the moon? Nay, not indifferent, for I have just discovered my real sentiments. I hate him and despise him. Girls, I here forbid you once for all to mention that signor's name to me again; else I'll whip you till the blood comes. You know how I can lay on when I'm roused."

"We do. We do."

"Then provoke me not to it;" and her eye flashed daggers, before she turned to Gerard all instantaneous honey. "Addio, il Gerardo." And Gerard bowed himself out of this velvet tiger's den.

He came the next day and coloured her; the following day he was set to make
