Princess Claelia commanded a full-length portrait of herself. Gerard advised her to entrust the commission to his friend, Pietro Vanucci.

She declined immediately. "'Twill be time to put a slight on the Gerardo," she said, "when his work discontents me." Gerard, aware that while he was an excellent draughtsman, his coloring was not so refined, begged her to pose as a Roman statue. He demonstrated how closely he could mimic marble on paper. She agreed at first, but hesitated when he explained she must don the tunic, toga, and sandals of antiquity.

"Why, I had as lief be presented in my smock," she replied with medieval frankness.

"Alack, signorina," Gerard protested, "you have surely never noted the ancient habit; so free, so ample, so simple, yet so noble. It is most becoming your highness, to whom Heaven hath granted Roman features, a shapely arm, and a hand of such grace that modern attire cannot suit it."

"What, can you flatter, like the rest, Gerardo?" she asked. "Well, give me time to think on't. Come on Saturday, and then I will say ay or nay."

The respite gained was spent in constructing the ancient garments and trying them on in her chamber to see if they compensated for being a thousand years out of date.

Gerard, hurrying to this interview, was suddenly arrested by a shop window. His keen eye discerned a copy of Lactantius lying open. "That is fairly writ, anyway," he thought.

He stared at it a moment longer.

It was not written. It was printed.

Gerard groaned. "I am sped; mine enemy is at the door. The press is in Rome."

He entered the shop, feigning nonchalance, and inquired how long the printing press had been in the city. The man claimed there was no such thing in Rome. "Oh, the Lactantius; that was printed on the top of the Apennines."

"What, did the printing-press fall down there out of the moon?"

"Nay, messer," the trader laughed, "it shot up there out of Germany. See the title-page!"

Gerard eagerly examined the book and read:

"Will ye buy, messer? See how fair and even be the letters. Few are left can write like that; and scarce a quarter of the price."

"I would fain have it," Gerard said sadly, "but my heart will not let me. Know that I am a caligrapher, and these disciples of Fust run after me round the world, taking the bread out of my mouth. But I wish them no ill. Heaven forbid!" He hurried from the shop.

"Dear Margaret," he whispered to himself, "we must lose no time; we must make our hay while the sun shines. One month more, and an avalanche of printer's type shall roll down from those Apennines and lay us waste."

He almost ran to the Princess Claelia.

He was ushered into an apartment new to him. It was not large, but luxurious; a fountain played in the center, and the floor was covered with panther skins, dressed with the hair, so that no footfall could be heard. The room was an antechamber to the princess's boudoir, for on one side there was no door, only an ample curtain of gorgeous tapestry.

Gerard was left alone until he became uneasy, doubting if he had been shown the wrong place. These doubts were soon dispelled.

A light step came swiftly behind the curtain; it parted, and there stood a figure the heathens might have worshipped. It was not quite Venus, nor quite Minerva, but between the two—nobler than Venus, more womanly than Jupiter's daughter. Toga, tunic, sandals; nothing was modern. As for beauty, that is of all times.

Gerard started up, and all the artist in him flushed with pleasure.

"Oh!" he cried innocently, gazing in rapture.

This added the last charm to his model: a light blush tinted her cheeks, her eyes brightened, and her mouth smiled with delicious complacency at this genuine tribute to her charms.

They looked at one another for some time. When she saw Gerard's eloquence was confined to ejaculating and gazing, she spoke. "Well, Gerardo, thou seest I have made myself an antique monster for thee."

"A monster? I doubt Fra Colonna would fall down and adore your highness, seeing you so habited."

"Nay, I care not to be adored by an old man. I would liefer be loved by a young one: of my own choosing."

Gerard took out his pencils, arranged his canvas, which he had covered with stout paper, and set to work. So absorbed was he that he had no mercy on his model. At last, after nearly an hour in one posture, "Gerardo," she said faintly, "I can stand so no more, even for thee."

"Sit down and rest awhile, Signora."

"I thank thee," she said, sinking into a chair, turning pale and sighing.

Gerard was alarmed and realized he had been inconsiderate. He took water from the fountain and was about to throw it in her face, but she put up a white hand deprecatingly: "Nay, hold it to my brow with thine hand: prithee, do not fling it at me!"

Gerard timidly and hesitantly applied his wet hand to her brow.

"Ah!" she sighed, "that is reviving. Again."

He applied it again. She thanked him and asked him to ring a little hand-bell on the table. He did so, and a maid came, who was sent to Floretta with orders to bring a large fan.

Floretta speedily arrived with the fan. She no sooner came near the princess than that lady's highbred nostrils suddenly expanded like a bloodhorse's. "Wretch!" she cried, rising with a sudden return to vigor, seizing Floretta with her left hand, twisting it in her hair, and with the right hand boxing her ears severely three times.

Floretta screamed and blubbered but obtained no mercy.

The antique toga left quite disengaged a bare arm, now seeming as powerful as it was beautiful; it rose and fell like the piston of a modern steam-engine, and heavy slaps resounded one after another on Floretta's shoulders. The last one drove her sobbing and screaming through the curtain, where she was heard crying bitterly for some time after.

"Saints of heaven!" cried Gerard, "what is amiss? what has she done?"

"She knows right well. 'Tis not the first time. The nasty toad! I'll learn her to come to me stinking of the musk-cat."

"Alas, Signora, 'twas a small fault, methinks."

"A small fault? Nay, 'twas a foul fault." She added with an amazing sudden descent to humility and sweetness, "Are you wroth with me for beating her, Gerardo?"

"Signora, it ill becomes me to school you; but methinks such as Heaven appoints to govern others should govern themselves."

"That is true, Gerardo. How wise you are, to be so young." She then called the other maid and gave her a little purse. "Take that to Floretta, and tell her 'the Gerardo' hath interceded for her; and so I must needs forgive her. There, Gerardo."

Gerard colored all over at the compliment; but not knowing how to turn a phrase equal to the occasion, he asked her if he should resume her picture.

"Not yet; beating that hussy hath somewhat breathed me. I'll sit awhile, and you shall talk to me. I know you can talk, an it pleases you, as rarely as you draw."

"That were easily done."

"Do it then, Gerardo."

Gerard was taken aback. "But, signora, I know not what to say. This is sudden."

"Say your real mind. Say you wish you were anywhere but here."

"Nay, signora, that would not be sooth. I wish one thing though."

"Ay, and what is that?" she said gently.

"I wish I could have drawn you as you were beating that poor lass. You were awful, yet lovely. Oh, what a subject for a Pythoness!"

"Alas! he thinks but of his art. And why keep such a coil about my beauty, Gerardo? You are far fairer than I am. You are more like Apollo than I to Venus. Also, you have lovely hair and lovely eyes—but you know not what to do with them."

"Ay, do I. To draw you, signora."

"Ah, yes; you can see my features with them; but you cannot see what any Roman gallant had seen long ago in your place. Yet sure you must have noted how welcome you are to me, Gerardo?"

"I can see your highness is always passing kind to me; a poor stranger like me."

"No, I am not, Gerardo. I have often been cold to you; rude sometimes; and you are so simple you see not the cause. Alas! I feared for my own heart. I feared to be your slave. I who have hitherto made slaves. Ah! Gerardo, I am unhappy. Ever since you came here I have lived upon your visits. The day you are to come I am bright. The other days I am listless, and wish them fled. You are not like the Roman gallants. You make me hate them. You are ten times braver to my eye; and you are wise and scholarly, and never flatter and lie. I scorn a man that lies. Gerardo, teach me thy magic; teach me to make thee as happy by my side as I am still by thine."

As she poured out these strange words, the princess's mellow voice sank almost to a whisper, trembling with half-suppressed passion, and her white hand stole timidly yet earnestly down Gerard's arm, resting like a soft bird upon his wrist, ready to fly away at a word.

Destitute of vanity and experience, wrapped up in his Margaret and his art, Gerard had not seen this revelation coming, though it had come by regular and visible gradations.

He blushed all over. His innocent admiration of the regal beauty that besieged him did not for a moment displace the absent Margaret's image. Yet it was regal beauty, wooing with a grace and tenderness he had never even figured in imagination. How to check her without wounding her?

He blushed and trembled.

The siren saw, and encouraged him.

"Poor Gerardo," she murmured, "fear not; none shall ever harm thee under my wing. Wilt not speak to me, Gerardo mio?"

"Signora!" muttered Gerard deprecatingly.

At this moment his eye, lowered in his confusion, fell on the shapely white arm and delicate hand that curled round his elbow like a tender vine, and it flashed across him how he had just seen that lovely limb employed on Floretta.

He trembled and blushed.

"Alas!" said the princess, "I scare him. Am I then so very terrible? Is it my Roman robe? I'll doff it, and habit me as when thou first camest to me. Mindest thou? 'Twas to write a letter to yon barren knight Ercole d'Orsini. Shall I tell thee? 'twas the sight of thee, and thy pretty ways, and thy wise words, made me hate him on the instant. I liked the fool well enough before; or wist I liked him. Tell me now how many times hast thou been here since then. Ah! thou knowest not; lovest me not, I doubt, as I love thee. Eighteen times, Gerardo. And each time dearer to me. The day thou comest not 'tis night, not day, to Claelia. Alas! I speak for both. Cruel boy, am I not worth a word? Hast every day a princess at thy feet? Nay, prithee, prithee, speak to me, Gerardo."

"Signora," faltered Gerard, "what can I say, that were not better left unsaid? Oh, evil day that ever I came here."

"Ah! say not so. 'Twas the brightest day ever shone on me or indeed on thee. I'll make thee confess so much ere long, ungrateful one."

"Your highness," began Gerard, in a low, pleading voice.

"Call me Claelia, Gerardo."

"Signora, I am too young and too little wise to know how I ought to speak to you, so as not to seem blind nor yet ungrateful. But this I know, I were both naught and ungrateful, and the worst foe e'er you had, did I take advantage of this mad fancy. Sure some ill spirit hath had leave to afflict you withal. For 'tis all unnatural that a princess adorned with every grace should abase her affections on a churl."

The princess withdrew her hand slowly from Gerard's wrist. Yet as it passed lightly over his arm it seemed to linger a moment at parting.

"You fear the daggers of my kinsmen," she said, half sadly, half contemptuously.

"No more than I fear the bodkins of your women," said Gerard haughtily. "But I fear God and the saints, and my own conscience."

"The truth, Gerardo, the truth! Hypocrisy sits awkwardly on thee. Princesses, while they are young, are not despised for love of God, but of some other woman. Tell me whom thou lovest; and if she is worthy thee I will forgive thee."

"No she in Italy, upon my soul."

"Ah! there is one somewhere then. Where? where?"

"In Holland,
