Gerard, the novice, had imposed upon himself a peculiar penance: to receive Lodovico with kindness, though he viewed the man internally as a slimy serpent. Yet, in the economy of self-denial, this burden proved too light to sustain itself. Like many rational acts of sacrifice, it quickly ceased to feel like a penance at all. Initially, the assassin's gaze upon the single life he had spared was a mixture of ludicrous pride and pathetic complacency. But once a good door is opened in a hardened heart, a stream of virtue flows through the aperture. Finding the act of saving life so sweet, Lodovico gradually grew averse to taking it; from that aversion came remorse, and from remorse, something resembling true penitence.

Teresa aided this transformation, threatening for the first time to depart unless he consented to live honestly. The good fathers of the convent supported her resolve, and Lodovico and Teresa were dispatched by sea to Leghorn, where Teresa possessed friends. There, the former assassin settled down, trading his blade for the heavy burden of a porter's trade.

At first, he found the labor miserably dull, complaining often of the monotony. Yet, perhaps this drudgery was far superior to the brief, violent excitement of being hewn in pieces by the Princess Claelia's myrmidons. His exile had spared him that fate. The princess, thwarted in her revenge, retreated into a profound melancholy. She dismissed her old confessor and summoned a new one renowned for his piety, entrusting to him what she termed her "griefs." This new confessor was none other than Fra Jerome. She could scarcely have fallen into better hands.

Fra Jerome listened to her grimly, then seized her by the shoulders and shook the delusions from her mind with the roughness one might reserve for a kitchen maid. For, on the path of duty, this hard monk feared the anger of princes no more than he feared the sea. In a few words, delivered with thunder and lightning, he revealed her as the criminal of criminals.

"You are the devil," he declared, "who with your money tempted one man to slay his fellow, and then, blinded by self-love, instead of blaming and punishing yourself, thirst for the blood of others—men less guilty than you."

At first, she resisted, claiming she was unused to being reprimanded by her confessors. But Fra Jerome overpowered her. He threatened her with the Church's curse, both in this life and the next; he tore the scales from her eyes and thundered until she sank down, groveling in remorse and terror at the feet of the gigantic Boanerges.

"Oh, holy father, have pity on a poor, weak woman," she cried, "and help me save my guilty soul. I was benighted for lack of ghostly counsel like yours, good father. I wake as from a dream."

"Doff thy jewels," Fra Jerome commanded sternly.

"I will. I will."

"Cast off thy silk and velvet; and clad in humbler garb than thy meanest servant, hasten instantly to Loretto."

"I will," the princess whispered faintly.

"No shoes; but a bare sandal."

"No, father."

"Wash the feet of pilgrims, both those going and those coming. To such as are holy friars, tell thy sin, and abide their admonition."

"Oh, holy father, let me wear my mask."

"Humph!"

"Oh, mercy! Think again! My features are known throughout Italy."

"Ay. Beauty is a curse to most of you. Well, thou mayst mask thine eyes; no more."

With this concession, she seized his hand, intending to kiss it, but he snatched it away rudely.

"What would you do? That hand handled the Eucharist but an hour ago; is it fit for one such as you to touch it?"

"Ah, no. But oh, do not go without giving your penitent daughter your blessing."

"There is time enough to ask it when you return from Loretto."

Thus, that marvelous occurrence by the banks of the Tiber left its mark upon all who acted in it, just as prodigies are said to do. The assassin, softened by the act of saving the life he was paid to take, turned from the stiletto to the knot of porters. The princess went barefoot to Loretto, weeping her crime and washing the feet of the base-born.

As for Gerard, carried from the Tiber into that convent as a suicide, he now passed for a young saint within its walls. Loving yet experienced eyes watched him. Upon a probation shorter than usual, he was admitted to priest's orders. Soon thereafter, he took the monastic vows and became a friar of St. Dominic. Dying to the world, the monk parted with the very name by which he had lived, thereby breaking the last link of association with earthly feelings. Here Gerard ended, and Brother Clement began.
