"As is the fleeting race of leaves, so too is that of men." In this very year, within the humble confines of a tailor's shop in Rotterdam, a great soul budded unnoticed, while a mighty figure fell to the earth with resounding fanfare.

At Bruges, Philip, Duke of Burgundy and Earl of Holland, lay dying. In the natural order, the poor fall ill and recover as fate decrees; but for the wealthy, in an age where one physician could slay three, disaster often followed. The Duke's ailment, unnamed in those days but known today as diphtheria, was a wasting sickness that claimed the aged. Thus, Dr. Remedy turned to the ancient art of bloodletting.

The Duke grew ice-cold—a marvel indeed.

Undeterred, the doctor summoned the arcane secrets of science. "Ho! This is grave," he cried. "Flay an ape immediately and affix it to the Duke's breast!"

State officers scrambled in every direction, their faces pale, hunting for an ape to counteract the bloodthirsty folly of humanity. But perdition awaited them; the Duke was without apes. Buffaloes, lizards, Turks, and leopards lay ready, yet none were the requisite beast.

"Why, there used to be an ape about," one officer stammered. "I saw him standing just there."

Indeed, there had been one; but a mastiff had torn the lively creature apart for stealing its supper, fulfilling the grim human adage: "Be of your time."

In this desperate hour, the seneschal cast his despairing gaze around the room, and hope suddenly ignited in his eyes.

"Here is this," he whispered urgently. "Surely this will suffice: it is altogether apelike, doublet and hose aside."

"Nay!" the chancellor snapped, his voice peevish. "The Princess Marie would have us hanged. She dotes upon this creature."

It was then that our friend Giles appeared, strutting with unconscious pride in cloth of gold.

Driven by impatience, Dr. Remedy commanded, "Then flay a dog."

"A dog is the next best thing to an ape," the doctor insisted, "provided it is a dog of a single color."

So they skinned a liver-colored dog and pinned its still-beating heart to their sovereign's chest. The Duke died.

Philip the Good, thus dispatched by the crude methods of his era, left behind thirty-one children. Somehow, one was deemed legitimate and ascended to rule in his stead. The benevolent duke had provided for nineteen of the others; the remainder were left to shift for themselves.

Flemish chronicles claimed the deceased prince descended from the kings of Troy through Thierry of Aquitaine and the ancient rulers of Franconia. Yet, this lineage offered no true distinction. Not a single prince of his day could be found who did not trace his blood back to Troy. In the medieval mind, "Priam" was merely a synonym for "Adam."

The Duke's body was carried to Burgundy and interred in a noble mausoleum of black marble at Dijon. Holland rang with mourning for his passing, little dreaming that within its borders, that same year, something as famous was being born. That judgment has since been reversed. Men now gaze with reverence at the tailor's house where the great birth of the fifteenth century occurred. As the song goes, no one knows or cares where the good duke died.

And why?

Dukes like Philip the Good come and go, leaving mankind neither a halfpenny wiser, nor better, nor different from how they found it.

But when, once in three hundred years, a child such as Margaret's son is born to the world, behold! A human torch kindled by fire from heaven; and "Let there be Light" thunders from pole to pole.
