The new Pope favored the Dominican order, and a message arrived from the Vatican summoning a capable friar to teach at the University of Basel. Clement was the very monk required for this task; well-versed in languages and having attended the lectures of Guarini the Younger in his worldly days, he was perfectly suited. His planned visit to England was therefore postponed, though not abandoned. Instead, he was dispatched to Basel, with the instruction that, since he would not be needed there for three months, he should preach along the way.

He departed through the northern gate with his eyes lowered, the entire figure wrapped in pious contemplation.

Hopeful, happy love; bereavement, despair, impiety, vice, suicide, remorse, religious despondency, penitence, death to the world, resignation.

And all within twelve short months.

Now the traveler was on foot again. Yet everything had changed; there were no perilous adventures now. Even thieves and robbers bowed to the ground before him, and instead of robbing him, forced stolen money upon him and begged his prayers. Consequently, this journey furnished few picturesque incidents. However, I have readers in mind who care little for melodrama and expect a quiet peep at what passes inside a man. To such students, undramatic things are often vocal, denoting the progress of a mind.

The first Sunday of Clement's journey was marked by this. He prayed for the soul of Margaret. He had never done so before. Not that her eternal welfare was not dearer to him than anything on earth; it was his humility. The terrible impieties that burst from him upon hearing the news of her death horrified his well-disposed readers, but not as on reflection they horrified him who had uttered them. For a long time during his novitiate, he was oppressed with religious despair. He thought he must have committed that sin against the Holy Spirit which dooms the soul forever. By degrees, that dark cloud cleared away, aided by Anselmo; but deep self-abasement remained. He felt his own salvation insecure, and moreover, thought it would be mocking Heaven should he, the deeply stained, pray for a soul so innocent, comparatively, as Margaret's. So he used to coax good Anselm and another kindly monk to pray for her. They did not refuse, nor did they do it by halves. In general, the good old monks—and there were good, bad, and indifferent in every convent—had a pure and tender affection for their younger brethren, which, in truth, was not of this world.

Clement, having preached on Sunday morning in a small Italian town and being mightily carried onward, was greatly encouraged. That day, a balmy sense of God's forgiveness and love descended upon him. He prayed for the welfare of Margaret's soul. From that hour, this became his daily habit, the one purified tie that by memory connected his heart with earth.

For his family were to him as if they had never been. The Church would not share with earth. Nor could even the Church cure the great love without annihilating the smaller ones.

During most of this journey, Clement rarely felt any spring of life within him, but when he was in the pulpit. The other exceptions were when he happened to relieve some fellow-creature.

A young man was tarantula-bitten, or perhaps, like many more, merely fancied it. Fancy or reality, he had been for two days without sleep, and in most extraordinary convulsions, leaping, twisting, and beating the walls. The village musicians had only excited him worse with their music. Exhaustion and death followed the disease when it gained such a head. Clement passed by and learned what was the matter. He sent for a psaltery and tried the patient with soothing melodies; but if the other tunes maddened him, Clement's seemed to crush him. He groaned and moaned under them and groveled on the floor. At last, the friar observed that at intervals his lips kept going. He applied his ear and found the patient was whispering a tune; and a very singular one, that had no existence. He learned this tune and played it. The patient's face brightened amazingly. He marched about the room on the light fantastic toe, enjoying it; and when Clement's fingers ached nearly off with playing it, he had the satisfaction of seeing the young man sink complacently to sleep to this lullaby, the strange creation of his own mind; for it seems he was no musician and never composed a tune before or after. This sleep saved his life. And Clement, after teaching the tune to another, in case it should be wanted again, went forward with his heart a little warmer.

On another occasion, he found a mob haling a decently dressed man along, who struggled and vociferated, but in a strange language. This person had walked into their town erect and sprightly, waving a mulberry branch over his head. Thereupon the natives first gazed stupidly, not believing their eyes, then pounced on him and dragged him before the podestà. Clement went with them; but on the way, he drew quietly near the prisoner and spoke to him in Italian; no answer. In French, German, Dutch; no assets. Then the man tried Clement in tolerable Latin, but with a sharpish accent. He said he was an Englishman and oppressed with the heat of Italy, had taken a bough off the nearest tree to save his head. "In my country, anybody is welcome to what grows on the highway. Confound the fools; I am ready to pay for it. But here is all Italy up in arms about a twig and a handful of leaves."

The pig-headed podestà would have sent the dogged islander to prison; but Clement mediated, and with some difficulty made the prisoner comprehend that silkworms, and by consequence mulberry leaves, were sacred, being under the wing of the Sovereign and his source of income. He urged on the podestà that ignorance of his mulberry laws was natural in a distant country, where the very tree perhaps was unknown. The opinionative islander turned the still vibrating scale by pulling out a long purse and repeating his original theory that the whole question was mercantile. "Quid damni?" said he, "Dic, et cito solvam." The podestà snuffed the gold: fined him a ducat for the duke, about the value of the whole tree, and pouched the coin.

The Englishman shook off his ire the moment he was liberated and laughed heartily at the whole thing, but was very grateful to Clement.

"You are too good for this hole of a country, father," said he. "Come to England! That is the only place in the world. I was an uneasy fool to leave it and wander among mulberries and their idiots. I am a Kentish squire, and educated at Cambridge University. My name is Rolfe, my place Betshanger. The man and the house are both at your service. Come over and stay till Domesday. We sit down forty to dinner every day at Betshanger. One more or one less at the board will not be seen. You shall end your days with me and my heirs if you will. Come now! What an Englishman says he means." And he gave him a great hearty grip of the hand to confirm it.

"I will visit thee some day, my son," said Clement; "but not to weary thy hospitality."

The Englishman then begged Clement to shrive him. "I know not what will become of my soul," said he, "I live like a heathen since I left England."

Clement consented gladly, and soon the islander was on his knees to him by the roadside, confessing the last month's sins.

Finding him so pious a son of the Church, Clement let him know he was really coming to England. He then asked him whether it was true that the country was overrun with Lollards and Wickliffites.

The other colored up a little. "There be black sheep in every land," said he. Then, after some reflection, he said gravely, "Holy father, hear the truth about these heretics. None are better disposed towards Holy Church than we English. But we are ourselves, and by ourselves. We love our own ways, and above all, our own tongue. The Norman could conquer our bill-hooks, but not our tongues; and hard they tried it for many a long year by law and proclamation. Our good foreign priests utter God to plain English folk in Latin, or in some French or Italian lingo, like the bleating of a sheep. Then comes the fox Wickliff and his crew, and reads him out of his own book in plain English, that all men's hearts warm to. Who can withstand this? God forgive me, I believe the English would turn deaf ears to St. Peter himself, spoke he not to them in the tongue their mothers sowed in their ears and their hearts along with mothers' kisses." He added hastily, "I say not this for myself; I am Cambridge bred; and good words come not amiss to me in Latin; but for the people in general. *Clavis ad corda Anglorum est lingua materna*."

"My son," said Clement, "blessed be the hour I met thee; for thy words are sober and wise. But alas! how shall I learn your English tongue? No book have I."

"I would give you my book of hours, father. 'Tis in English and Latin, cheek by jowl. But then, what would become of my poor soul, wanting my 'hours' in a strange land? Stay, you are a holy man, and I am an honest one; let us make a bargain; you to pray for me every day for two months, and I to give you my book of hours. Here it is. What say you to that?" And his eyes sparkled, and he was all on fire with mercantility.

Clement smiled gently at this trait; and quietly detached a manuscript from his girdle and showed him that it was in Latin and Italian.

"See, my son," said he, "Heaven hath foreseen our several needs and given us the means to satisfy them: let us change books; and, my dear son, I will give thee my poor prayers and welcome, not sell them thee. I love not religious bargains."

The islander was delighted. "So shall I learn the Italian tongue without risk to my eternal weal. Near is my purse, but nearer is my soul."

He forced money on Clement. In vain the friar told him it was contrary to his vow to carry more of that than was barely necessary.

"Lay it out for the good of the Church and of my soul," said the islander. "I ask you not to keep it, but take it you must and shall." And he grasped Clement's hand warmly again; and Clement kissed him on the brow and blessed him, and they went each his way.

About a mile from where they parted, Clement found two tired wayfarers lying in the deep shade of a great chestnut-tree, one of a thick grove the road skirted. Near the men was a little cart, and in it a printing-press, rude and clumsy as a vine-press. A jaded mule was harnessed to the cart.

And so Clement stood face to face with his old enemy.

And as he eyed it, and the honest, blue-eyed faces of the wearied craftsmen, he looked back as on a dream at the bitterness he had once felt towards this machine. He looked kindly down on them and said softly—

"Sweynheim!"

The men started to their feet.

"Pannartz!"

They scuttled into the wood and were seen no more.

Clement was amazed and stood puzzling himself.

Presently a face peeped from behind a tree.

Clement addressed it, "What fear ye?"

A quavering voice replied—

"Say, rather, by what magic you, a stranger, can call us by our names! I never clapt eyes on you till now."

"Oh, superstition! I know ye, as all good workmen are known—by your works. Come hither and I will tell ye."

They advanced gingerly from different sides, each regulating his advance by the other's.

"My children," said Clement, "I saw a Lactantius in Rome, printed by Sweynheim and Pannartz, disciples of Fust."

"D'ye hear that, Pannartz? our work has gotten to Rome already."

"By your blue eyes and flaxen hair I wist ye were Germans; and the printing-press spoke for itself. Who then should ye be but Fust's disciples, Pannartz and Sweynheim?"

The honest Germans were now astonished that they had suspected magic in so simple a matter.

"The good father hath his wits about him, that is all," said Pannartz.

"Ay," said Sweynheim, "and with those wits would he could tell us how to get this tired beast to the next town."

"Yea," said Sweynheim, "and where to find money to pay for his meat and ours when we get there."

"I will try," said Clement. "Free the mule of the cart and of all harness but the bare halter."

This was done, and the animal immediately lay down and rolled on his back in the dust like a kitten. Whilst he was thus employed, Clement assured them he would rise up a new mule.

"His Creator hath taught him this art to refresh himself, which the nobler horse knoweth not. Now, with regard to money, know that a worthy Englishman hath entrusted me with a certain sum to bestow in charity. To whom can I better give a stranger's money than to strangers? Take it, then, and be kind to some Englishman or other stranger in his need; and may all nations learn to love one another one day."

The tears stood in the honest workmen's eyes. They took the money with heartfelt thanks.

"It is your nation we are bound to thank and bless, good father, if we but knew it."

"My nation is the Church."

Clement was then for bidding them
