"Mistress, they all whisper he is dead."

"Not so," Margaret replied, her voice trembling. "They feed me with hopes."

"Ay, to your face, but behind your back, every tongue agrees he is gone."

At this cruel revelation, Margaret's tears began to flow. Beside her, Luke whimpered, seeking comfort. Though he possessed the sturdy frame of a man, his heart beat with the fragile rhythm of a girl.

"Prithee, weep not so sore, sweet mistress," he pleaded gently. "I would bring him back to life rather than see thee weed so deeply."

Margaret confessed that her sorrow stemmed from their double-tongued deceit. Composing herself, she placed a solemn hand upon his shoulder. "Luke, he is not dead. Dying men possess a strange sight. Listen to me: when my poor father was on his deathbed, and I, a simple fool, rejoiced thinking he would recover, he spoke to my mother and me. He sat in this very chair where you stand, and my mother was here, while I worked on a sleeve nearby. He said, 'I see him!' He saw him clearly—not like a failing man, but aflame. 'Sore disfigured—on a great river—coming this way.'"

"Ah, Luke," she cried, her desperation rising, "if you were a woman, possessing the depth of feeling you claim, you would pity me and find him for me. Think on it! He is the father of my child!"

"Alack, I would if I knew how," Luke sighed. "But how can I?"

"Nay, of course you cannot. I am mad to think it. But oh, if anyone truly cared for me, they would; that is all I know."

Luke fell silent, pondering. "The old folk say dying men see more than living wights. Let me think: my mind cannot gallop like yours. On a great river... Well, the Maas is a great river." He paused, weighing the possibilities. "Coming this way? Then if it were the Maas, he would have arrived by now. It is not the Maas. The Rhine is greater, far longer. I think it must be the Rhine."

"And so do I, Luke," Margaret insisted. "Denys bade him come down the Rhine. Yet, even if it is, he may turn off before reaching his birthplace. He does not pine for me as I for him; that is clear. Luke, do you not think he has deserted me?" She sought contradiction, but he only replied, "It looks very like it; what a fool he must be!"

"What do we know?" Margaret implored.

"Let me think again," Luke said slowly. "I cannot gallop."

His meditation yielded a plan. He knew a station sixty miles up the Rhine where all public boats docked. He would go there and intercept the truant. Though he did not know Gerard by sight, he would mingle with the passengers on every arriving boat and ask if a Gerard was present. "And, mistress," he added, "if you would give me a letter to him; for, being strangers, he may not believe a word I say."

"Good, kind, thoughtful Luke," she said, blushing as she realized how little she had valued him. "I will. But give me until supper-time to write it."

At supper, she handed him a long letter, tied with silk in the fashion of the day and sealed over the knot. Luke weighed it in his hand, a shadow of discontent crossing his face. "Say your father was not dreaming," he said gravely, "and say I have the luck to fall in with this man. Say that if he turns out to be better stuff than I think, and comes home to you then and there... what becomes of me?"

Margaret flushed to her brow. "Oh, Luke, Heaven will reward thee. I shall fall on my knees and bless thee; I shall love thee all my days, sweet Luke, as a mother loves her son. I am so old by thee; trouble ages the heart. Thou shalt not go; 'tis not fair of me. Love makes us all selfish."

"Humph!" Luke grunted. "And if," he resumed, "that scapegrace reads thy letter, hears me tell him how thou pinest for him, and yet, being a traitor or a mere idiot, refuses to turn to thee... what then? Must I die a bachelor, and thou fare lonely to thy grave, neither maid, wife, nor widow?"

Margaret panted with fear and emotion at this terrible, sensible warning. Finally, she faltered, "If, which our Lady be merciful to me and forbid... Oh!"

"Well, mistress?"

"If he should read my letter, hear thy words—and, sweet Luke, be just and tell him what a lovely babe he hath, fatherless, fatherless. Oh, Luke, can he be so cruel?"

"I trow not but if?"

"Then he will give thee up my marriage lines," she whispered, "and I shall be an honest woman, and a wretched one, and my boy will not be a bastard. Of course, then we could both go into any honest man's house that would be troubled with us. And even for thy goodness this day, I will—I will—ne'er be so ungrateful as to go past thy door to another man's."

"Ay, but will you come in at mine? Answer me that!"

"Oh, ask me not! Some day, perhaps, when my wounds cease bleeding. Alas, I'll try. If I don't fling myself and my child into the Maas. Do not go, Luke! Do not think of going! 'Tis all madness from first to last."

But Luke was as slow to forego an idea as to form one. His reply revealed how quickly love was forging a man within him. "Well," he said, "madness is something, anyway. I am tired of doing nothing for thee, and I am no great talker. To-morrow, at peep of day, I start. But hold, I have no money. My mother takes care of all mine; I ne'er see it again."

Then Margaret took out Catherine's gold angel, which had escaped her grasp so often, and gave it to Luke. He set out on his mad errand.

It did not seem so mad to him as it did to us. In a superstitious age, Luke acted on the dying man's dream, vision, or illusion much as we would act on respectable information.

But Catherine was downright angry when she heard of it. "To send the poor lad on such a wild-goose chase! But you are like many more girls; mark my words; by the time you have worn that Luke fairly out, and made him as sick of you as a dog, you will turn as fond on him as a cow on a calf, and 'Too late' will be the cry."

Meanwhile, the two friars reached Holland from the south just twelve hours after Luke started up the Rhine. Thus, whether wild-goose chase or not, the parties were rapidly nearing each other. Jerome, unable to preach in low Dutch, pushed on toward the coast, anxious to reach England as soon as possible. Having the stream with them, the friars would in fact have missed Luke by passing him in full stream below his station, but for the incident I am about to relate.

About twenty miles above the station Luke was making for, Clement landed to preach in a large village. Towards the end of his sermon, he noticed a grey nun weeping. He spoke to her kindly, asking what her grief was.

"Nay," she said, "'tis not for myself these tears flow; 'tis for my lost friend. Thy words reminded me of what she was, and what she is, poor wretch. But you are a Dominican, and I am a Franciscan nun."

"It matters little, my sister, if we are both Christians, and if I can aid thee in aught."

The nun looked in his face. "These are strange words, but methinks they are good; and thy lips are oh, most eloquent. I will tell thee our grief."

She revealed that a young nun, the darling of the convent and her bosom friend, had been lured away from her vows. After various gradations of sin, she was now living in a small inn as a chambermaid, in reality as a decoy, known to be selling her favors to wealthier customers. "Anywhere else we might, by kindly violence, force her away from perdition," she added. "But this innkeeper is the servant of the fierce baron on the height there, and hath his ear still. He would burn our convent to the ground were we to take her by force."

"Moreover, souls will not be saved by brute force," Clement said.

While they talked, Jerome came up, and Clement persuaded him to lie at the convent that night. In the morning, when Clement told him he had had a long talk with the abbess and promised to try to win back her nun, Jerome objected, saying it was not their business and a waste of time. Clement, however, was no longer a mere pupil. He stood firm, and finally they agreed that Jerome should go forward to secure their passage in the next ship for England, while Clement was allowed time to make his well-meant but idle experiment.

About ten o'clock that day, a figure in a horseman's cloak, great boots, and a large flapping felt hat stood like a statue near the auberge where the apostate nun, Mary, was. The friar thus disguised was truly wretched. Ardent natures undertake wonders, but are dashed when they come hand-to-hand with sickening difficulties. Yet, as their hearts are steel, though their nerves are anything but iron, they turn not back, but panting and dispirited, struggle on to the last.

Clement hesitated long at the door, praying for help and wisdom, before entering the inn and sitting down faint of heart, his body in cold perspiration. Inside, however, he was another man. He called lustily for a cup of wine, which the landlord brought him. Clement paid with money the convent had supplied and made a show of drinking.

"Landlord," he said, "I hear there is a fair chambermaid in thine house."

"Ay, stranger, the buxomest in Holland. But she gives not her company to all comers, only to good customers."

Friar Clement dangled a massive gold chain in the landlord's sight. The landlord laughed and shouted, "Here, Janet, here is a lover for thee who would bind thee in chains of gold; and a tall lad into the bargain, I promise thee."

"Then I am in double luck," said a female voice. "Send him hither."

Clement rose, shuddered, and passed into the room where Janet was seated, playing with a piece of work, laying it down every minute to sing a mutilated fragment of a song. In her mode of life, she lacked the patience to carry anything out.

After a few words of greeting, the disguised visitor asked if they could not be more private somewhere.

"Why not?" she said, rising and smiling, tripping before him. He followed, groaning inwardly and sorely perplexed.

"There," she said. "Have no fear! Nobody ever comes here but such as pay for the privilege."

Clement looked round the room and prayed silently for wisdom. Then he went softly and closed the window-shutters carefully.

"What on earth is that for?" Janet asked, in some uneasiness.

"Sweetheart," the visitor whispered with a mysterious air, "it is that God may not see us."

"Madman," Janet retorted. "Think you a wooden shutter can keep out His eye?"

"Nay, I know not. Perchance He has too much on hand to notice us. But I would not the saints and angels should see us. Would you?"

"My poor soul, hope not to escape their sight! The only way is not to think of them; for if you do, it poisons your cup. For two pins I'd run and leave thee. Art pleasant company in sooth."

"After all, girl, so that men see us not, what signify God and the saints seeing us? Feel this chain! 'Tis virgin gold. I shall cut two of these heavy links off for thee."

"Ah! now thy discourse is to the point," she said, handling the chain greedily. "Why, 'tis as massy as the chain round the virgin's neck at the conv—" She did not finish the word.

"Whisht! whisht! whisht! 'Tis it. And thou shalt have thy share. But betray me not."

"Monster!" cried Janet, drawing back with repugnance. "What, rob the blessed Virgin of her chain and give it to an—"

"You are none," cried Clement exultingly, "or you had not recked for that—Mary!"

"Ah! ah! ah!"

"Thy patron saint, whose chain this is, sends me to greet thee."

She ran screaming to the window and began to undo the shutters. Her fingers trembled, and Clement had time to disabuse himself of his boots and hat before the light streamed in upon him. He then let his cloak quietly fall and stood before her, a Dominican friar, calm and majestic as a statue, holding his crucifix towering over her with a loving, sad, and solemn look that somehow relieved her of the physical part of fear but crushed her with religious terror and remorse. She crouched and cowered against the wall.

"Mary," he said gently, "one word! Are you happy?"

"As happy as I shall be in hell."

"And they are not happy at the convent; they weep for you."

"For me?"

"Day and night; above all, Sister Ursula."

"Poor Ursula!" The strayed nun began to weep at the thought of her friend.

"The angels weep still more. Wilt not dry all their tears in earth and heaven and save thyself?"

"Ay! would I could; but it is too late."

"Satan avaunt," cried the monk stern
