As Jorian donned his doublet and jerkin, preparing to depart for Peter's tomb, his tongue remained far from idle. "They used to call him a magician out in Sevenbergen," he remarked, his voice carrying the rough cadence of the market square. "And they say he gave them a taste of his trade before leaving. He told them he saw Margaret's boy descending the Rhine in fine clothes, laden with gold, yet his face scarred by a foreign blade, missing limbs that once were whole. But, dear heart, nothing came of it. Margaret still pines for her son; and Peter lies as still as his neighbors, though she has placed a stone slab over him to keep him where he rests, as you shall soon see."

He pressed both hands against the grave's edge, rising to leave, when the friar laid a trembling hand upon his shoulder. "How long since Peter Brandt passed?" the monk whispered, his voice strange and strained.

"About two months. Why ask?"

"And his daughter buried him, you say?"

"Nay, I performed the burial rites, but she paid the fee and commissioned the stone."

"Then... but he had only one daughter, Margaret?"

"No more, at least, that he acknowledged."

"Then you believe Margaret is—alive?"

"Believe? Why, I should be dead otherwise. Riddle me that."

"Alas, how can I understand? You love her!"

"No more than reason dictates, being a married man and father to four sturdy knaves like myself. Nay, the truth is, she saved my life scarcely six weeks ago. Had she been dead, she could not have kept me alive. Bless your heart, I could not keep food on my stomach; nor could any doctor. My Joan said, 'Tis time to buy thee a shroud.' I replied, 'I dare say, so it is; but try borrowing one first.' Then in came my lady, this Margaret—who, by your reckoning, died three years ago—opened the windows, shifted me from my bed, and cured me in the twinkling of an eye. With what? There pinches the shoe; with the scurviest herb, plucked from my own garden, sweet feverfew. An herb, quotha, 'tis a weed; leastways, it was a weed until it cured me. Now, whenever I pass my hunch, I doff my bonnet and cry, 'Fly service to thee.' Why, Father, you look wondrous pale, then red, then white? What is the matter? What, in Heaven's name, troubles you?"

"The surprise—the joy—the wonder—the fear," gasped Clement.

"Why, what does it concern thee? Art thou of kin to Margaret Brandt?"

"Nay; but I knew one who loved her well, so well her death nearly killed him, body and soul. And yet thou sayest she lives. And I believe thee."

Jorian stared, and after a considerable silence, spoke very gravely. "Father, you have asked me many questions, and I have answered them truly; now, for our Lady's sake, answer me but two. Did you, in very sooth, know one who loved this poor lass? Where?"

Clement stood on the brink of revealing himself, but remembering Jerome's letter, he shrank from bearing the name he had worn in the world. "I knew him in Italy," he said.

"If you knew him, you can tell me his name," Jorian urged cautiously.

"His name was Gerard Eliassoen."

"Oh, but this is strange. Stay, what made thee say Margaret Brandt was dead?"

"I was with Gerard when a letter arrived from Margaret Van Eyck. It told him the one he loved was dead and buried. Let me sit down, for my strength fails me. Foul play! Foul play!"

"Father," said Jorian, "I thank Heaven for sending thee to me. Ay, sit ye down; ye look like a ghost; ye fast too much to be strong. My mind misgives me; methinks I hold the clue to this riddle, and if I do, there be two knaves in this town whose heads I would fain batter to pieces as I do this mould," and he clenched his teeth, raising his long spade above his head and bringing it down furiously upon the earth several times. "Foul play? You never spoke a truer word in your life. If you know where Gerard is now, lose no time and show him the trap they have laid. Mine is but a dull head, but sometimes the slow hound puzzles out the scent—go on. And I do think you and I have grasped two ends of one stick, and a main foul one."

Jorian then, after those useless preliminaries men of his class always deal in, came to the point of the story. He had been employed by the burgomaster of Tergou to repair the floor of an upper room. When it was nearly done, curiosity seized him as he fetched his tools, hearing loud words below. He lay prone and heard the burgomaster speak of a letter Cornelis and Sybrandt intended to deliver to replace one Hans Memling was taking to Gerard. "Their will was good, but their stomach was small," the old man had said, showing them a drawer full of silver, promising each thief a handful if they succeeded.

"Well, Father," continued Jorian, "I thought little of it then, save for the bargain itself, which kept me awake mostly all night. Think on't! Next morning at peep of day, who should I see but my masters Cornelis and Sybrandt emerging from their house, each with a black eye. 'Oho,' says I, 'what mark has yon Hans put upon ye? Well now, I hope that is all you have got for your pains.' Didn't they make for the burgomaster's house? I hid in my place."

At this revelation, the monk's nostril dilated, his restless eye showing the suspense he endured.

"Well, Father," Jorian pressed on, "the burgomaster brought them into that same room. He held a letter in his hand; I am no scholar, however, I have as many eyes in my head as the Pope, and I saw the drawer opened. Those two knaves thrust in each a hand and drew it out full. Saints in glory, how they tried to hold more, and more, and more of that stuff! Sybrandt had daubed his hand in something sticky, I think 'twas glue, and he managed to carry one or two pieces away sticking to the back of his hand. He! He! He! 'Tis a sin to laugh. So you see luck was on the wrong side as usual; they had done the trick, but how they did it, that, methinks, will never be known till doomsday. They left their immortal jewels in yon drawer. Well, they got a handful of silver for them; the devil had the worst of that bargain. There, Father, that is off my mind. Often I longed to tell it to someone, but I durst not to the women; or Margaret would not have had a friend left in the world. For those two black-hearted villains are the favorites. 'Tis always so. Have not the old folk just taken a brave new shop in this very town, in the Hoog Straet? There you may see their sign, a gilt sheep and a lambkin; a brace of wolves sucking their dam would be nigher the mark. And there the whole family feasts this day; oh, 'tis a fine world. What, not a word, holy father? You sit there like stone, having not even a curse to bestow on them, the stony-hearted miscreants. Was it not enough the poor lad was all alone in a strange land? Must his own flesh and blood go and lie away the one blessing his enemies left him? And then think of her pining and pining all these years, sitting at the window looking down the street for Gerard! So constant, so tender, and true: my wife says she is sure no woman ever loved a man truer than she loves the lad those villains have parted from her. The day never passes but she weeps salt tears for him. And when I think that, but for those two greedy lying knaves, yon winsome lad, whose life I saved, might be by her side this day the happiest he in Holland; and the sweet lass, that saved my life, might be sitting with her cheek upon her sweetheart's shoulder, the happiest she in Holland in place of the saddest; oh, I thirst for their blood, the nasty, sneaking, lying, cogging, cowardly, heartless, bowelless—how now?"

The monk started wildly up, livid with fury and despair, rushing headlong from the place with both hands clenched and raised high. So terrible was this inarticulate burst of fury that Jorian's puny ire died out at sight of it, and he stood looking dismayed after the human tempest he had launched.

While thus absorbed, he felt his arm grasped by a small, tremulous hand.

It was Margaret Brandt.

He started; her presence there seemed so strange. She had waited long on Peter's tombstone, but the friar did not come. So she entered the church to see if he was still there. She could not find him.

Presently, going up the south aisle, the gigantic shadow of a friar came rapidly along the floor and past a pillar, seeming to pass through her. She was near screaming, but in a moment remembered Jorian's shadow had come in so from the churchyard; she tried to clamber out the nearest way. She did so, with some difficulty; by that time Clement was just disappearing down the street, yet so expressive is the body as well as the face, she could see he was greatly agitated. Jorian and she looked at one another, and at the wild figure of the distant friar.

"Well?" she asked Jorian, trembling.

"Well," he replied, "you startled me. How come you here of all people?"

"Is this a time for idle chat? What said he to you? He has been speaking to you; deny it not."

"Girl, as I stand here, he asked me whereabout you were buried in this churchyard."

"Ah!"

"I told him, nowhere, thank Heaven: you were alive and saving other folk from the churchyard."

"Well?"

"Well, the long and the short is, he knew thy Gerard in Italy; and a letter came saying you were dead; and it broke thy poor lad's heart. Let me see; who was the letter written by? Oh, by the demoiselle van Eyck. That was his way of it. But I up and told him nay; 'twas neither demoiselle nor dame that penned yon lie, but Ghysbrecht Van Swieten, and those foul knaves, Cornelis and Sybrandt; these changed the true letter for one of their own. I told him as how I saw the whole villainy done through a chink; and now, if I have not been and told you!"

"Oh, cruel! cruel! But he lives. The fear of fears is gone. Thank God!"

"Ay, lass; and as for thine enemies, I have given them a dig. For yon friar is friendly to Gerard, and he is gone to Eli's house, methinks. For I told him where to find Gerard's enemies and thine, and wow but he will give them their lesson. If ever a man was mad with rage, 'tis yon. He turned black and white, and parted like a stone from a sling. Girl, there was thunder in his eye and silence on his lips. Made me cold a did."

"Oh, Jorian, what have you done?" cried Margaret. "Quick! quick! help me thither, for the power is gone all out of my body. You know him not as I do. Oh, if you had seen the blow he gave Ghysbrecht; and heard the frightful crash! Come, save him from worse mischief. The water is deep enough; but not bloody yet, come!"

Her accents were so full of agony that Jorian sprang out of the grave and came with her, huddling on his jerkin as he went.

But as they hurried along, he asked her what on earth she meant. "I talk of this friar, and you answer me of Gerard."

"Man, see you not, this is Gerard!"

"This, Gerard? What mean ye?"

"I mean, yon friar is my boy's father. I have waited for him long, Jorian. Well, he is come to me at last. And thank God for it. Oh, my poor child! Quicker, Jorian, quicker!"

"Why, thou art mad as he. Stay! By St. Bavon, yon was Gerard's face; 'twas nought like it; yet somehow—'twas it. Come on! come on! let me see the end of this."

"The end? How many of us will live to see that?"

They hurried along in breathless silence, till they reached Hoog Straet.

Then Jorian tried to reassure her. "You are making your own trouble," he said. "Who says he has gone thither? More likely to the convent to weep and pray, poor soul. Oh, cursed, cursed villains!"

"Did not you tell him where those villains bide?"

"Ay, that I did."

"Then quicker, oh, Jorian, quicker. I see the house. Thank God and all the saints, I shall be in time to calm him. I know what I'll say to him; Heaven forgive me! Poor Catherine; 'tis of her I think: she has been a mother to me."

The shop was a corner house with two doors; one in the main street for customers, and a house-door round the corner.

Margaret and Jorian were now within twenty yards of the shop when they heard a roar inside, like that of some wild animal, and the friar burst out, white and raging, tearing down the street.

Margaret screamed and sank fainting on Jorian's arm.

Jorian
