The news arrived swiftly that Margaret Van Eyck was dead and buried. By a will executed a year prior, she bequeathed her entire estate—after settling funeral costs and granting specific gifts to Reicht Heynes—to her beloved daughter, Margaret Brandt. The testatrix requested that Reicht remain in her service until the daughter was wed.

Through this inheritance, Margaret Brandt acquired a fully furnished house, a collection of sketches, and paintings that would constitute a fortune in the modern era. Among these treasures was a single portrait she cherished above all others: "A Betrothal." The painting captured the solemn gravity of the groom's expression and the demure composure of the bride. While Jan van Eyck had completed the background, the figure of the bride was painted almost entirely by Margaret herself. The accessories were rendered with exquisite precision, a marvel of skill that endures to this day. Margaret sent word to Reicht to remain in the house until she could summon the courage to step inside, asking him to guard the portrait carefully, noting it was kept in a small cupboard—the diptych.

Shortly thereafter, Luke Peterson returned home and learned that Gerard was now a monk. He nearly went mad with joy, rushing to Margaret with the declaration, "Heed, mistress. If he cannot marry you, I can."

"You?" Margaret asked, surprised. "Why, I have seen him."

"But he is a friar," Luke insisted.

"He was my husband and my boy's father long before he became a friar. And I have seen him; I've seen him."

Luke was thoroughly puzzled. "I'll tell you what," he said, "I have a cousin who is a lawyer. I will go and ask him whether you are married or single."

"Nay," Margaret replied sharply. "I shall ask my own heart, not a lawyer. So that is your regard for me? To go making me the town talk? Oh, fie!"

"That is done already without a word from me," Luke retorted.

"But not by such as seek my respect. And if you do it, never come nigh me again."

"Ay," Luke sighed, "you are like a dove to all the rest; but you are a hardhearted tyrant to me."

"'Tis your own fault, dear Luke, for wooing me. That is what prevents me from being as kind to you as I desire, Luke, my bonny lad, listen to me. I am rich now; I can make my friends happy, though not myself. Look round the street, look round the parish. There are many women fairer than I, twice told, and not spoiled with weeping. Look high; take your choice. Speak to the lass herself, and I'll speak to the mother; they shall not say thee nay; take my word for't."

"I see what you mean," Luke said, turning very red. "But if I cannot have your liking, I will none of your money. I was your servant when you were poor as I; and poorer. No; if you would rather be a friar's leman than an honest man's wife, you are not the woman I took you for. So part we without malice: seek your comfort on yon road, where never a she did find it yet. And for me, I'll live and die a bachelor. Good even, mistress."

"Farewell, dear Luke; and God forgive you for saying that to me."

For some days, Margaret dreaded, almost as much as she desired, the coming interview with Gerard. She told herself, "I wonder not he keeps away a while; for so should I." However, he would hear he was a father; the desire to see their boy would overcome everything. "And," the poor girl murmured to herself, "if so be that meeting does not kill me, I feel I shall be better after it than I am now."

But when day after day passed and he was not heard of, a freezing suspicion began to creep into her mind. What if his absence was intentional? What if he had gone to some cold-blooded monks, his fellows, and they had forbidden him to see her again? The convent had already shown itself as merciless to true lovers as the grave itself. At this thought, the very life seemed to die out of her.

Now, for the first time, deep indignation mingled with her grief and apprehension. "Can he have ever loved me? To run from me and his boy without a word! Why, this poor Luke thinks more of me than he does."

While her mind was in this state, Giles came roaring. "I've hit the clout; our Gerard is Vicar of Gouda."

A brief sketch of the dwarf's court life prepares the reader for his account of this feat. Some months before he went to court, his intelligence had budded. He himself dated the change from a certain eighth of June, when, swinging by one hand along with the week's washing on a tightrope in the drying ground, something cracked inside his head; lo! intellectual powers unchained. At court, his shrewdness and bluntness of speech, coupled with his gigantic voice and small stature, made him a Power; without the last item, they would have conducted him to that unpopular gymnasium, the gallows. The young Duchess of Burgundy and Marie, the heiress apparent, both petted him, as great ladies have petted dwarfs in all ages; and the court poet melted butter by the six-foot rule and poured enough of it down his back to stew Goliath in. He even amplified, versified, and enfeebled certain rough and ready sentences dictated by Giles.

The centipedal prolixity that resulted went to Eli by letter, thus entitled:

"The high and puissant Princess Marie of Bourgogne her lytel jantilman hys complaynt of y' Coort, and praise of a rusticall lyfe, versificated, and empapyred by me the lytel jantilman's right lovynge and obsequious servitor, etc."

But the dwarf reached his climax by a happy mixture of mind and muscle. The day before a grand court joust, he challenged the Duke's giant to a trial of strength. This challenge made the gravest grin and aroused expectation.

Giles had a lofty pole planted ready, and at the appointed hour went up it like a squirrel, and by strength of arm made a right angle with his body, and so remained; then slid down so quickly that the high and puissant princess squeaked and hid her face in her hands, not to see the demise of her pocket-Hercules.

The giant effected only about ten feet, then looked ruefully up and ruefully down and descended, bathed in perspiration to argue the matter.

"It was not the dwarf's greater strength, but his smaller body," the giant claimed.

The spectators received this excuse with loud derision. There was the fact: the dwarf was great at mounting a pole; the giant only great at excuses. In short, Giles had gauged their intellects, with his own body no doubt.

"Come," said he, "an ye go to that, I'll wrestle ye, my lad, if so be you will let me blindfold your eyne."

The giant, smarting under defeat and thinking he could surely recover it by this means, readily consented.

"Madam," said Giles, "see you yon blind Samson? At a signal from me he shall make me a low obeisance, and unbonnet to me."

"How may that be, being blinded?" inquired a maid of honour.

"I'll wager on Giles for one," said the princess.

"That is my affair."

When several wagers were laid pro and con, Giles hit the giant in the bread-basket. He went double (the obeisance), and his bonnet fell off.

The company yelled with delight at this delicate stroke of wit, and Giles took to his heels. The giant followed as soon as he could recover his breath and tear off his bandage. But it was too late; Giles had prepared a little door in the wall, through which he could pass but not a giant, and had coloured it so artfully it looked like a wall. He tore it open and went headlong through, leaving no vestige but this posy written very large upon the reverse of his trick door:

Long limbs, big body, panting wit
By wee and wise is bet and bit

After this, Giles became a Force.

He shall now speak for himself.

Finding Margaret unable to believe the good news and sceptical as to the affairs of Holy Church being administered by dwarfs, he narrated as follows:

"When the princess sent for me to her bedroom as of custom, to keep her out of languor, I came not mirthful nor full of country dicts, as is my wont, but dull as lead.

"'Why, what aileth thee?' quo' she. 'Art sick?' 'At heart,' quo' I. 'Alas, he is in love,' quo' she. Whereat five brazen hussies, which they call them maids of honour, did giggle loud. 'Not so mad as that,' said I, 'seeing what I see at court of women folk.'

"'There, ladies,' quo' the princess, 'best let him a be. 'Tis a liberal mannikin, and still giveth more than he taketh of saucy words.'

"'In all sadness,' quo' she, 'what is the matter?'

"I told her I was meditating, and what perplexed me was that other folk could now and then keep their word, but princes never.

"'Heyday,' says she, 'thy shafts fly high this morn.' I told her, 'Ay, for they hit the Truth.'

"She said I was as keen as keen; but it became not me to put riddles to her, nor her to answer them. 'Stand aloof a bit, mesdames,' said she, 'and thou speak withouten fear;' for she saw I was in sad earnest.

"I began to quake a bit; for mind ye, she can doff freedom and don dignity quicker than she can slip out of her dressing-gown into kirtle of state. But I made my voice so soft as honey (wherefore smilest?), and I said 'Madam, one evening, a matter of five years agone, as ye sat with your mother, the Countess of Charolois, who is now in heaven, worse luck, you wi' your lute, and she wi' her tapestry, or the like, do ye mind there came into ye a fair youth with a letter from a painter body, one Margaret Van Eyck?'

"She said she thought she did, 'Was it not a tall youth, exceeding comely?'

"'Ay, madam,' said I; 'he was my brother.'

"'Your brother?' said she, and did eye me like all over, (What dost smile at?)

"So I told her all that passed between her and Gerard, and how she was for giving him a bishopric; but the good countess said, 'Gently, Marie! he is too young; and with that they did both promise him a living: 'Yet,' said I, 'he hath been a priest a long while, and no living. Hence my bile.'

"'Alas!' said she, ''tis not by my good will; for all this thou hast said is sooth, and more. I do remember my dear mother said to me, 'See thou to it if I be not here.' So then she cried out, 'Ay, dear mother, no word of thine shall ever fall to the ground.'

"I, seeing her so ripe, said quickly, 'Madam, the Vicar of Gouda died last week.' (For when ye seek favours of the great, behoves ye know the very thing ye aim at.)

"'Then thy brother is vicar of Gouda,' quo' she, 'so sure as I am heiress of Burgundy and the Netherlands. Nay, thank me not, good Giles,' quo' she, 'but my good mother. And I do thank thee for giving of me somewhat to do for her memory. And doesn't she fall a weeping for her mother? And doesn't that set me off a-snivelling for my good brother that I love so dear, and to think that a poor little elf like me could yet speak in the ear of princes, and make my beautiful brother vicar of Gouda; eh, lass, it is a bonny place, and a bonny manse, and hawthorn in every bush at spring-tide, and dog-roses and eglantine in every summer hedge. I know what the poor fool affects, leave that to me."

The dwarf began his narrative strutting to and fro before Margaret, but he ended it in her arms; for she could not contain herself, but caught him and embraced him warmly. "Oh, Giles," she said, blushing and kissing him, "I cannot keep my hands off thee, thy body it is so little, and thy heart so great. Thou art his true friend. Bless thee! bless thee! bless thee! Now we shall see him again. We have not set eyes on him since that terrible day."

"Gramercy, but that is strange," said Giles. "Maybe he is ashamed of having cursed those two vagabones, being our own flesh and blood, worse luck."

"Think you that is why he hides?" said Margaret eagerly.

"Ay, if he is hiding at all. However, I'll cry him by bellman."

"Nay, that might much offend him."

"What care I? Is Gouda to go vicarless and the manse in nettles?"

And to Margaret's secret satisfaction, Giles had the new vicar cried in Rotterdam and the neighbouring towns. He easily persuaded Margaret that in a day or two Gerard would be sure to hear and come to his benefice. She went to look at his manse and thought how comfortable it might be made for him, and how dearly she should love to do it.

But the days rolled on, and Gerard came neither to Rotterdam nor Gouda. Giles was mortified, Margaret indignant, and very wretched. She said to herself, "Thinking me dead, he comes home, and now,
