One day, as Clement lay there sighing and groaning, prayerless, tuneless, and hopeless, a sudden thought flashed into his mind. He realized that just as he had once cared for the poor and the wayfarer, he must now care for himself. He resolved to fill his den of despair with the name of God, the sacred words of Scripture, and the pious consolations of the Church.

Like the pilgrim Christian at the feet of Apollyon, he reached out his hand—not for a sword, which he lacked, but for the humble weapon of peaceful labor, his chisel. He seized it as if his very soul depended upon the stroke of his arm. They say that Michelangelo, in the generation following, carved statues not by modeling clay and hiring mechanics to chip away, but by seizing the block, conceiving the image, and striking with mallet and steel until the marble chips flew madly about him and the mass sprouted into form. So Clement drew no guiding lines. He turned to his memory for gracious words and dashed eagerly at his work, carving them into the soft stone between working and fighting.

He begged his visitors for candle ends and rancid oil. "Anything is good enough for me," he said, "if 'twill but burn." Thus, at night, the cave glowed afar off like a blacksmith's forge, visible through the window and the gaping cracks of the rude stone door. The rustics beholding it crossed themselves, suspecting devilries, while within, the holy talismans appeared on the walls one after another. Sparks and chips flew day and night, night and day, as the soldier of Solitude and the Church plied his bloodless weapon with sighs and groans.

{*ton Satanan suntripson upo tous pothas ymwn*}—Beat down Satan under our feet.
*Sursum Corda*—Up, hearts!
*Deus Refugium nostrum et virtus*—O God, our refuge and strength.
*Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi miserere mihi*—O Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world, have mercy upon me.
*Sancta Trinitas unus Deus, miserere nobis*—O Holy Trinity, one God, have mercy upon us.
*Ab infestationibus Daemonum, a ventura ira, a damnatione perpetua. Libera nos Domine*—From the assaults of demons, from the wrath to come, from everlasting damnation, deliver us, O Lord.
*Deus, qui miro ordine Angelorum ministeria...* (the whole collect).
*Quem quaerimus adjutorem nisi te Domine qui pro peccatis nostris juste irascaris?*—Of whom may we seek succour but of Thee, O Lord, who for our sins art justly displeased?
*Sancte Deus, Sancte fortis, Sancte et misericors Salvator, amarae morti ne tradas nos*—Holy God, Holy strong, Holy and merciful Savior, do not deliver us to bitter death.

Beneath the great crucifix fastened to the wall, he graved a passage from Augustine:

*O anima Christiana, respice vulnera patientis, sanguinem morientis, pretium redemptionis. Haec quanta sint cogitate, et in statera mentis vestrae appendite, ut totus vobis figatur in corde, qui pro vobis totus fixus est in cruce. Nam si passio Christi ad memoriam revocetur, nihil est tam durum quod non aequo animo toleretur.*

Which may thus be rendered: *O Christian soul, look on the wounds of the suffering One, the blood of the dying One, the price paid for our redemption! Think how great these things be, and weigh them in the balance of thy mind, that He may be wholly nailed to thy heart, who for thee was all nailed unto the cross. For do but call to mind the sufferings of Christ, and there is nought on earth too hard to endure with composure.*

Soothed a little, a very little, by these sweet and pious words raised all around him, yet weighed down by watching and working night and day, Clement one morning sank prostrate with fatigue, and a deep sleep overpowered him for many hours. Awakening quietly, he heard a little cheep. He opened his eyes, and lo! upon his breviary, which rested on a low stool near his feet, perched a robin redbreast. With a single pull, it ruffled all its feathers, smoothing them as suddenly, and cocking its bill this way and that with a vast display of cunning purely imaginary.

Clement held his breath. He half-closed his eyes lest they should frighten the airy guest. Down came the robin on the floor. There, it went through its pantomime of astuteness; then *pim, pim, pim*, with three stiff little hops, like a ball of worsted on vertical wires, it was on the hermit's bare foot. On this eminence it swelled and contracted again, with an ebb and flow of feathers, but Clement lost sight of it, for he quite closed his eyes and scarce drew his breath in fear of frightening and losing his visitor. He was content merely to feel the minute claw on his foot, sensing its presence by knowing it was there.

Presently, a little flutter with two little wings, and the feathered busybody was back on the breviary. Then Clement determined to try feeding this pretty little fidget without scaring it away. It was very difficult. He had a piece of bread within reach, but how to get at it? He thought he was five minutes creeping his hand up to that bread, and when there, he must not move his arm. Slily, he got a crumb between a finger and thumb and shot it as boys do marbles, keeping the hand quite still.

Cockrobin saw it fall near him and displayed sagacity, but moved not. When another followed, and then another, he popped down and caught up one of the crumbs, but not quite understanding this mystery, he fled with it, for more security, to an eminence—to wit, the hermit's knee. And so the game proceeded until a much larger fragment than usual rolled along. Here was a prize. Cockrobin pounced on it, bore it aloft, and fled so swiftly into the world with it that the cave resounded with the buffeted air.

"Now, bless thee, sweet bird," sighed the stricken solitary. "Thy wings are music, and thou a feathered ray camest to light my darkened soul."

And from that moment, to his orisons, and then to his tools with a little bit of courage, this became his day's work:

So the days rolled on; the weather grew colder, but Clement's heart grew warmer, and despondency rolled away. By and by, somehow or another, it was gone. He had outlived it. It had come like a cloud, and it went like one. Presently, all was reversed; his cell seemed illuminated with joy. His work pleased him; his prayers were full of unction; his psalms were songs of praise. Hosts of little birds followed their crimson leader, flying from the snow, and a parish full of Cains made friends one after another with Abel; fast friends.

One keen frosty night, as he sang the praises of God to his tuneful psaltery, and his hollow cave rang forth the holy psalmody upon the night, as if that cave itself were Tubal's surrounding shell or David's harp, he heard a clear whine, not unmelodious. It became louder and less in tune. He peeped through the chinks of his rude door, and there sat a great red wolf moaning melodiously with his nose high in the air.

Clement was rejoiced. "My sins are going," he cried, "and the creatures of God are owning me, one after another." In a burst of enthusiasm, he struck up the laud:

"Praise Him all ye creatures of His!
Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord."

And all the time he sang, the wolf bayed at intervals.

But above all, he seemed now to be drawing nearer to that celestial intercourse which was the sign and the bliss of the true hermit. He had dreams about the saints and angels so vivid they were more like visions. He saw bright figures clad in woven snow. They bent on him eyes lovelier than those of the antelope he had seen at Rome, and fanned him with broad wings hued like the rainbow, their gentle voices bidding him speed upon his course.

He had not long enjoyed this felicity when his dreams began to take another and a strange complexion. He wandered with Fra Colonna over the relics of antique nations, and the friar was lame and had a staff. This staff he waved over the mighty ruins, and whether they were Egyptian, Greek, or Roman, straightway the temples and palaces, whose wrecks they were, rose again like an exhalation, thronged with the famous dead. Songsters that might have eclipsed both Apollo and his rival poured forth their lays; women, god-like in form and draped like Minerva, swam round the marble courts in voluptuous but easy and graceful dances. Here sculptors carved away amidst admiring pupils, and forms of supernatural beauty grew out of Parian marble in a quarter of an hour; grave philosophers conversed on high and subtle matters with youth listening reverently. It was a long time ago. And still beneath all this wonderful panorama, a sort of suspicion or expectation lurked in the dreamer's mind. "This is a prologue, a flourish; there is something behind; something that means me no good, something mysterious, awful."

And one night, when the wizard Colonna had transcended himself, he pointed with his stick, and there was a swallowing up of many great ancient cities. The pair stood on a vast sandy plain with a huge crimson sun sinking to rest. There were great palm-trees; there were bulrush hives, scarce a man's height, dotted all about to the sandy horizon and the crimson sun.

"These are the anchorites of the Theban desert," said Colonna calmly, "followers not of Christ and His apostles, and the great fathers, but of the Greek pupils of the Egyptian pupils of the Brachmans and Gymnosophists."

Clement thought that he burned to go and embrace the holy men and tell them his troubles, seeking their advice. But he was tied by the feet somehow and could not move. The crimson sun sank, and it got dusk, and the hives became scarce visible. Colonna's figure became shadowy and shapeless, but his eyes glowed ten times brighter. This thing all eyes spoke and said: "Nay, let them be, a pack of fools. I see how dismal it all is." Then, with a sudden sprightliness, "But I hear one of them has a manuscript of Petronius, on papyrus; I go to buy it; farewell forever, for ever, for ever."

And it was pitch dark, and a light came at Clement's back like a gentle stroke, a glorious roseate light. It warmed as well as brightened. It loosened his feet from the ground. He turned round, and there, her face irradiated with sunshine and her hair glittering like the gloriola of a saint, was Margaret Brandt.

She blushed and smiled and cast a look of ineffable tenderness on him. "Gerard," she murmured, "be whose thou wilt by day, but at night be mine!"

Even as she spoke, the agitation of seeing her so suddenly awakened him, and he found himself lying trembling from head to foot. That radiant figure and mellow voice seemed to have struck his nightly keynote.

Awake, he could pray, praise, and worship God; he was master of his thoughts. But if he closed his eyes in sleep, Margaret, or Satan in her shape, beset him—a seeming angel of light. He might dream of a thousand different things, wide as the poles asunder, ere he woke, but the imperial figure was sure to come and extinguish all the rest in a moment, *stellas exortus uti aetherius sol*; for she came glowing with two beauties never before united: an angel's radiance and a woman's blushes.

Angels cannot blush. So he knew it was a fiend.

He was alarmed, but not so much surprised as at the demon's last artifice. From Anthony to Nicholas of the Rock, scarce a hermit had not been thus beset; sometimes with gay voluptuous visions, sometimes with lovely phantoms, warm, tangible, and womanly without, demons within, nor always baffled even by the saints. Witness that "angel form with a devil's heart" that came hanging its lovely head, like a bruised flower, to St. Macarius, with a feigned tale, weeping and weeping and weeping, and beguiling him first of his tears and then of half his virtue.

But with the examples of Satanic power and craft had come down copious records of the hermits' triumphs and the weapons by which they had conquered. *Domandum est Corpus*; the body must be tamed. This had been their watchword for twelve hundred years. It was a tremendous war-cry, for they called the earthly affections, as well as appetites, the body, and crushed the whole heart through the suffering and mortified flesh.

Clement then said to himself that the great enemy of man had retired but to spring with more effect, having allowed him a few days of true purity and joy only to put him off his guard against the soft blandishments he was pouring over the soul that had survived the buffeting of his black wings. He applied himself to tame the body. He shortened his sleep, length
