Sally sat with her back propped against a golden sand dune, her eyes half-closed, watching the morning ritual of Roville-sur-Mer. It was the usual scene: whiskered fathers forming colorful patches in the foreground, their female kin clustered beneath gay parasols, while dogs roamed aimlessly and children dug industriously with spades, occasionally pausing to strike one another with their tools. One dog, a poodle with the military bearing of a minor general, wandered over, spotted Sally's box of sweets, and decided to stake his claim.

Sally's vacation had been a magic month of lazy drifting, but the voice of America was already calling. Gerald had written a frantic note about "The Primrose Way" opening in Detroit, demanding her immediate return. She was leaving tomorrow, but today was today. She sat and basked, enjoying the novel sensation of having nothing to do but listen to the waves. However, the Roville plage had one drawback: it was dangerously easy to fall asleep. The sun was too warm, the whispers too insidious. Just as she teetered on the edge of dozing, the familiar cadence of English voices jerked her awake.

Two men sat nearby. Sally, whose amusement involved dissecting strangers into characters, inspected them. The first was a tall, dark man with a tight, precise mouth and high cheekbones that gave him a vaguely sinister air. He shaved twice a day and possessed the self-control not to swear when he cut himself—a trait that suggested a nasty smile when accidents occurred. "Hard," Sally diagnosed. "Probably a lawyer. I wouldn't like him."

The second man was different. He was staring at Sally with the intensity of a man who had finally found something worth looking at after years of disappointment. He was sturdy, thick-set, with a freckled face and the reddest hair Sally had ever seen. A slight cut marred his square chin. "Rather a dear," Sally decided. "A temper, I should think. Quick, but soon over. Not very clever, but nice."

The dark man, having successfully lit a cigarette against the breeze, turned to his companion. "And how is Scrymgeour?"

"Oh, all right," the red-haired man replied absently, though his eyes remained fixed on Sally. "I was surprised he's here. He said he meant to stay in Paris."

Sally gave the attentive poodle a piece of nougat. "Say," the red-haired man announced in clear, vibrating tones, "that's the prettiest girl I've seen in my life!"

Sally was startled but not displeased; a broad-minded girl, she viewed the outburst as a legitimate comment on public interest. The dark man, however, was shocked. "My dear fellow!" he ejaculated.

"Oh, it's all right," the red-haired man said, unmoved. "She can't understand. There isn't a bally soul in this place who speaks English. If I didn't remember a few odd bits of French, I'd be starving. That girl is an absolute topper! I give you my solemn word I've never seen anybody to touch her. Look at those hands and feet. You don't get them outside France. Of course, her mouth is a bit wide," he added reluctantly.

Sally's stillness, combined with the dark man's concern for linguistic correctness, reassured him. He breathed again. "Still, you ought to be careful," he said austerely.

He looked at Sally, who was now distracted by a raffish-looking mongrel that had joined the canine party, and returned to the topic of Scrymgeour. "How is Scrymgeour's dyspepsia?"

"Do you notice the way her hair curls over her ears?" the red-haired man asked, ignoring the medical query. "Eh? Oh, pretty much the same, I think."

"What hotel are you staying at?"

"The Normandie."

Sally dipped into her box for another chocolate cream and gave an imperceptible start. She was also staying at the Normandie. She presumed he was a recent arrival.

"The Normandie?" The dark man looked puzzled. "I know Roville by report, but I've never heard of any Hotel Normandie. Where is it?"

"It's a little shanty down near the station. Not much of a place. Still, it's cheap, and the cooking's all right."

His companion's bewilderment deepened. "What on earth is a man like Scrymgeour doing there?" he demanded. "If there's one thing he's fussy about..."

"There are at least eleven thousand things he's fussy about," the red-haired man interrupted disapprovingly. "Jumpy old blighter!"

"If there's one thing he's particular about, it's the sort of hotel he goes to. Ever since I've known him, he's wanted the best. I should have thought he'd go to the Splendide." The dark man mused dissatisfiedly, then seemed to reconcile himself to the eccentricities of the rich. "I'd like to see him again. Ask him if he will dine with me at the Splendide tonight. Say eight sharp."

Sally, occupied with the growing pack of dogs, couldn't see the young man's face, but his voice betrayed a false airiness. "Oh, Scrymgeour isn't in Roville."

"No? Where is he?"

"Paris, I believe."

"What!" The dark man's voice sharpened, sounding like a cross-examination. "Then why aren't you there? What are you doing here? Did he give you a holiday?"

"Yes, he did."

"When do you rejoin him?"

"I don't."

"What!"

"Well, if you want to know," the red-haired man said, "the old blighter fired me the day before yesterday."

The dark man sprang up, shuffling the sand. Sally, intent on the drama, absent-mindedly gave the poodle a piece of nougat that should have gone to the terrier. She glanced sideways to see the dark man standing in an attitude reminiscent of a stern father driving an erring daughter into the snow. The red-haired young man, outwardly stolid, gazed down the beach at a fat bather in an orange suit who, after six false starts, was now floating in the water with the dignity of a wrecked balloon.

"Do you mean to tell me," the dark man demanded, "that after all the trouble the family took to get you what was practically a sinecure, you have deliberately thrown away..." A despairing gesture completed the sentence. "Good God, you're hopeless!"

The red-haired young man made no reply. He continued to gaze down the beach. Few outdoor sports are more stimulating than watching middle-aged Frenchmen bathe—drama, action, suspense. Yet the young man, recently employed by Mr. Scrymgeour, eyed this free circus without enjoyment.

"It's maddening! What are you going to do? What do you expect us to do? Are we to spend our whole lives getting you positions which you won't keep? I can tell you we're... it's monstrous! It's sickening! Good God!"

With these words, the dark man turned sharply and stalked away up the beach, his dignity marred a moment later when his straw hat blew off and was trodden on by a passing child.

He left behind an electric calm that followed a thunderbolt. This stunned silence lasted barely a minute before being shattered by a terrestrial uproar. With an abruptness heralded by one short, low gurgling snarl, the prettiest dog fight Roville had seen that season erupted.

It was the terrier with the black patch who began it. His best friend, anxious to make a case for him, couldn't deny firing the first gun. But the fault was really Sally's. Absorbed in the scene and acutely inquisitive about Scrymgeour's decision to fire the red-haired young man, she had thrice in succession helped the poodle out of his turn. The third occasion was too much for the terrier.

There is about any dog fight a wild, gusty fury that affects the average mortal with helplessness. It seems outside one's jurisdiction. And this was no ordinary fight. It was a stunning mêlée that would have excited favorable comment even among the blasé residents of a negro quarter or the not-easily-pleased critics of a Lancashire mining village. From all over the beach, dogs of every size, breed, and color raced to the scene. Some remained in the ringside seats barking, while others immediately started fighting on general principles, well content to be in action without bothering about first causes. The terrier had got the poodle by the left hind-leg and was restating his war-aims. The raffish mongrel was apparently endeavoring to fletcherize a complete stranger of the Sealyham family.

Sally was frankly unequal to the situation, as were the entire crowd of spectators who had galloped up from the water's edge. She had been paralyzed from the start. Snarling bundles bumped against her legs and bounced away, but she made no move. Advice in fluent French rent the air. Arms waved, and well-filled bathing suits leaped up and down. But nobody did anything practical until, in the center of the theater of war, the red-haired young man suddenly appeared.

The only reason dog fights do not go on forever is that Providence decides there shall always be among those present one Master Mind; one wizard who, whatever his shortcomings in other battles of life, is competent and dominating in this single sphere. At Roville-sur-Mer, it was the red-haired young man. His dark companion might have turned from him in disgust; his services might not have seemed worth retaining by the haughty Scrymgeour; he might be a pain in the neck to "the family"; but he did know how to stop a dog fight. From the first moment of his intervention, calm began to steal over the scene. He had the same effect on the almost inextricably entwined belligerents as, in medieval legend, the Holy Grail sliding down a sunbeam used to have on battling knights. He did not look like a dove of peace, but the most captious could not deny that he brought home the goods. There was a magic in his soothing hands, a spell in his voice. In a shorter time than one would have believed possible, dog after dog was sorted out and calmed down; until presently all that was left of Armageddon was one solitary small Scotch terrier, thoughtfully licking a chewed leg. The rest of the combatants, once more in their right mind and wondering what all the fuss was about, had been captured and haled away in a whirl of recrimination by voluble owners.

Having achieved this miracle, the young man turned to Sally. Gallant, one might say reckless, as he had been a moment before, he now gave indications of a rather pleasing shyness. He braced himself with that painful air of effort which announces to the world that an Englishman is about to speak a language other than his own.

"J'espère," he said, swallowing once or twice to brace himself for the journey through the jungle of a foreign tongue, "J'espère que vous n'êtes pas--oh, dammit, what's the word--J'espère que vous n'êtes pas blessée?"

"Blessée?"

"Yes, blessée. Wounded. Hurt, don't you know. Bitten. Oh, dash it. J'espère..."

"Oh, bitten!" said Sally, dimpling. "Oh, no, thanks very much. I wasn't bitten. And I think it was awfully brave of you to save all our lives."

The compliment seemed to pass over the young man's head. He stared at Sally with horrified eyes. Over his amiable face swept a vivid blush. His jaw dropped.

"Oh, my sainted aunt!" he ejaculated.

Then, as if the situation was too much for him and flight the only possible solution, he spun round and disappeared at a walk so rapid that it was almost a run. Sally watched him go and was sorry that he had torn himself away. She still wanted to know why Scrymgeour had fired him.

Bedtime at Roville varied according to one's proximity to the sea. The gilded palaces along the front kept deplorable hours, polluting the night air with indefatigable jazz; but at the pensions of the economical, like the Normandie, early to bed was the rule. True, Jules, the stout young native who combined the offices of night-clerk and lift attendant, was on duty in the hall throughout the night, but few of the Normandie's patrons made use of his services.

Sally, entering shortly before twelve o'clock on the night the dark man, the red-haired young man, and their friend Scrymgeour had come into her life, found the little hall dim and silent. Through the iron cage of the lift, a single faint bulb glowed; another, over the desk in the far corner, illuminated the upper half of Jules, slumbering in a chair. Jules seemed to Sally to be on duty in some capacity or other all the time. His work, like women's, was never done. He was now restoring his tissues with a few winks of much-needed beauty sleep. Sally, who had been to the Casino to hear the band and afterwards had strolled on the moonlit promenade, had a guilty sense of intrusion.

As she stood there, reluctant to break in on Jules' rest—for her sympathetic heart, always at the disposal of the oppressed, had long ached for this overworked peon—she was relieved to hear footsteps in the street outside, followed by the opening of the front door. If Jules would have had to wake up anyway, she felt her sense of responsibility lessened. The door, having opened, closed again with a bang. Jules stirred, gurgled, blinked, and sat up, and Sally, turning, perceived that the new arrival was the red-haired young man.

"Oh, good evening," said Sally welcomingly.

The young man stopped and shuffled uncomfortably. The morning's happenings were obviously still green in his memory. He had either not ceased blushing since their last meeting or was celebrating their reunion by beginning to blush again; for his face was
