By six o'clock the next evening, Sally had reached the grim conclusion that Ginger would have to navigate life's rough seas without her commentary. She hadn't seen him all day, and in another hour, she'd be boarding the seven-fifteen express for Paris, en route to Cherbourg and the liner bound for New York.

Driven by a desperate, fluttering hope, Sally dragged her baggage to the station, entrusted it to a smiling porter, and made one final pilgrimage to the Casino Municipale. Like many spirited young women, she possessed a peculiar talent for meddling in the private affairs of others—a trait her brother Fillmore might have termed "messing about." She had decided Ginger needed a friendly shove in the right direction, and it was with a surge of gratification that she spotted a flaming head cutting through the crowd at a roulette table.

Roville-sur-Mer boasted two casinos. The one on the Promenade catered to sea breezes and a gentle game called *boule*. But the true haunt of the serious gambler was the grand Casino Municipale near the station, housed in the Palace Massena. Sally arrived to find Ginger Kemp not merely playing, but thriving. He was entrenched behind a mountain of square counters, looking every bit the high-stakes operator. As she watched, a wooden-faced croupier slid another stack of chips across the green felt.

"Epatant!" murmured a wistful man beside Sally, removing his elbow from her ribs to gesture wildly. Sally, though no French scholar, understood the sentiment: the crowd was startled and delighted. There is a certain altruistic joy in watching someone else win at roulette; the spectators seem to derive a spiritual high from another's fortune.

The croupier twisted his moustache with his left hand and the wheel with his right, and silence descended. Sally, having maneuvered to a spot where the crush was slightly less acute, finally caught a glimpse of Ginger's face. She couldn't help but laugh involuntarily. He looked exactly like a dog sniffing a rat-hole. His hair bristled with excitement; one could almost imagine his ears pricked up.

In the tense hush that fell as the wheel restarted, Sally's laugh rang out with an embarrassing clarity. It had a marked effect on the room. There is something akin to religious ecstasy in the demeanor of roulette spectators when someone is on a winning streak, and if she had guffawed in a cathedral, she could not have caused more pained consternation. The earnest worshippers gazed at her with shocked eyes. Ginger, turning with a start, saw her and leaped to his feet. Just as he rose, the ball rattled into a red compartment. Since the big winner had picked the wrong color, a shuddering groan rippled through the congregation, much like the convulsions of penitents at a revival meeting. More glances of reproach were cast at Sally; it was generally felt that her injudicious behavior had jinxed Ginger's luck.

The only person seemingly unbothered was Ginger himself. He gathered his loot, shoved it into his pocket, and elbowed his way through the crowd, now viewing Sally as a pariah. There was universal regret that he was calling it a day. It was as if a star had walked off stage mid-scene. Not even a loud quarrel between two gamblers over a disputed five-franc counter could console them.

"I say," Ginger said, dexterously plucking Sally from the crowd, "this is topping, meeting you like this. I've been looking for you everywhere."

"It's funny you didn't find me, then, for that's where I've been. I was looking for you."

"No, really?" Ginger seemed pleased. He led her to the quiet ante-room outside the gambling hall, where they sat in a corner. It was pleasant here, save for the gorgeously uniformed attendant standing by the door. "That was awfully good of you."

"I felt I must have a talk with you before my train went."

Ginger started violently.

"Your train? What do you mean?"

"The puff-puff," Sally explained. "I'm leaving tonight, you know."

"Leaving?" Ginger looked as horrified as the devout congregation Sally had just been exiled from. "You don't mean leaving? You're not going away from Roville?"

"I'm afraid so."

"But why? Where are you going?"

"Back to America. My boat sails from Cherbourg tomorrow."

"Oh, my aunt!"

"I'm sorry," Sally said, touched by his concern. She was a warm-hearted girl and liked being appreciated. "But..."

"I say..." Ginger Kemp turned bright scarlet and glared at the uniformed official, who was regarding their tête-à-tête with the indulgent eye of someone who had been through this before. "I say, look here, will you marry me?"

Sally stared at his vermilion profile in frank amazement. Ginger, she realized, was a surprising young man, but she hadn't expected him to be *this* surprising.

"Marry you!"

"You know what I mean."

"Well, yes, I suppose I do. You allude to the holy state. Yes, I know what you mean."

"Then how about it?"

Sally began to regain her composure. Her sense of humor was tickled. She looked at Ginger gravely. He didn't meet her eye but continued to drink in the uniformed official, who was now humming a love ballad under his breath. The official couldn't hear them and wouldn't understand them even if he could, but he was an expert in the language of the eyes.

"But isn't this—don't think I'm making difficulties—isn't this a little sudden?"

"It's got to be sudden," Ginger complained. "I thought you were going to be here for weeks."

"But, my infant, my babe, has it occurred to you that we are practically strangers?" She patted his hand tolerantly, causing the official to heave a tender sigh. "I see what has happened. You're mistaking me for some other girl, some girl you know really well and were properly introduced to. Take a good look at me, and you'll see."

"If I take a good look at you," Ginger said feverishly, "I'm dashed if I'll answer for the consequences."

"And this is the man I was going to lecture on 'Enterprise.'"

"You're the most wonderful girl I've ever met, dash it!" Ginger's gaze remained riveted on the official. "I dare say it is sudden. I can't help that. I fell in love with you the moment I saw you, and there you are!"

"But..."

"Now, look here, I know I'm not much of a chap and all that, but... well, I've just won the deuce of a lot of money in there..."

"Would you buy me with your gold?"

"I mean to say, we should have enough to start on, and... of course I've made an infernal hash of everything I've tried up till now, but there must be something I can do. With you to buck me up and so forth, don't you know. Well, I mean..."

"Has it struck you that I may already be engaged to someone else?"

"Oh, golly! Are you?"

For the first time, he turned and faced her. There was a look in his eyes that touched Sally and drove all sense of the ludicrous out of her. Absurd as it was, this man was really serious.

"Well, yes, as a matter of fact I am," she said soberly.

Ginger Kemp bit his lip and for a moment was silent.

"Oh, well, that's torn it!" he said at last.

Sally felt an emotion too complex to analyze. There was pity in it, but amusement too. The emotion, though she didn't recognize it, was maternal. Mothers, listening to their children plead with engaging absurdity for something wholly out of their power to bestow, feel that same wavering between tears and laughter. Sally wanted to pick Ginger up and kiss him. The one thing she couldn't do was look on him, sorry as she was for him, as a reasonable, grown-up man.

"You don't really mean it, you know."

"Don't I!" said Ginger, hollowly. "Oh, don't I!"

"You can't! There isn't such a thing in real life as love at first sight. Love's a thing that comes when you know a person well and..." She paused. It had just occurred to her that she was hardly the girl to lecture in this strain. Her love for Gerald Foster had been sufficiently sudden, even instantaneous. What did she know of Gerald except that she loved him? They had become engaged within two weeks of their first meeting. She found this recollection damping to her eloquence and ended by saying tamely:

"It's ridiculous."

Ginger had simmered down to a mood of melancholy resignation.

"I couldn't have expected you to care for me, I suppose, anyway," he said sombrely. "I'm not much of a chap."

It was just the diversion from the theme under discussion that Sally had been longing for. She welcomed the chance to continue the conversation on a less intimate and sentimental note.

"That's exactly what I wanted to talk to you about," she said, seizing the opportunity offered by this display of humility. "I've been looking for you all day to go on with what I was starting to say in the lift last night when we were interrupted. Do you mind if I talk to you like an aunt—or a sister, suppose we say? Really, the best plan would be for you to adopt me as an honorary sister. What do you think?"

Ginger did not appear noticeably elated at the suggested relationship.

"Because I really do take a tremendous interest in you."

Ginger brightened. "That's awfully good of you."

"I'm going to speak words of wisdom. Ginger, why don't you brace up?"

"Brace up?"

"Yes, stiffen your backbone and stick out your chin, and square your elbows, and really amount to something. Why do you simply flop about and do nothing and leave everything to what you call 'the family'? Why do you have to be helped all the time? Why don't you help yourself? Why don't you rush out and get one? Why do you have to worry about what 'the family' thinks of you? Why don't you make yourself independent of them? I know you had hard luck, suddenly finding yourself without money and all that, but, good heavens, everybody else in the world who has ever done anything has been broke at one time or another. It's part of the fun. You'll never get anywhere by letting yourself be picked up by the family like... like a floppy Newfoundland puppy and dumped down in any old place that happens to suit them. A job's a thing you've got to choose for yourself and get for yourself. Think what you can do—there must be something—and then go at it with a snort and grab it and hold it down and teach it to take a joke. You've managed to collect some money. It will give you time to look round. And, when you've had a look round, do something! Try to realize you're alive, and try to imagine the family isn't!"

Sally stopped and drew a deep breath. Ginger Kemp did not reply for a moment. He seemed greatly impressed.

"When you talk quick," he said at length, in a serious meditative voice, "your nose sort of goes all squiggly. Ripping, it looks!"

Sally uttered an indignant cry.

"Do you mean to say you haven't been listening to a word I've been saying," she demanded.

"Oh, rather! Oh, by Jove, yes."

"Well, what did I say?"

"You... er... And your eyes sort of shine, too."

"Never mind my eyes. What did I say?"

"You told me," said Ginger, on reflection, "to get a job."

"Well, yes. I put it much better than that, but that's what it amounted to, I suppose. All right, then. I'm glad you..."

Ginger was eyeing her with mournful devotion. "I say," he interrupted, "I wish you'd let me write to you. Letters, I mean, and all that. I have an idea it would kind of buck me up."

"You won't have time for writing letters."

"I'll have time to write them to you. You haven't an address or anything of that sort in America, have you, by any chance? I mean, so that I'd know where to write to."

"I can give you an address which will always find me." She told him the number and street of Mrs. Meecher's boarding-house, and he wrote them down reverently on his shirt-cuff. "Yes, on second thoughts, do write," she said. "Of course, I shall want to know how you've got on. I... oh, my goodness! That clock's not right?"

"Just about. What time does your train go?"

"Go! It's gone! Or, at least, it goes in about two seconds." She made a rush for the swing-door, to the confusion of the uniformed official who had not been expecting this sudden activity. "Good-bye, Ginger. Write to me, and remember what I said."

Ginger, alert after his unexpected fashion when it became a question of physical action, had followed her through the swing-door, and they emerged together and started running down the square.

"Stick it!" said Ginger, encouragingly. He was running easily and well, as becomes a man who, in his day, had been a snip for his international at scrum-half.

Sally saved her breath. The train was beginning to move slowly out of the station as they sprinted abreast onto the platform. Ginger dived for the nearest door, wrenched it open, gathered Sally neatly in his arms, and flung her in. She landed squarely on the toes of a man who occupied the corner seat, and, bounding off again, made for the window. Ginger, faithful to the last, was trotting beside the train as it gathered speed.

"Ginger! My poor porter! Tip him. I forgot."
