1

By the time Sally departed Detroit on Saturday, flanked by Fillmore—who was heading back to Manhattan to secure offices and establish his dominance on Broadway—her spirits had bounced back to full capacity. She felt a pang of guilt for having been so fanciful, even morbid, in her previous worries. After all, men were wired to climb the ladder; it was their job. She reminded herself that her happiness was tethered to Gerald's success, and complaining about his energy was the last thing a supportive partner should do.

The recent excitement had polished her mood to a shine. Detroit, that city of sweet-natured audiences, had devoured "The Primrose Way." True to Teddy's prophecy, the theater had opened on Tuesday to a packed house starving for entertainment, welcoming the play with a roar. The critics, usually skeptical of first-night mobs, had unanimously crowned Gerald as the rising author and Elsa Doland as the next big star. Even Fillmore got a brief nod as the "coming manager." But in the grandest of victories, there's always a tiny snag. Fillmore's triumph was nearly derailed by the fact that the only mention of Gladys Winch in the papers was a typo in the critic's list of supporting players, where her name appeared as "Wunch."

"One of the greatest character actresses on the stage," Fillmore grumbled later that morning, recounting the slight to Sally.

But his sunny disposition quickly patched the wound. Life offered so much brightness that dwelling on one dark spot was simply churlish. Business was booming; Elsa was improving nightly; and a frantic telegram from Mr. Cracknell asking to buy the rights back suggested Miss Hobson had cooled off. Best of all, Ike Schumann, the tycoon who owned half of New York's theaters, had visited and stamped the production with his approval. Sitting opposite Sally on the train, Fillmore glowed with self-importance.

"Yes, do," Sally said, breaking a long silence.

Fillmore snapped out of his reverie. "Eh?"

"I said 'Yes, do.' I think you owe it to your position."

"Do what?"

"Buy a fur coat. Wasn't that what you were dreaming about?"

"Don't be a chump," Fillmore said, blushing despite himself. He had indeed toyed with the idea; a fellow needed to keep warm.

"With an astrakhan collar," Sally pressed.

"As a matter of fact," Fillmore said loftily, his noble soul finding the banter tedious, "what I was really thinking about was something Ike said."

"Ike?"

"Ike Schumann. He's on this train. I just met him."

"We call him Ike!"

"Of course I call him Ike," Fillmore heatedly corrected. "Everyone calls him Ike."

"He wears a fur coat," Sally murmured.

Fillmore bristled. "I wish you'd stop harping on that damned coat. And anyway, why shouldn't I have a fur coat?"

"Fill...! How can you be so brutal as to imply I said you shouldn't? Why, I'm the biggest supporter of the fur coat. With massive cuffs. And you must roll up Fifth Avenue in your car, and I'll point and say, 'That's my brother!' 'Your brother? No!' 'He is, really.' 'You're joking. Why, that's the great Fillmore Nicholas.' 'I know. But he really is my brother. And I was with him when he bought that coat.'"

"Do leave off about the coat!"

"'And it isn't only the coat,' I'll say. 'It's what's underneath. Tucked away inside that mass of fur, dodging about behind that dollar cigar, is one to whom we point with pride...'"

Fillmore checked his watch with a cold stare. "I've got to go see Ike Schumann."

"We're in hourly consultation with Ike."

"He wants to talk about the show. He suggests opening in Chicago before New York."

"Oh no," Sally cried, dismayed.

"Why not?"

Sally composed herself. Identifying so closely with Gerald, she had momentarily feared a Chicago premiere meant another long separation. But logically, he wouldn't need to stay with the company after the first couple of days.

"You're thinking we need a New York reputation before tackling Chicago. There's merit to that. Still, it works both ways. A Chicago run could boost us in New York. Well, I'll have to think it over," Fillmore said, adopting an important air. "I'll have to think it over."

He pondered with furrowed brows.

"All wrong," Sally declared.

"Eh?"

"Not a bit like it. The lips should be compressed, and the forefinger of the right hand laid in a careworn manner against the right temple. You've a lot to learn, Fill."

"Oh, stop it!"

"Fillmore Nicholas," Sally said, "if you knew the pain it causes me to joke with my only brother, you'd be sorry for me. But it's for your good. Now go and put Ike out of his misery. I know he's waiting with his watch out. 'You do think he'll come, Miss Nicholas?' were his last words as he boarded. Oh, Fill, the yearning in his voice. 'Why, of course he will, Mr. Schumann,' I said. 'For all his exalted position, my brother is kindliness itself. Of course he'll come.' 'If I could only think so!' he gulped. 'If I could only think so. But you know what these managers are. A thousand calls on their time. They get brooding on their fur coats and forget everything else.' 'Have no fear, Mr. Schumann,' I said. 'Fillmore Nicholas is a man of his word.'"

She would have loved to continue the charade, for she never spared herself when entertaining her dearest, but Fillmore was already moving down the car, his rigid back a silent protest against sisterly levity. Sally watched him vanish, then picked up a magazine.

She was just finishing a gripping story tangled in a jungle of advertisements when a voice spoke.

"How do you do, Miss Nicholas?"

Into the seat beside her, recently vacated by the coming manager, Bruce Carmyle insinuated himself with that well-bred air of deferential restraint that never left him.

2

Sally was startled. People traveled everywhere nowadays, and finding a man in America you thought was in Europe wasn't remarkable, yet she felt a dreamlike sensation, as if the clock had been turned back and a closed chapter of her life had reopened.

"Mr. Carmyle!" she cried.

If Sally had been constantly in Bruce Carmyle's thoughts since their parting on the Paris express, he had been very little in hers—so little she had to search her memory to identify him.

"We're always meeting on trains, aren't we?" she said, regaining her composure. "I never expected to see you in America."

"I came over."

Sally was tempted to say she gathered that, but a sudden embarrassment silenced her. She remembered how abominably rude she had been to him last time. She was never rude without subsequent remorse. She settled for a tame "Yes."

"Yes," Mr. Carmyle said. "It's been many years since I took a real holiday. My doctor thought I was run down. It seemed a good opportunity to visit America. Everybody," he said oracularly, trying to convince himself that his trip wasn't just to renew acquaintance with Sally, "ought to visit America at least once. It's part of one's education."

"And what are your impressions of our glorious country?" Sally rallied.

Mr. Carmyle seemed glad to lecture on an impersonal subject. He, too, had been embarrassed at first, but his voice restored him.

"I've been visiting Chicago," he said briefly.

"Oh!"

"A wonderful city."

"I've never seen it. I've come from Detroit."

"Yes, I heard you were in Detroit."

Sally's eyes widened. "You heard I was in Detroit? Good gracious! How?"

"I--ah--called at your New York address and made inquiries," Mr. Carmyle said awkwardly.

"But how did you know where I lived?"

"My cousin--er--Lancelot told me."

Sally fell silent. She felt the same chill a detective gets when realizing he's being shadowed. Even if this stranger hadn't come specifically to hunt her down, it was clear he found her of considerable interest. It was a compliment, but disturbing to realize she was apparently important to him. Seizing on the mention of Ginger, she tried to steer the conversation away from this too intimate course.

"How is Mr. Kemp?" she asked.

Mr. Carmyle's dark face seemed to darken further.

"We have had no news of him," he said shortly.

"No news? How do you mean? You speak as though he had disappeared."

"He has disappeared!"

"Good heavens! When?"

"Shortly after I saw you last."

"Disappeared!"

Mr. Carmyle frowned. Sally watched him, and her instinctive dislike stirred again. There was a hardness about this man she had hated from the start.

"But where has he gone to?"

"I don't know." Mr. Carmyle frowned again. The subject of Ginger was clearly a sore spot. "And I don't want to know," he went on heatedly, a dull flush rising in his cheeks. "I don't care to know. The Family have washed their hands of him. For the future he may look after himself as best he can. I believe he is off his head."

Sally's rebellious temper flared, but she fought it down. She would have loved to battle Mr. Carmyle—it was odd how she felt like Ginger's champion—but she realized that if she wanted to hear more of her red-headed friend, she must humour him.

"But what happened? What was all the trouble about?"

Mr. Carmyle's eyebrows met.

"He--insulted his uncle. His uncle Donald. He insulted him--grossly. The one man in the world he should have made a point of--er--"

"Keeping in with?"

"Yes. His future depended upon him."

"But what did he do?" Sally cried, trying hard to keep a reprehensible joy out of her voice.

"I have heard no details. My uncle is reticent. He invited Lancelot to dinner to discuss his plans, and it appears that Lancelot--defied him. Defied him! He was rude and insulting. My uncle refuses to have anything more to do with him. Apparently the young fool managed to win some money at the tables at Roville, and this seems to have turned his head completely. My uncle insists that he is mad. I agree with him. Since the night of that dinner, nothing has been heard of Lancelot."

Mr. Carmyle broke off to brood. Before Sally could speak, the impressive bulk of Fillmore loomed up in the aisle beside them. Explanations seemed in order. He cast a questioning glance at the mysterious stranger, who, in addition to talking to his sister, had claimed her seat.

"Oh, hullo, Fill," Sally said. "Fillmore, this is Mr. Carmyle. We met abroad. My brother Fillmore, Mr. Carmyle."

With the proper introduction effected, Fillmore approved of Mr. Carmyle. His air of being someone special appealed to him.

"Strange you meeting again like this," he said affably.

The porter, who had been making up berths, hovered expectantly.

"You two had better go into the smoking room," Sally suggested. "I'm going to bed."

She wanted to be alone to think. Mr. Carmyle's tale of a roused and revolting Ginger had stirred her.

The two men went off to the smoking room, and Sally found an empty seat, waiting for her berth to be made up. She was aglow with a curious exhilaration. So Ginger had taken her advice! Excellent Ginger! She felt proud of him. She also felt that complacency, amounting almost to sinful pride, which comes to those who give advice and see it acted upon. She felt like a creator. After all, had she not created this new Ginger? It was she who had stirred him up, unleashed him, changing him from a meek dependent into a ravening creature who went about insulting uncles.

It was a feat, undeniable. Something attempted, something done: and by all the rules laid down by poets, it should have earned a night's repose. Yet, jolted by the train, which seemed to be inventing new buck-and-wing steps of its own, Sally slept ill. Presently, as she lay awake, the Spectre of Doubt appeared at her bedside, gaunt and questioning.

"What about it?" said the Spectre of Doubt.

3

Daylight brought no comforting answer. Breakfast failed to manufacture an easy mind. Sally got off the train at Grand Central Station in a state of remorseful concern. She declined Mr. Carmyle's offer to drive her to the boarding-house and started walking, hoping the crisp morning air would cure her.

She wondered how she could ever have approved of her rash act. What demon of interference had possessed her to blunder into people's lives? She was nothing more nor less than a menace to society. Here was an estimable young man who would always need assistance, and she had deliberately egged him on to wreck his prospects. She blushed hotly remembering the mad wireless she had sent him from the boat.

Miserable Ginger! She pictured him, his money gone, wandering foot-sore about London, seeking work in vain; forcing himself to call on Uncle Donald; being thrown down the front steps by haughty footmen; sleeping on the Embankment; gazing into the dark waters of the Thames with the stare of hopelessness; climbing to the parapet and...

"Ugh!" said Sally.

She had arrived at the boarding-house door, and Mrs. Meecher was regarding her with welcoming eyes, little knowing that she had practically slain a red-headed young man of amiable manners in his prime.

Mrs. Meecher was friendly and garrulous. *Vari
