For Sally, the weeks following her reunion with Ginger Kemp felt less like a timeline and more like a golden age that had simply refused to end. Her little kingdom was at peace; the frontiers were secure, and she awoke each morning to a world so meticulously ironed out that even the most cynical pessimist would struggle to find a single flaw to critique.

True, Gerald was still a thousand miles away, busy in Chicago superintending the opening of *The Primrose Way*. Fillmore had agreed to Ike's suggestion to premiere the play there, dragging Gerald in as a consultant to fix a brother dramatist's failing comedy. It was a disappointment, certainly, but Sally refused to let it dim her spirits. Life, in every other respect, was perfect. Fillmore was booming, Ginger was off her conscience, she had secured a lovely apartment, her new hat was flawless, and *The Primrose Way* was a sensation. Chicago, according to Fillmore, had forgotten everything except securing seats for the show; national and local problems had vanished into the ether, leaving the citizens riveted on the art of queue-jumping.

But the crown jewel of this golden age was the solution to Ginger's future. Ginger was now employed by Fillmore Nicholas Theatrical Enterprises Ltd., a title Fillmore had wisely kept short to avoid cluttering the brass plate. Daily, Ginger could be found in the outer office, his duties primarily consisting of reading the evening papers. He was a glorified office boy, or perhaps the man at the wheel, depending on the day. His main job was to act as a human moat, preventing the mob from rushing Fillmore, who sat in semi-regal isolation in the inner office, pondering grand schemes.

Ginger's gratitude to Sally was boundless. He tried to thank her every time they met, which was often, as he was currently helping her furnish her new apartment. He spared no effort, claiming it kept him in "condition."

"And what I mean to say is," Ginger panted, pausing while carrying a massive easy chair to the third spot Sally had selected in the last ten minutes, "if I didn't sweat a bit and help you after the way you got me that job..."

"Ginger, desist," Sally commanded.

"Yes, but honestly..."

"If you don't stop, I'll make you move that chair into the next room."

"Shall I?" Ginger rubbed his blistered hands and took a fresh grip. "Anything you say."

"Silly! Of course not. The only other rooms are my bedroom, the bathroom, and the kitchen. What on earth would I want a great lumbering chair in them for? All the same, I believe the first we chose was the best."

"Back she goes, then, what?"

Sally frowned, deep in thought. Setting up house was causing her much contemplation.

"No," she decided. "By the window is better." She looked at him remorsefully. "I'm giving you a lot of trouble."

"Trouble!" Ginger, accompanied by the chair, staggered across the room. "The way I look at it is this. You got me that job, and..."

"Stop!"

"Right ho... Still, you did, you know."

Sally sat in the armchair and stretched, watching Ginger work until she felt a vicarious fatigue. She surveyed the room proudly. It was beginning to look cozy. Pictures were up, the carpet laid, furniture neatly arranged. For the first time in three years of boarding-house existence, she felt the restful sensation of being at home—a settled abode where she could lock the door and be alone. The apartment was small, but it was undeniably a haven. She looked about, searching for a flaw... except...

"Hullo!" she exclaimed. "Where's that photograph of me? I'm sure I put it on the mantelpiece yesterday."

Ginger's exertions had flushed his face a rich red. He inspected the mantelpiece narrowly.

"No. No photograph here."

"I know there isn't. But it was there yesterday. Or was it? I know I meant to put it there. Perhaps I forgot. It's the most beautiful thing you ever saw. Not a bit like me; but what of that? They touch 'em up in the dark-room, you know. I value it because it looks the way I should like to look if I could."

"I've never had a beautiful photograph taken of myself," Ginger said solemnly, with gentle regret.

"Cheer up!"

"Oh, I don't mind. I only mentioned..."

"Ginger," Sally interrupted, "pardon my interrupting your valuable remarks, but this chair is—not—right! It ought to be where it was at the beginning. Could you give your imitation of a pack-mule just once more? And after that I'll make you some tea. If there's any tea—or milk—or cups."

"There are cups all right. I know, because I smashed two the day before yesterday. I'll nip round the corner for some milk, shall I?"

"Yes, please nip. All this hard work has taken it out of me terribly."

Over the tea table, Sally became inquisitive.

"What I can't understand about this job of yours, Ginger—which as you are just about to observe, I was noble enough to secure for you—is the amount of leisure that seems to go with it. How is it that you are able to spend your valuable time—Fillmore's valuable time, rather—juggling with my furniture every day?"

"Oh, I can usually get off."

"But oughtn't you to be at your post doing—whatever it is you do? What do you do?"

Ginger stirred his tea thoughtfully.

"Well, I sort of mess about, you know. I interview divers blighters and tell 'em your brother is out and take their names and addresses and... oh, all that sort of thing."

"Does Fillmore consult you much?"

"He lets me read some of the plays that are sent in. Awful tosh most of them. Sometimes he sends me off to a vaudeville house of an evening."

"As a treat?"

"To see some special act, you know. To report on it. In case he might want to use it for this revue of his."

"Which revue?"

"Didn't you know he was going to put on a revue? Oh, rather. A whacking big affair. Going to cut out the Follies and all that sort of thing."

"But—my goodness!" Sally was alarmed. It was just like Fillmore to branch out into expensive schemes when he ought to be consolidating his small success. All his life he had thought in millions where the prudent man would have been content with hundreds. An inexhaustible fount of optimism bubbled eternally within him. "That's rather ambitious," she said.

"Yes. Ambitious sort of cove, your brother. Quite the Napoleon."

"I shall have to talk to him," Sally decided. She was annoyed with Fillmore. Everything had been peaceful and prosperous until he had spoiled things. Now she would have to start worrying again.

"Of course," argued Ginger, "there's money in revues. Over in London fellows make pots out of them."

Sally shook her head.

"It won't do," she said. "And I'll tell you another thing that won't do. This armchair. Of course it ought to be over by the window. You can see that yourself, can't you."

"Absolutely!" said Ginger, patiently preparing for action once more.

***

Sally's anxiety regarding her ebullient brother was not lessened by a telegram from Miss Winch in Chicago shortly thereafter.

The message ran, and while Sally couldn't claim to fully understand it, there was a sinister suggestion about the wording that decided her to wait no longer. She tore herself away from the joys of furnishing and rushed to the headquarters of the Fillmore Nicholas Theatrical Enterprises Ltd.

Ginger was absent from his customary post, his place taken by a lad of tender years and pimply exterior who thawed and cast off a proud reserve upon hearing Sally's name, ushering her right in. Sally found Fillmore with his feet on an untidy desk, studying what appeared to be costume designs.

"Ah, Sally!" he said in a distrait, tired voice. Prosperity was putting in its silent, deadly work on the Hope of the American Theatre. What had been merely a smooth fullness around the angle of his jaw was now frankly a double chin. He wore a new waistcoat, unbuttoned. "I am rather busy. Always glad to see you, but I am rather busy. I have a hundred things to attend to."

"Well, attend to me. That'll only make a hundred and one. Fill, what's all this I hear about a revue?"

Fillmore looked as like a small boy caught in the act of stealing jam as it is possible for a great theatrical manager to look. He had been wondering in his darker moments what Sally would say about that project and had hoped she wouldn't hear of it until interference was impossible. He was extremely fond of Sally, but he knew there was a lamentable vein of caution in her make-up which might lead her to criticize. And how can a man of affairs carry on if women are buzzing round criticizing all the time? He picked up a pen and put it down; buttoned his waistcoat and unbuttoned it; and scratched his ear with one of the costume designs.

"Oh yes, the revue!"

"It's no good saying 'Oh yes'! You know perfectly well it's a crazy idea."

"Really... these business matters... this interference..."

"I don't want to run your affairs for you, Fill, but that money of mine does make me a sort of partner, I suppose, and I think I have a right to raise a loud yell of agony when I see you risking it on a..."

"Pardon me," said Fillmore loftily, looking happier. "Let me explain. Women never understand business matters. Your money is tied up exclusively in 'The Primrose Way,' which, as you know, is a tremendous success. You have nothing whatever to worry about as regards any new production I may make."

"I'm not worrying about the money. I'm worrying about you."

A tolerant smile played about the lower slopes of Fillmore's face.

"Don't be alarmed about me. I'm all right."

"You aren't all right. You've no business, when you've only just got started as a manager, to be rushing into an enormous production like this. You can't afford it."

"My dear child, as I said before, women cannot understand these things. A man in my position can always command money for a new venture."

"Do you mean to say you have found somebody silly enough to put up money?"

"Certainly. I don't know that there is any secret about it. Your friend, Mr. Carmyle, has taken an interest in some of my forthcoming productions."

"What!" Sally was aghast now.

This was something she had never anticipated. Bruce Carmyle seemed to be creeping into her life like an advancing tide. There appeared to be no eluding him. Wherever she turned, there he was, and she could do nothing but rage impotently. The situation was becoming impossible.

Fillmore misinterpreted the note of dismay in her voice.

"It's quite all right," he assured her. "He's a very rich man. Large private means, besides his big income. Even if anything goes wrong..."

"It isn't that. It's..."

The hopelessness of explaining to Fillmore stopped Sally. Just as she was chafing at this new complication, there was an outburst of voices in the other office. Ginger's understudy seemed to be convincing someone that the Big Chief was engaged. The door opened tempestuously and Miss Winch sailed in.

"Fillmore, you poor nut," said Miss Winch. Though she might wrap up her meaning somewhat obscurely in telegraphic communications, when it came to spoken words she was directness itself. "Stop picking straws in your hair and listen to me. You're dippy!"

The last time Sally had seen Fillmore's fiancée, she had been impressed by her imperturbable calm. Miss Winch, in Detroit, had seemed a girl whom nothing could ruffle. That she had lapsed now from this serene placidity struck Sally as ominous.

"Ah! Here you are!" Fillmore said, starting to his feet indignantly like a lion bearded in its den, but calm returned when he saw who the intruder was.

"Yes, here I am!" Miss Winch dropped despairingly into a swivel-chair and endeavored to restore herself with a stick of chewing-gum. "Fillmore, darling, you're the sweetest thing on earth, and I love you, but on present form you could just walk straight into Bloomingdale and they'd give you the royal suite."

"My dear girl..."

"What do you think?" demanded Miss Winch, turning to Sally.

"I've just been telling him," said Sally, welcoming this ally, "I think it's absurd at this stage of things for him to put on an enormous revue..."

"Revue?" Miss Winch stopped in the act of gnawing her gum. "What revue?" She flung up her arms. "I shall have to swallow this gum. You can't chew with your head going round. Are you putting on a revue too?"

Fillmore was buttoning and unbuttoning his waistcoat. He had a hounded look.

"Certainly, certainly," he replied in a tone of some feverishness. "I wish you girls would leave me to manage..."

"Dippy!" said Miss Winch once more. "Telegraphic address: Tea-Pot, Matteawan." She swiveled round to Sally again. "Say, listen! This boy must be stopped. We must form a gang in his best interests and get him put away. What do you think he proposes doing? I'll give you three guesses. Oh, what's the use? You'd never hit it. This poor wandering lad has got it all fixed up to star me—me—in a new show!"

Fillmore removed a hand from his waistcoat buttons and waved it protestingly.

"I have used my own judgment
