If Ginger Kemp had been asked to list his virtues, the paper would likely have remained mostly blank. He might have managed "good intentions" with a bit of chewing on the pencil, but after that, the list would stall. Tact and sensitivity were not on the menu. Yet, by successfully avoiding Sally for several days, he had demonstrated a surprising degree of class. It wasn't easy; he had to force himself to stay away. He reasoned that in times of trouble, solitude was the patient's best friend. He, too, had suffered nasty shocks in his day and preferred to sit alone and fight his battles in silence.

But by Saturday, Ginger decided that action was overdue. Saturday was a prime day for restarting threads. He didn't have to go to the office, and, crucially, he had just collected his weekly salary. Mrs. Meecher had wisely deducted her share, but enough remained to fund a princely consolation tour. The plan crystallized: hire a car and whisk Sally away to one of the roadhouses along the Boston Post Road. The more he examined the scheme, the better it looked.

The weather was an extraordinary ally. It had been a revelation to Ginger, his first true taste of America's Indian Summer. Standing on the roof of Mrs. Meecher's establishment on Saturday morning, thrilled by the velvet glow of the sun, he concluded that the only logical use of such a day was to take Sally for a drive in an open car.

The Maison Meecher was a lofty building on a side-street near the avenue. From its roof, after navigating the groves of laundry hanging limply from lines, one could see wonders. To the left lay Washington Square, buzzing with sleepy Italians and roller-skating children; to the right stood the high smokestacks of a Cunard liner moving slowly down the river, looming over the rooftops as if the ship were traveling down Ninth Avenue.

Today, there were four funnels, leading Ginger to deduce it was the *Mauritania*. The boat he had crossed from England held a sentimental weight for him. He watched her stately progress until higher buildings blocked her view, then picked his way through the washing to retrieve his hat. A quarter-hour later, he stood in the hallway of Sally's apartment building, staring with undisguised disgust at the serge-clad back of his cousin, Mr. Carmyle, who was chatting with a man in overalls.

No carefree prospector singing through the Mojave Desert, only to find a rattlesnake, could have shifted moods so abruptly as Ginger did at this revolting sight. Even in Piccadilly, bumping into Mr. Carmyle had been unpleasant; finding him here was nauseating. There was only one explanation: he must have come to see Sally. With a sinking heart, Ginger remembered the shiny, expensive automobile waiting at the door. Clearly, he wasn't the only one who had thought of taking Sally for a drive on this golden day.

Mr. Carmyle swung around with a frown on his dark face, indicating that the janitor's chat hadn't been entertaining. Seeing Ginger did nothing to lift his gloom.

"Hullo!" he said.

"Hullo!" replied Ginger.

An uncomfortable silence followed.

"Have you come to see Miss Nicholas?"

"Why, yes."

"She isn't here," said Mr. Carmyle. The fact that he had someone to share the bad news seemed to cheer him slightly.

"Not here?"

"No. Apparently..." Bruce Carmyle's scowl revealed the resentment a balanced man feels at others' unreasonableness. "...Apparently, for some extraordinary reason, she's decided to dash off to England."

Ginger tottered. The blow was crushing in its unexpectedness. He followed his cousin out into the sunshine in a daze. Mr. Carmyle was addressing the driver of the expensive car.

"I find I won't need the car. You can take it back to the garage."

The chauffeur, a moody man, opened one half-closed eye and spat cautiously—a gesture Rockefeller might have used during a delicate financial crisis.

"You'll have to pay just the same," he observed, opening the other eye for emphasis.

"Of course I shall pay," snapped Mr. Carmyle, irritably. "How much is it?"

Money changed hands. The car rolled away.

"Gone to England?" said Ginger, dizzily.

"Yes, gone to England."

"But why?"

"How the devil do I know why?" Mr. Carmyle would have found his best friend trying to answer this. Gaping Ginger caused him almost physical pain. "All I know is what the janitor told me: she sailed on the *Mauretania* this morning."

The tragic irony hit Ginger hard. He had stood on the roof, calmly watching the boat leave the river...

He nodded absently to Mr. Carmyle and walked off. He had no further remarks. The warmth had drained from the sunshine, and all interest had vanished from his life. He felt dull, listless, adrift. Even the thought that his cousin, a careful man with his money, had paid for a day's hire on a car he couldn't use brought no comfort. He loafed aimlessly through the streets. He wandered into the Park and out again. The Park bored him. The streets bored him. The whole city bored him. A city without Sally was a drab, futile place, and nothing the sun could do to brighten it would change that.

Night finally arrived, bringing a letter. It was the first passably pleasant event of this dreary, unprofitable day: the envelope bore the crest of the good ship *Mauretania*. Ginger snatched it covetously from the rack and carried it upstairs.

Very few rooms at Mrs. Meecher's boarding house suggested luxury. Mrs. Meecher wasn't a fashionable decorator; she believed that adding a Morris chair to the essentials of a bedroom represented the peak of pomp a guest paying seven-and-a-half dollars a night could expect. Usually, the severity of his surroundings depressed Ginger at bedtime, but tonight—the magic of a letter from the right person—he was uplifted, almost gay. There are moments when even illuminated texts over a washstand cannot quell us.

Ginger approached the letter with ceremony. He behaved like a small boy facing unexpected ice cream, gloating before embarking on the treat, anxious to make it last. His first move was to fish the photograph of Sally from his coat pocket, which he had feloniously removed from her apartment. He studied it long and earnestly before propping it up against his basin for reference. He stripped off his coat, collar, and shoes, filled and lit a pipe, placed pouch and matches on the arm of the Morris chair, and drew the chair up so he could sit with his feet on the bed. Once settled in a position of ease, he lit his pipe again and took up the letter. He examined the crest, the handwriting, and the postmark. He weighed it in his hand. It was bulky.

He moved Sally's photo from the washstand and scrutinized it once more. Then, wriggling into the depths of the chair, he opened the envelope.

"Ginger, dear."

Reading this far, Ginger felt compelled to pick up the photograph and study it with even greater intent. He gazed at it for many minutes, then laid it down and lit his pipe again. Then he continued.

"Ginger, dear—I'm afraid this address is going to give you a shock, and I'm feeling very guilty. I'm running away, and I haven't even stopped to say good-bye. I can't help it. I know it's weak and cowardly, but I simply can't help it. I stood it for a day or two, and then I saw it was no good. (Thank you for leaving me alone and not coming round to see me. Nobody else but you would have done that. But then, nobody ever has been or ever could be so understanding as you.)"

Ginger found himself compelled to look at the photograph again.

"There was too much in New York to remind me. That's the worst of being happy in a place. When things go wrong, you find there are too many ghosts about. I just couldn't stand it. I tried, but I couldn't. I'm going away to get cured—if I can. Mr. Faucitt is over in England, and when I went down to Mrs. Meecher for my letters, I found one from him. His brother is dead, you know, and he has inherited, of all things, a fashionable dress-making place in Regent Street. His brother was Laurette et Cie. I suppose he will sell the business later, but just now, the poor old dear is apparently quite bewildered, and that doesn't seem to have occurred to him. He kept saying in his letter how much he wished I was with him to help him, and I was tempted and ran. Anything to get away from the ghosts and have something to do. I don't suppose I shall feel much better in England, but at least every street corner won't have associations. Don't ever be happy anywhere, Ginger. It's too big a risk, much too big a risk.

"There was a letter from Elsa Doland, too. Bubbling over with affection. We had always been tremendous friends. Of course, she never knew anything about my being engaged to Gerald. I lent Fillmore the money to buy that piece, which gave Elsa her first big chance, and so she's very grateful. She says, if ever she gets the opportunity of doing me a good turn... Aren't things muddled?

"And there was a letter from Gerald. I was expecting one, of course, but... what would you have done, Ginger? Would you have read it? I sat with it in front of me for an hour, I should think, just looking at the envelope, and then... You see, what was the use? I could guess exactly the sort of thing that would be in it, and reading it would only have hurt a lot more. The thing was done, so why bother about explanations? What good are explanations, anyway? They don't help. They don't do anything... I burned it, Ginger. The last letter I shall ever get from him. I made a bonfire on the bathroom floor, and it smouldered and went brown, and then flared a little, and every now and then I lit another match and kept it burning, and at last it was just black ashes and a stain on the tiles. Just a mess!

"Ginger, burn this letter, too. I'm pouring out all the poison to you, hoping it will make me feel better. You don't mind, do you? But I know you don't. If ever anybody had a real pal...

"It's a dreadful thing, fascination, Ginger. It grips you and you are helpless. One can be so sensible and reasonable about other people's love affairs. When I was working at the dance place, I told you about a girl who fell in love with the most awful little beast. He had a mean mouth and shiny black hair brushed straight back, and anybody would have seen what he was. But this girl wouldn't listen to a word. I talked to her by the hour. It makes me smile now when I think how sensible and level-headed I was. But she wouldn't listen. In some mysterious way, this was the man she wanted, and, of course, everything happened that one knew would happen.

"If one could manage one's own life as well as one can manage other people's! If all this wretched thing of mine had happened to some other girl, how beautifully I could have proved that it was the best thing that could have happened, and that a man who could behave as Gerald has done wasn't worth worrying about. I can just hear myself. But, you see, whatever he has done, Gerald is still Gerald and Sally is still Sally, and however much I argue, I can't get away from that. All I can do is to come howling to my redheaded pal, when I know just as well as he does that a girl of any spirit would be dignified and keep her troubles to herself and be much too proud to let anyone know that she was hurt.

"Proud! That's the real trouble, Ginger. My pride has been battered and chopped up and broken into as many pieces as you broke Mr. Scrymgeour's stick! What pitiful creatures we are. Girls, I mean. At least, I suppose a good many girls are like me. If Gerald had died and I had lost him that way, I know quite well I shouldn't be feeling as I do now. I should have been broken-hearted, but it wouldn't have been the same. It's my pride that is hurt. I have always been a bossy, cocksure little creature, swaggering about the world like an English sparrow; and now I'm paying for it! Oh, Ginger, I'm paying for it! I wonder if running away is going to do me any good at all. Perhaps, if Mr. Faucitt has some real hard work for me to do...

"Of course, I know exactly how all this has come about. Elsa's pretty and attractive. But the point is that she is a success, and as a success she appeals to Gerald's weakest side. He worships success. She is going to have a marvellous career, and she can help Gerald on in his. He can write plays for her to star in. What have I to offer against that? Yes, I know it's grovelling and contemptible of me to say that, Ginger. I ought to be above it, oughtn't I—talking as if I were competing for some prize... But I haven't any pride left. Oh, well!

"There! I've poured it all out and I really do feel a little better just for the moment. It won't last, of course, but even a minute is something. Ginger, dear, I shan't see you for ever so long, even if we ever do meet again, but you'll try to remember that I'm thinking of you a whole lot, won't you? I feel responsible for you. You're my baby. You've got started now and you've only to stick to it. Please, please, please don't 'make a hash of it'! Good-bye. I never did find that photograph of me that we were looking for that afternoon in the apartment,
