The twilight didn't arrive with a bang; it crept in with the shy, apologetic demeanor of a guest who knows he's overstaying his welcome. It lingered over the western treeline, clutching a fading afterglow, while a new moon hung above the barn like a polished silver sickle. Sally stepped onto the gravel path, bowing three solemn times for luck before pausing to inhale the evening's perfume. Life, she decided, was simply good.

Then, the shadows decided to stop playing hard to get. They buckled down with industrial efficiency, turning the sky a uniform, star-dusted indigo and swallowing the state road whole. Across the meadows, house lights flickered on like distant fireflies. From the kennel direction came a single, sleepy bark, followed by a sharp, challenging squeak from Toto, the small white woolly dog who had been trotting at Sally's heels.

The air was so still that Ginger's footsteps echoed long before he rounded the bend. He was returning from the village—provisions, evening papers, and the wool for Sally's sweater in tow. Though invisible in the gloom, his presence brought a familiar, cozy thrill to Sally's chest.

"Ginger!" she called out.

"What ho!"

Toto scuttled forward with another important squeak, only to be met with a frosty greeting. Ginger, despite his professed love for dogs, had never warmed to Toto. He remembered the day a month prior when Sally, seeing Mrs. Meecher distraught over her pet's lethargy, had begged Ginger to take the invalid to the country.

"It's wonderful what you've done for Toto, angel," Sally said as Ginger sidestepped the dog's enthusiastic leaps. "He's a different dog."

"Bit of luck for him," Ginger replied, his tone cool.

"In all the years I was at Mrs. Meecher's, I never saw him move faster than a stately walk. Now he's running around all day."

"The blighter was overeating from birth," Ginger explained, brightening slightly. "A little judicious dieting fixed him. We'll be able to ship him back next week."

"I shall quite miss him."

"I nearly missed him this morning with a shoe," Ginger admitted casually. "He was up on the kitchen table wolfing bacon, and I took steps."

"My cave-man!" Sally murmured, shaking her head. "I always said you had a frightfully brutal streak. Ginger, what an evening!"

"Good Lord!" Ginger exclaimed suddenly as they crossed the threshold into the kitchen's warm light.

"Now what?"

He stopped, staring at her intently. "Do you know you're looking prettier than when I started down to the village?"

Sally gave his arm a affectionate squeeze. "Beloved! Did you get the chops?"

Ginger froze, horror washing over his face. "Oh, my aunt! I clean forgot them!"

"Oh, Ginger, you old chump. Well, you'll have to go on a diet like Toto."

"I say, I'm most awfully sorry. But I got the wool."

"If you think I'm going to eat wool..."

"Isn't there anything else in the house?"

"Vegetables and fruit."

"Fine! But, of course, if you want chops..."

"Not at all. I'm spiritual. Besides, people say vegetables are good for blood pressure." He paused, a mischievous glint in his eye. "Of course, you forgot to get the mail, too?"

"Absolutely not! I was on to it like a knife. Two letters from fellows wanting Airedale puppies."

"No! Ginger, we're getting on!"

"Pretty bloated," Ginger agreed complacently. "Pretty bloated. If things keep buzzing along like this, we'll get that two-seater. There was a letter for you. Here it is."

"It's from Fillmore," Sally said, examining the envelope as they moved inside. "And about time. Haven't heard from him in months."

She sat down and opened the letter. Ginger hauled himself onto the table, wriggling into a comfortable position to read his evening paper. After skimming the sports page, he lowered it, his gaze resting on Sally's bent head with a profound sense of contentment. Even as a married man of nearly a year, Ginger still felt like he was wandering a magic world, dazed by the sheer impossibility of his bliss. He had seen many things that looked good from afar, but none had held up to close inspection—except this business of marriage.

With Sally as his partner, marriage seemed to be one of the few things in existence without a catch. His honest eyes glowed as he watched her. Sally broke into a little splutter of laughter.

"Ginger, look at this!"

He reached down and took the slip of paper she offered. Bold letters stared back at him:

Ginger frowned, puzzled. "What is it?"

"It's Fillmore."

"How do you mean?"

Sally gurgled with delight. "Fillmore and Gladys have started a little restaurant in Pittsburgh."

"A restaurant!" Shock colored Ginger's voice. Although he knew his brother-in-law, the self-styled "modern Napoleon," had previously crashed spectacularly, Ginger still held a grudging reverence for the Man of Destiny. For Fillmore Nicholas to descend to running a *small* restaurant struck him as almost indecent.

Sally, however, was thrilled. "It's the most splendid idea," she enthused. "It looks like Fillmore is finally amounting to something. They started small, just making pork-pies..."

"Why 'Popp'?" Ginger interrupted, perplexed.

"Just a trade name, silly. Gladys is a wonderful cook; she made the pies while Fillmore sold them. They did so well they've expanded into a full restaurant, and it's a success. Listen to this." Sally turned the page. "'...sound financial footing. Our success has been so instantaneous that I have decided to launch out on a really big scale. It is Big Ideas that lead to Big Business. I am contemplating a vast extension... organizing branches in New York, Chicago, Detroit... each offering as a special feature, in addition to the usual restaurant cuisine, these Popp's Outstanding Pork-pies... That done, I shall sail for England and introduce Popp's Pork-pies there...' Isn't he a little wonder!"

"Dashed brainy chap. Always said so."

"I must say I was uneasy reading that. I've seen so many of Fillmore's 'Big Ideas.' He usually gets something good and then overdoes it until it bursts. However, it's all right now that he's got Gladys. She added a postscript: 'Yes, I don't think!' Just four words, but oh, how comforting to a sister's heart. Thank heaven, she's got poor dear Fillmore well in hand."

"Pork-pies!" Ginger mused, as the pangs of hunger began to gnaw at him. "I wish he'd sent us one of those outstanding little chaps. I could do with it."

Sally stood up and ruffled his red hair. "Poor old Ginger! I knew you'd never be able to stick it. Come on, it's a lovely night. Let's walk to the village and revel at the inn. We're going to be millionaires before we know where we are, so we can afford it."
