A Face in the Crowd.

To the northern folk, rising on Midsummer morning is a simple affair: one sees the dew upon the grassy verge of dusty paths, notes the fresh sprouts amidst the deeper greens of the oaks and firs in the coppice, and gazes over the gate at the newly shorn meadows, without needing to recall that it is the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist.

Not so for the Florentine—and least of all for the Florentine of the fifteenth century. To him, that specific morning held a brilliance in the eastern sun's touch upon the Arno that was singular and electric. The bells rang with articulation, proclaiming aloud the great summer festival of Florence, the Day of San Giovanni.

San Giovanni had served as Florence's patron saint for at least eight centuries, ever since the Lombard Queen Theodolinda commanded her subjects to render him peculiar honor. Indeed, the old chronicler Villani asserts that this devotion stretched back to the days of Constantine the Great and Pope Sylvester, when the Florentines deposed their idol, Mars, yet did so with a discretion that avoided contumely. While they consecrated their beautiful temples to God and "Beato Messere Santo Giovanni," they had once placed the old god of war respectfully atop a high tower near the River Arno. Ancient memorials suggested Mars had been elected their tutelary deity under specific astral influences; to break him or treat him with indignity would bring great damage and mutation to the city. However, by the fifteenth century, this discreet regard for the feelings of the Man-destroyer had long vanished. The god of spear and shield had ceased to frown beside the Arno, and the defenses of the Republic were believed to rest not in martial might, but in craft and coffers. For spears and shields could be purchased with gold florins, and upon those coins, the image of San Giovanni had always been struck.

Much good had accrued to Florence since the twilight struggles between the old patron and the new: undoubtedly, there had been quarrels and bloodshed between Guelf and Ghibelline, between Black and White, between orthodox sons of the Church and heretical Paterini. There had been floods, famines, and pestilences. Yet, much wealth and glory remained. Florence had achieved conquests over walled cities once mightier than herself, notably over Pisa, whose marble edifices were too lofty and beautiful, whose masts were too honored on the Greek and Italian coasts. The name of Florence grew prouder daily in the courts of Europe, nay, in Africa itself, bolstered by the purity of its gold coinage, the fineness of its dyes and textiles, pre-eminence in scholarship and poetry, and the wit of its citizens, most serviceable for statesmanship and banking. It was a name so omnipresent that a Pope with a turn for epigram dubbed the Florentines "the fifth element." And for this high destiny, though it might partly depend on the stars and the Madonna dell'Impruneta, and certainly on other higher powers less frequently named, the praise was largely due to San Giovanni, whose image crowned the fair gold florins.

Thus, it was fitting that the day of San Giovanni—an ancient Church festival already venerated in the days of Saint Augustine—should be a day of peculiar rejoicing. It was ushered in by a vigil kept in strict old Florentine fashion: with much dancing, much street jesting, perhaps with not a little stone-throwing and window-breaking, but emphatically with sights unique to a city employing a clever engineer and architect named Cecca, valuable alike in sieges and in pageantry. By Cecca's aid, the saints, surrounded by almond-shaped glory and floating on clouds with their joyful retinue of winged cherubs, as seen today in the works of Perugino, seemed to have brought a fragment of heaven down into the narrow streets, passing slowly through them. More wonderfully still, saints of gigantic stature, attended by angels, might be seen moving in a slow, mysterious manner along the thoroughfares, like a procession of colossal figures descended from the high domes and tribunes of the churches. The clouds were crafted from fine woven stuff; the saints and cherubs were mortal men supported by firm bars; and those mysterious giants were actually men of steady brains, balancing themselves on stilts, enlarged like Greek tragedians by huge masks and padded shoulders. Yet, a miserably unimaginative Florentine would think only of the mechanics, and thereby commit impiety, for in the images of sacred things lay some of the virtue of the sacred things themselves. Afterward, a company of merry black demons, well-armed with claws and thongs and other implements of sport, appeared ready to perform impromptu farces of bastinadoing and clothes-tearing. Such was the demons' way of keeping vigil, and they, too, might have descended from the domes and tribunes. The Tuscan mind slipped from the devout to the burlesque as readily as water rounds an angle. The saints had already done their turn, paused before the gates of San Giovanni to honor him on the eve of his *festa*, and departed.

On the morrow, the great day thus inaugurated, it was fitting that the tributary symbols paid to Florence by all its dependent cities, districts, and villages—whether conquered, protected, or of immemorial possession—should be offered at the shrine of San Giovanni within the old octagonal church, now the baptistery, where every Florentine had received the sign of the Cross anointed with chrism on his brow. All the city, from the white-haired elder to the stripling, from the matron to the lisping child, was clothed in its best to honor the great day and behold the great sight. Then, when the sun slanted low and the streets cooled, there would be the glorious race, or *Corso*. Unsaddled horses, clothed in rich trappings, would run straight across the city, from the Porta al Prato on the northwest, through the Mercato Vecchio, to the Porta Santa Croce on the southeast, where the richest *Palii*—velvet and brocade banners lined with silk and fringed with gold, befitting a city that half-clad the well-dressed world—awaited the winner upon a triumphal chariot.

Afterward followed more dancing. Nay, throughout the entire day, according to an old chronicler from the beginning of that century, there were weddings and the grandest gatherings, accompanied by so much piping, music, and song, balls, feasts, gladness, and ornament, that this earth might have been mistaken for Paradise.

In this year of 1492, however, it was perhaps a little less easy to make that mistake. Lorenzo the Magnificent, subtle and generous, was dead, and in his stead sat an arrogant, incautious Piero. An evil change for Florence, unless, indeed, the wise horse prefers the bad rider, as more easily thrown from the saddle. Already, regrets for Lorenzo were giving way to murmured desires for government on a broader basis, wherein corruption might be arrested, and wherein there might be that free play for everyone's jealousy and ambition which constituted the ideal liberty of the good, old, quarrelsome, struggling times. Those were the days when Florence raised her great buildings, reared her own soldiers, drove out would-be tyrants at the point of the sword, and was proud to keep faith at her own loss. Lorenzo was dead; Pope Innocent was dying; and a troublesome Neapolitan succession, coupled with an intriguing, ambitious Milan, might soon set Italy by the ears. The times were likely to be difficult. Still, there was all the more reason for the Republic to maintain its religious festivals.

Midsummer morning in this year 1492 was not less bright than usual. It was betimes in the morning that the symbolic offerings destined for the grand procession were assembled at their starting point in the Piazza della Signoria—that famous square where stood the massive, turreted Palace of the People, known as the Palazzo Vecchio, and the spacious Loggia built by Orcagna, the scene of all grand state ceremony. The sky spread out as the fairest blue tent, and beneath it, the bells swung so vigorously that every evil spirit possessing enough sense to be formidable must long since have taken flight. Windows and terraced roofs were alive with human faces; sombre stone houses glowed with hanging draperies. The boldly soaring palace tower, the yet older square tower of the Bargello, and the spire of the neighboring Badia seemed to keep watch above. Below, upon the broad polygonal flags of the piazza, lay the glorious display of banners, horses with rich trappings, and gigantic *ceri*, or tapers, fittingly called towers—strangely aggrandized descendants of those torches by whose faint light the Church worshipped in the Catacombs. Betimes in the morning, all processions needed to move under the Midsummer sky of Florence, where the shelter of narrow streets must every now and then be exchanged for the glare of wide spaces; and the sun would be high in the heavens before the long pomp had ended its pilgrimage in the Piazza di San Giovanni.

But here, where the procession was to pause, the magnificent city, aided by its ingenious Cecca, had provided another tent than the sky. The entire Piazza del Duomo, from the octagonal baptistery in the center to the façade of the cathedral and the walls of the houses on either side of the quadrangle, was covered, at a height of forty feet or more, with blue drapery adorned with well-stitched yellow lilies
