Mr. Home stayed two days. During his visit he could not be prevailed on to go out: he sat all day long by the fireside, sometimes silent, sometimes receiving and answering Mrs. Bretton’s chat, which was just of the proper sort for a man in his morbid mood—not over-sympathetic, yet not too uncongenial, sensible; and even with a touch of the motherly—she was sufficiently his senior to be permitted this touch. As to Paulina, the child was at once happy and mute, busy and watchful. Her father frequently lifted her to his knee; she would sit there till she felt or fancied he grew restless; then it was—“Papa, put me down; I shall tire you with my weight.” And the mighty burden slid to the rug, and establishing itself on carpet or stool just at “papa’s“ feet, the white work-box and the scarlet-speckled handkerchief came into play.

diminished by the nature of the scenes pretty sure to be enacted between him and Miss Paulina. A distant and haughty demeanour had been the result of the indignity put upon her the first evening of his arrival: her usual answer, when he addressed her, was—“I can’t attend to you; I have other things to think about.” Being implored to state what things: “Business.” Graham would endeavour to seduce her attention by opening his desk and displaying its multifarious contents: seals, bright sticks of wax, pen-knives, with a miscellany of engravings—some of them gaily coloured—which he had amassed from time to time. Nor was this powerful temptation wholly unavailing: her eyes, furtively raised from her work, cast many a peep towards the writing-table, rich in scattered pictures. An etching of a child playing with a Blenheim spaniel happened to flutter to the floor.

“Here goes!” said he, making a menacing flourish. “Right through Fido’s head, and splitting little Harry’s nose.” “No! No! NO!” “Then come to me. Come quickly, or it is done.” She hesitated, lingered, but complied. “Now, will you have it?” he asked, as she stood before him. “Please.” “But I shall want payment.” “How much?” “A kiss.” “Give the picture first into my hand.” Polly, as she said this, looked rather faithless in her turn. Graham gave it. She absconded a debtor, darted to her father, and took refuge on his knee. Graham rose in mimic wrath and followed. She buried her face in Mr. Home’s waistcoat. “Papa—papa—send him away!” “I’ll not be sent away,” said Graham. With face still averted, she held out her hand to keep him off. “Then, I shall kiss the hand,” said he; but that moment it became a miniature fist, and dealt him payment in a small coin that was not kisses.

She was beside him directly. “Let me see your eye: I did not mean to touch it, only your mouth; and I did not think I hit so very hard.” Silence answered her. Her features worked,—“I am sorry; I am sorry!” Then succeeded emotion, faltering; weeping. “Have done trying that child, Graham,” said Mrs. Bretton. “It is all nonsense, my pet,” cried Mr. Home. And Graham once more snatched her aloft, and she again punished him; and while she pulled his lion’s locks, termed him—“The naughtiest, rudest, worst, untruest person that ever was.” On the morning of Mr. Home’s departure, he and his daughter had some conversation in a window-recess by themselves; I heard part of it. “Couldn’t I pack my box and go with you, papa?” she whispered earnestly. He shook his head. “Should I be a trouble to you?” “Yes, Polly.” “Because I am little?” “Because you are little and tender.

she endured agony. She went through, in that brief interval of her infant life, emotions such as some never feel; it was in her constitution: she would have more of such instants if she lived. Nobody spoke. Mrs. Bretton, being a mother, shed a tear or two. Graham, who was writing, lifted up his eyes and gazed at her. I, Lucy Snowe, was calm. The little creature, thus left unharassed, did for herself what none other could do—contended with an intolerable feeling; and, ere long, in some degree, repressed it. That day she would accept solace from none; nor the next day: she grew more passive afterwards. On the third evening, as she sat on the floor, worn and quiet, Graham, coming in, took her up gently, without a word. She did not resist: she rather nestled in his arms, as if weary.

on the carpet, like a jailor putting a prisoner’s pitcher of water through his cell-door, and retreated. Presently she returned. “What will you have besides tea—what to eat?” “Anything good. Bring me something particularly nice; that’s a kind little woman.” She came back to Mrs. Bretton. “Please, ma’am, send your boy something good.” “You shall choose for him, Polly; what shall my boy have?” She selected a portion of whatever was best on the table; and, ere long, came back with a whispered request for some marmalade, which was not there. Having got it, however, (for Mrs. Bretton refused the pair nothing), Graham was shortly after heard lauding her to the skies; promising that, when he had a house of his own, she should be his housekeeper, and perhaps—if she showed any culinary genius—his cook; and, as she did not return, and I went to look after her, I found Graham and her breakfasting tête-à-tête —she standing at his elbow, and sharing his fare: excepting the marmalade, which she delicately refused to touch, lest, I suppose, it should appear that she had procured it as much on her own account as his.

gleam of the peculiarities of her nature. I ceased to watch her under such circumstances: she was not interesting. But the moment Graham’s knock sounded of an evening, a change occurred; she was instantly at the head of the staircase. Usually her welcome was a reprimand or a threat. “You have not wiped your shoes properly on the mat. I shall tell your mamma.” “Little busybody! Are you there?” “Yes—and you can’t reach me: I am higher up than you“ (peeping between the rails of the banister; she could not look over them). “Polly!” “My dear boy!” (such was one of her terms for him, adopted in imitation of his mother.) “I am fit to faint with fatigue,” declared Graham, leaning against the passage-wall in seeming exhaustion. “Dr. Digby“ (the headmaster) “has quite knocked me up with overwork. Just come down and help me to carry up my books.” “Ah! you’re cunning!” “Not at all, Polly—it is positive fact.

from the feeble Graham. Of course her approach always galvanized him to new and spasmodic life: the game of romps was sure to be exacted. Sometimes she would be angry; sometimes the matter was allowed to pass smoothly, and we could hear her say as she led him up-stairs: “Now, my dear boy, come and take your tea—I am sure you must want something.” It was sufficiently comical to observe her as she sat beside Graham, while he took that meal. In his absence she was a still personage, but with him the most officious, fidgety little body possible. I often wished she would mind herself and be tranquil; but no—herself was forgotten in him: he could not be sufficiently well waited on, nor carefully enough looked after; he was more than the Grand Turk in her estimation. She would gradually assemble the various plates before him, and, when one would suppose all he could possibly desire was within his reach, she would find out something else: “Ma’am,” she would whisper to Mrs.

it.” Graham did like it very well, and almost always got it. To do him justice, he would have shared his prize with her to whom he owed it; but that was never allowed: to insist, was to ruffle her for the evening. To stand by his knee, and monopolize his talk and notice, was the reward she wanted—not a share of the cake. With curious readiness did she adapt herself to such themes as interested him. One would have thought the child had no mind or life of her own, but must necessarily live, move, and have her being in another: now that her father was taken from her, she nestled to Graham, and seemed to feel by his feelings: to exist in his existence. She learned the names of all his schoolfellows in a trice: she got by heart their characters as given from his lips: a single description of an individual seemed to suffice.

dining-room, where they soon became very merry and made a good deal of noise. Chancing to pass through the hall, I found Paulina sitting alone on the lowest step of the staircase, her eyes fixed on the glossy panels of the dining-room door, where the reflection of the hall-lamp was shining; her little brow knit in anxious meditation. “What are you thinking about, Polly?” “Nothing particular; only I wish that door was clear glass—that I might see through it. The boys seem very cheerful, and I want to go to them: I want to be with Graham, and watch his friends.” “What hinders you from going?” “I feel afraid: but may I try, do you think? May I knock at the door, and ask to be let in?” I thought perhaps they might not object to have her as a playmate, and therefore encouraged the attempt.

ever a tolerable stock ready for application. She stopped me, however, by putting her fingers in her ears at the first words I uttered, and then lying down on the mat with her face against the flags; nor could either Warren or the cook root her from that position: she was allowed to lie, therefore, till she chose to rise of her own accord. Graham forgot his impatience the same evening, and would have accosted her as usual when his friends were gone, but she wrenched herself from his hand; her eye quite flashed; she would not bid him good-night; she would not look in his face. The next day he treated her with indifference, and she grew like a bit of marble. The day after, he teased her to know what was the matter; her lips would not unclose.

to watch him dismount; as she leaned against the gate, the longing wish for the indulgence of a ride glittered in her eye. “Come, Polly, will you have a canter?” asked Graham, half carelessly. I suppose she thought he was too careless. “No, thank you,” said she, turning away with the utmost coolness. “You’d better,” pursued he. “You will like it, I am sure.” “Don’t think I should care a fig about it,” was the response. “That is not true. You told Lucy Snowe you longed to have a ride.” “Lucy Snowe is a tatter -box,” I heard her say: (her imperfect articulation was the least precocious thing she had about her); and with this, she walked into the house. Graham coming in soon after, observed to his mother,—“Mamma, I believe that creature is a changeling: she is a perfect cabinet of oddities; but I should be dull without her; she amuses me a great deal more than you or Lucy Snowe.” “Miss Snowe,” said Paulina to me (she had now got into the habit of occasionally chatting with me when we were alone in our room at night), “do you know on what day in the week I like Graham best?” “How can I possibly know anything so strange?

we have him the whole day, and he is quiet, and, in the evening, so kind.” This observation was not altogether groundless: going to church, &c., kept Graham quiet on the Sunday, and the evening he generally dedicated to a serene, though rather indolent sort of enjoyment by the parlour fireside. He would take possession of the couch, and then he would call Polly. Graham was a boy not quite as other boys are; all his delight did not lie in action: he was capable of some intervals of contemplation; he could take a pleasure too in reading, nor was his selection of books wholly indiscriminate: there were glimmerings of characteristic preference, and even of instinctive taste in the choice. He rarely, it is true, remarked on what he read, but I have seen him sit and think of it.

seldom required here, for the child could read any simple narrative chapter very well; and, when the subject was such as she could understand and take an interest in, her expression and emphasis were something remarkable. Joseph cast into the pit; the calling of Samuel; Daniel in the lions’ den;—these were favourite passages: of the first especially she seemed perfectly to feel the pathos. “Poor Jacob!” she would sometimes say, with quivering lips. “How he loved his son Joseph! As much,” she once added—“as much, Graham, as I love you: if you were to die“ (and she re-opened the book, sought the verse, and read), “I should refuse to be comforted, and go down into the grave to you mourning.” With these words she gathered Graham in her little arms, drawing his long-tressed head towards her. The action, I remember, struck me as strangely rash; exciting the feeling one might experience on seeing an animal dangerous by nature, and but half-tamed by art, too heedlessly fondled.

his maternal kinsfolk on the Continent; that, as England was become wholly distasteful to him, he had no thoughts of returning hither, perhaps, for years; and that he wished his little girl to join him immediately. “I wonder how she will take this news?” said Mrs. Bretton, when she had read the letter. I wondered, too, and I took upon myself to communicate it. Repairing to the drawing-room—in which calm and decorated apartment she was fond of being alone, and where she could be implicitly trusted, for she fingered nothing, or rather soiled nothing she fingered—I found her seated, like a little Odalisque, on a couch, half shaded by the drooping draperies of the window near. She seemed happy; all her appliances for occupation were about her; the white wood workbox, a shred or two of muslin, an end or two of ribbon collected for conversion into doll-millinery.

The doll, duly night-capped and night-gowned, lay in its cradle; she was rocking it to sleep, with an air of the most perfect faith in its possession of sentient and somnolent faculties; her eyes, at the same time, being engaged with a picture-book, which lay open on her lap. “Miss Snowe,” said she in a whisper, “this is a wonderful book. Candace” (the doll, christened by Graham; for, indeed, its begrimed complexion gave it much of an Ethiopian aspect)—“Candace is asleep now, and I may tell you about it; only we must both speak low, lest she should waken. This book was given me by Graham; it tells about distant countries, a long, long way from England, which no traveller can reach without sailing thousands of miles over the sea.

as this room, and as long as the hall; but not a fierce, flesh-eating thing, Graham thinks. He believes, if I met one in a forest, it would not kill me, unless I came quite in its way; when it would trample me down amongst the bushes, as I might tread on a grasshopper in a hayfield without knowing it.” Thus she rambled on. “Polly,” I interrupted, “should you like to travel?” “Not just yet,” was the prudent answer; “but perhaps in twenty years, when I am grown a woman, as tall as Mrs. Bretton, I may travel with Graham. We intend going to Switzerland, and climbing Mount Blanck; and some day we shall sail over to South America, and walk to the top of Kim-kim-borazo.” “But how would you like to travel now, if your papa was with you?” Her reply—not given till after a pause—evinced one of those unexpected turns of temper peculiar to her.

to disclose the fact of a letter having been received, and to mention the directions given that she and Harriet should immediately rejoin this dear papa. “Now, Polly, are you not glad?” I added. She made no answer. She dropped her book and ceased to rock her doll; she gazed at me with gravity and earnestness. “Shall not you like to go to papa?” “Of course,” she said at last in that trenchant manner she usually employed in speaking to me; and which was quite different from that she used with Mrs. Bretton, and different again from the one dedicated to Graham. I wished to ascertain more of what she thought but no: she would converse no more. Hastening to Mrs. Bretton, she questioned her, and received the confirmation of my news. The weight and importance of these tidings kept her perfectly serious the whole day.

twice before it took proper hold of his attention, and even then he dwelt on it but momently. “Polly going? What a pity! Dear little Mousie, I shall be sorry to lose her: she must come to us again, mamma.” And hastily swallowing his tea, he took a candle and a small table to himself and his books, and was soon buried in study. “Little Mousie” crept to his side, and lay down on the carpet at his feet, her face to the floor; mute and motionless she kept that post and position till bed-time. Once I saw Graham—wholly unconscious of her proximity—push her with his restless foot. She receded an inch or two. A minute after one little hand stole out from beneath her face, to which it had been pressed, and softly caressed the heedless foot. When summoned by her nurse she rose and departed very obediently, having bid us all a subdued good-night.

knew how to accost her; she was not to be managed like another child. She, however, accosted me. As I closed the door, and put the light on the dressing-table, she turned to me with these words:—“I cannot— cannot sleep; and in this way I cannot— cannot live!” I asked what ailed her. “Dedful miz-er-y!” said she, with her piteous lisp. “Shall I call Mrs. Bretton?” “That is downright silly,” was her impatient reply; and, indeed, I well knew that if she had heard Mrs. Bretton’s foot approach, she would have nestled quiet as a mouse under the bedclothes. Whilst lavishing her eccentricities regardlessly before me—for whom she professed scarcely the semblance of affection—she never showed my godmother one glimpse of her inner self: for her, she was nothing but a docile, somewhat quaint little maiden. I examined her; her cheek was crimson; her dilated eye was both troubled and glowing, and painfully restless: in this state it was obvious she must not be left till morning.

Graham does not care for you so much as you care for him. It must be so.” Her lifted and questioning eyes asked why. “Because he is a boy and you are a girl; he is sixteen and you are only six; his nature is strong and gay, and yours is otherwise.” “But I love him so much; he should love me a little.” “He does. He is fond of you. You are his favourite.” “Am I Graham’s favourite?” “Yes, more than any little child I know.” The assurance soothed her; she smiled in her anguish. “But,” I continued, “don’t fret, and don’t expect too much of him, or else he will feel you to be troublesome, and then it is all over.” “All over!” she echoed softly; “then I’ll be good. I’ll try to be good, Lucy Snowe.” I put her to bed.

and as to likes and dislikes, we should be friendly to all, and worship none.” “Are you a wise person?” “I mean to try to be so. Go to sleep.” “I cannot go to sleep. Have you no pain just here” (laying her elfish hand on her elfish breast,) “when you think you shall have to leave Graham; for your home is not here?” “Surely, Polly,” said I, “you should not feel so much pain when you are very soon going to rejoin your father. Have you forgotten him? Do you no longer wish to be his little companion?” Dead silence succeeded this question. “Child, lie down and sleep,” I urged. “My bed is cold,” said she. “I can’t warm it.” I saw the little thing shiver. “Come to me,” I said, wishing, yet scarcely hoping, that she would comply: for she was a most strange, capricious, little creature, and especially whimsical with me.
