In Which Pendennis Appears as a Very Young Man Indeed

Arthur was about sixteen, a age at which he began to reign. In person, he possessed what his friends termed a "dumpy" figure, though his mother insisted on calling it "neat." His hair was a healthy brown that shimmered like gold in the sun; his face was round, rosy, and freckled, radiating a good-natured charm. When nature finally granted him the whiskers he so ardently desired, they were a decidedly reddish hue. Though not conventionally beautiful, he had a frank, honest countenance and laughed so merrily from his blue eyes that Mrs. Pendennis considered him the pride of the entire county. Between sixteen and eighteen, he grew from five feet six to five feet eight, pausing there. His mother, however, remained baffled. How could a man grow three inches taller than his father, Mr. Pendennis?

He never returned to school. The discipline of the establishment simply did not suit him; he preferred the comfort of home. The question of his return was debated, with his uncle advocating for it. The Doctor argued that a thorough knowledge of a Greek play was essential for Arthur's future success. Yet, Pen adroitly hinted to his mother about the dangers of Greyfriars and the wild fellows who inhabited it. The timid soul took alarm immediately and acceded to his desire to stay put.

Then, Pen's uncle offered to use his influence with His Royal Highness, the Commander-in-Chief, who was kind enough to propose a commission in the Foot Guards. Pen's heart leaped. He had recently visited St. James's Park to hear the band play on a Sunday. There, he had witnessed Tom Ricketts, a fourth-former known for wearing jackets so ludicrously tight that older boys used him as a target or 'cockshy.' Pen had seen this very Ricketts arrayed in crimson and gold, staggering under a bear-skin cap and regimental colours. Tom, a little wretch Pen had once cut with a hockey-stick, now recognized him, offering a patronizing nod. There he was, center stage, rallying around the flag of his country, surrounded by bayonets, crossbelts, and scarlet, while the band blew trumpets and banged cymbals. He was talking familiarly to immense warriors with tufts to their chins and Waterloo medals. What would not Pen have given to wear such epaulettes and enter such a service?

But Helen Pendennis, when this proposal was made, put on a face full of terror. She declared she did not quarrel with others' opinions, but in her view, a Christian had no right to make the army a profession. Mr. Pendennis would never have permitted it. Finally, she expressed that she would be very unhappy if he pursued it. Now, Pen would have as soon cut off his nose and ears as deliberately make his mother unhappy. Being of such a generous disposition that he would give anything to anyone, he instantly made a present of his visionary red coat, epaulettes, and ardour for military glory to his mother.

She thought him the noblest creature in the world. Major Pendennis, upon acknowledging and refusing the commission, wrote a curt and somewhat angry letter to the widow, thinking his nephew was merely a "spooney."

However, Pen was contented when he saw the boy's performances out hunting at Christmas, when the Major came down to Fairoaks. Pen had a very good mare and rode her with uncommon pluck and grace. He took his fences with great coolness and judgment, devoid of bravado. He wrote to his schoolmates about his top-boots and feats across country. He began to think seriously of a scarlet coat; his mother admitted it would become him remarkably well, though she passed hours of anguish during his absence, daily expecting to see him brought home on a shutter.

Amidst these amusements, it must not be assumed that Pen neglected his studies. He had a natural taste for every kind of book that did not fall into his school course. It was only when they forced his head into the waters of knowledge that he refused to drink. He devoured books at home from Inchbald's Theatre to White's Farriery, ransacking neighbouring bookcases. At Clavering, he found an old cargo of French novels which he read with all his might. He would sit for hours perched on the topmost bar of Doctor Portman's library steps with a folio on his knees, whether it were Hakluyt's Travels, Hobbes's Leviathan, Augustini Opera, or Chaucer's Poems. He and the Vicar were very good friends; from his Reverence, Pen learned that honest taste for port wine which distinguished him through life. As for Mrs. Portman, who was not in the least jealous—though her Doctor avowed himself in love with Mrs. Pendennis, whom he pronounced the finest lady in the county—all her grief was that her daughter, Minny, was too old for him. Miss Myra Portman was only two years younger than Pen's mother and weighed as much as Pen and Mrs. Pendennis combined.

Are these details insipid? Look back, good friend, at your own youth. I like to think of a well-nurtured boy, brave and gentle, warm-hearted and loving, looking the world in the face with kind, honest eyes. What bright colours it wore then, and how you enjoyed it! A man has not many years of such time. He does not know them whilst they are with him. It is only when they are passed long away that he remembers how dear and happy they were.

To keep Mr. Pen from indulging in the idleness prophesied by the Doctor of the Cistercians, Mr. Smirke, Dr. Portman's curate, was engaged at a liberal salary to walk or ride over from Clavering and spend several hours daily with the young gentleman. Smirke was a man perfectly faultless at a tea-table, wore a curl on his fair forehead, and tied his neck-cloth with a melancholy grace. He was a decent scholar and mathematician, and taught Pen as much as the lad was ever disposed to learn, which was not much. Pen had soon taken the measure of his tutor. When Smirke rode into the courtyard at Fairoaks on his pony, he turned out his toes so absurdly and left such a gap between his knees and the saddle that it was impossible for any lad with a sense of humour to respect such an equestrian. Pen nearly killed Smirke with terror by putting him on his mare, Rebecca (named after Pen's favourite heroine, the daughter of Isaac of York), and taking him a ride over a common where the county fox-hounds happened to meet. Smirke astounded the hounds as much as he disgusted the huntsman, laming one of the former by persisting in riding amongst the pack, and receiving a speech from the latter more remarkable for energy of language than any oration he had heard since leaving the bargemen on the banks of Isis.

Smirke confided his poems, both Latin and English, to his pupil, and presented Mrs. Pendennis with a volume of the latter, printed at Clapham, his native place. The two read the ancient poets together, rattling through them at a pleasant rate, very different from the steady grubbing pace with which the Cistercians went over classic ground, scenting out each word and digging up every root. Pen never liked to halt; he made his tutor construe when at fault, and thus galloped through the Iliad, the Odyssey, the tragic playwrights, and the charming, wicked Aristophanes, whom he vowed was the greatest poet of all. But he went at such a pace that, though he certainly galloped through a considerable extent of the ancient country, he clean forgot it in after-life, retaining only a vague remembrance of his early classic course as a man in the House of Commons who still keeps up two or three quotations, or a reviewer who, just for decency's sake, hints at a little Greek. Our people are the most prosaic in the world, but the most faithful; with curious reverence, we keep up and transmit, from generation to generation, the superstition of what we call the education of a gentleman.

Besides the ancient poets, Pen read the English with great gusto. Smirke sighed and shook his head sadly about Byron and Moore. But Pen was a sworn fire-worshipper and a Corsair; he had them by heart. He used to take little Laura into the window and say, "Zuleika, I am not thy brother," in tones so tragic that they caused the solemn little maid to open her great eyes still wider. She sat, until the proper hour for retirement, sewing at Mrs. Pendennis's knee, listening to Pen reading out to her of nights without comprehending one word of what he read.

He read Shakespeare to his mother (which she said she liked, but didn't), Byron, Pope, and his favourite *Lalla Rookh*, which pleased her indifferently. But as for Bishop Heber and Mrs. Hemans above all, this lady used to melt right away, absorbed into her pocket-handkerchief, when Pen read those authors to her in his kind boyish voice. *The Christian Year* was a book which appeared about that time. The son and the mother whispered it to each other with awe—faint, very faint. Seldom in after-life did Pendennis hear that solemn church-music, but he always loved the remembrance of it, and of the times when it struck on his heart, walking over the fields full of hope and void of doubt as the church-bells rang on Sunday morning.

It was at this period that Pen broke out in the Poets' Corner of the County Chronicle with some verses with which he was perfectly well satisfied. His verses, signed 'NEP.', included "To a Tear," "On the Anniversary of the Battle of Waterloo," "To Madame Caradori singing at the Assize Meetings," and "On Saint Bartholomew's Day"—a tremendous denunciation of Popery and a solemn warning to the people of England to rally against emancipating the Roman Catholics. All these masterpieces, Mrs. Pendennis no doubt keeps to this day, along with his first socks, the first cutting of his hair, his bottle, and other interesting relics of his infancy. He used to gallop Rebecca over the neighbouring Dumpling Downs or into the county town, which we shall call Chatteris, spouting his own poems, filled with quite a Byronic afflatus as he thought.

His genius at this time was of a decidedly gloomy cast. He brought his mother a tragedy in which, though he killed sixteen people before the second act, it made her laugh so that he thrust the masterpiece into the fire in a pet. He projected an epic poem in blank verse, *Cortez, or the Conqueror of Mexico, and the Inca's Daughter*. He wrote parts of *Seneca, or the Fatal Bath* and *Ariadne in Naxos*; classical pieces with choruses and strophes that sadly puzzled poor Mrs. Pendennis. He began a *History of the Jesuits*, in which he lashed that Order with tremendous severity and warned his Protestant fellow-countrymen of their machinations. His loyalty did his mother's heart good to witness. He was a staunch, unflinching Church-and-King man in those days. At the election, when Sir Giles Beanfield stood on the Blue interest against Lord Trehawk, a Whig and friend of Popery, Arthur Pendennis, with an immense bow for himself which his mother made and a blue ribbon for Rebecca, rode alongside the Reverend Doctor Portman on his grey mare Dowdy, leading the Clavering voters whom the Doctor brought up to plump for the Protestant Champion.

On that day, Pen made his first speech at the Blue Hotel, and also, it appears, for the first time in his life, took a little more wine than was good for him. Mercy! What a scene it was at Fairoaks when he rode back at ever so much o'clock at night! What moving about of lanterns in the courtyard and stables, though the moon was shining out! What a gathering of servants as Pen came home, clattering over the bridge and up the stableyard, with half a score of the Clavering voters yelling after him the Blue song of the election.

He wanted them all to come in and have some wine—some very good Madeira, some capital Madeira—"John, go and get some Madeira." There is no knowing what the farmers would have done had not Madam Pendennis made her appearance in a white wrapper with a candle, and scared those zealous Blues so by the sight of her pale, handsome face that they touched their hats and rode off.

Besides these amusements and occupations, there was one which forms the main business and pleasure of youth, if the poets tell us aright. Pen's heart was so ardent and his imagination so eager that it is not to be expected he should long escape the passion to which we allude, and which, ladies, you have rightly guessed to be that of Love. Pen sighed for it first in secret, and, like the love-sick swain in Ovid, opened his breast and said, "Aura, veni." What generous youth is there that has not courted some such windy mistress in his time?

Yes, Pen began to feel the necessity of a first love—a consuming passion—an object on which he could concentrate all those vague, floating fancies under which he sweetly suffered—a young lady to whom he could really make verses and whom he could set up and adore, in place of those unsubstantial Ianthes and Zuleikas to whom he addressed the outpourings of his gushing muse. He read his favourite poems over and over again, called upon Alma Venus, the delight of gods and men, translated Anacreon's odes, and picked out passages suitable to his complaint from Waller, Dryden, Prior, and the like. Smirke and he were never weary, in their interviews, of discoursing about love. The faithless tutor entertained him with sentimental conversations in place of lectures on algebra and Greek, for Smirke was in love too. Who could help it, being in daily intercourse with such a woman? Smirke was madly in love (as far as such a mild flame as Mr.
