In Which Pen Is Kept Waiting at the Door, While the Reader Is Informed Who Little Laura Was.

Once upon a time, there existed a young gentleman of Cambridge University who descended upon a village to spend the long vacation. His destination was the home of young Helen Thistlewood, living with her mother, the widow of a lieutenant slain at Copenhagen. This youth, the Reverend Francis Bell, was the nephew of Mrs. Thistlewood and, consequently, the cousin of Miss Helen. It being proper etiquette, he took lodgings in his aunt's modest house, bringing with him three or four pupils to accompany him. Mr. Bell was a fellow of a college, renowned for his learning and skill as a tutor.

His two kinswomen quickly deduced that the reverend gentleman was engaged to be married, merely awaiting a college living to formalize the union. His intended bride was the daughter of another parson, who had served as Mr. Bell's private tutor in his youth. Indeed, it was under Mr. Coacher's roof, when Bell was but a boy of seventeen or eighteen, that the impetuous young man had thrown himself at the feet of Miss Martha Coacher while assisting her in picking peas in the garden. On his knees, amidst the peas and her presence, he pledged himself to an endless affection.

Miss Coacher was many years his senior, and her heart had been lacerated by numerous previous matrimonial disappointments. No fewer than three of her father's pupils had trifled with her affections; the village apothecary had despicably jilted her, and a dragoon officer, with whom she had danced many times during a happy season spent at Bath with her gouty grandmother, had once gaily shaken his bridle-rein and galloped away forever. Wounded by repeated ingratitude, it is no wonder that Martha Coacher panted for rest. She listened to the proposals of the gawky, gallant, honest boy with great kindness and good humor. At the end of his speech, she remarked, "Law, Bell, I'm sure you are too young to think of such things," but intimated that she would revolve the matter in her own virgin bosom. She could not refer Mr. Bell to her mother, for Mr. Coacher was a widower, immersed in his books, and thus unable to direct such a frail and wondrous article as a lady's heart, which Miss Martha had to manage alone.

A lock of her hair, tied up in a piece of blue ribbon, conveyed the result of the Vestal's conference to the happy Bell. Thrice before had she snipped off one of her auburn ringlets and given them away; the possessors were faithless, but the hair had grown again. Martha had indeed occasion to say that men were deceivers when she handed over this token of love to the simple boy.

Number six, however, was an exception to former passions—Francis Bell was the most faithful of lovers. When his time arrived to go to college, and it became necessary to acquaint Mr. Coacher of the arrangements, the latter cried, "God bless my soul, I hadn't the least idea what was going on," as was indeed very likely, for he had been taken in three times before in precisely a similar manner. Francis went to the University resolved to conquer honors so as to lay them at the feet of his beloved Martha.

This prize in view made him labor prodigiously. News came, term after term, of the honors he won. He sent the prize-books for his college essays to old Coacher and his silver declamation cup to Miss Martha. In due season, he was high among the Wranglers and a fellow of his college. During all these transactions, a constant tender correspondence was kept up with Miss Coacher, to whose influence, and perhaps with justice, he attributed the successes he had won.

By the time the Rev. Francis Bell, M.A., and Fellow and Tutor of his College, was twenty-six years of age, it happened that Miss Coacher was thirty-four, nor had her charms, manners, or temper improved since that sunny day in the springtime of life when he found her picking peas in the garden. Having achieved his honors, he relaxed in the ardor of his studies, and his judgment and tastes perhaps became cooler. The sunshine of the pea-garden faded away from Miss Martha, and poor Bell found himself engaged—and his hand pledged to that bond in a thousand letters—to a coarse, ill-tempered, ill-favored, ill-mannered, middle-aged woman.

It was in consequence of one of many altercations (in which Martha's eloquence shone, and in which she frequently indulged) that Francis refused to take his pupils to Bearleader's Green, where Mr. Coacher's living was, and where Bell was in the habit of spending the summer. He bethought himself that he would pass the vacation at his aunt's village, which he had not seen for many years—not since little Helen was a girl and used to sit on his knee. Down then he came and lived with them. Helen was grown a beautiful young woman now. The cousins were nearly four months together, from June to October. They walked in the summer evenings; they met in the early morn. They read out of the same book when the old lady dozed at night over the candles. What little Helen knew, Frank taught her. She sang to him; she gave her artless heart to him. She was aware of all his story. Had he made any secret? Had he not shown the picture of the woman to whom he was engaged, and with a blush, her letters, hard, eager, and cruel? The days went on and on, happier and closer, with more kindness, more confidence, and more pity. At last, one morning in October came, when Francis went back to college, and the poor girl felt that her tender heart was gone with him.

Frank too wakened up from the delightful midsummer dream to the horrible reality of his own pain. He gnashed and tore at the chain which bound him. He was frantic to break it and be free. Should he confess? Give his savings to the woman to whom he was bound and beg his release? There was time yet; he temporized. No living might fall in for years to come. The cousins went on corresponding sadly and fondly; the betrothed woman, hard, jealous, and dissatisfied, complained bitterly, and with reason, of her Francis's altered tone.

At last, things came to a crisis, and the new attachment was discovered. Francis owned it, cared not to disguise it, rebuked Martha with her violent temper and angry imperiousness, and, worst of all, with her inferiority and her age. Her reply was that if he did not keep his promise, she would carry his letters into every court in the kingdom—letters in which his love was pledged to her ten thousand times; and, after exposing him to the world as the perjurer and traitor he was, she would kill herself.

Frank had one more interview with Helen, whose mother was dead then, and who was living companion with old Lady Pontypool—one more interview, where it was resolved that he was to do his duty; that is, to redeem his vow; that is, to pay a debt cozened from him by a sharper; that is, to make two honest people miserable. So the two judged their duty to be, and they parted.

The living fell in only too soon; but yet Frank Bell was quite a grey and worn-out man when he was inducted into it. Helen wrote him a letter on his marriage, beginning "My dear Cousin" and ending "always truly yours." She sent him back the other letters and the lock of his hair—all but a small piece. She had it in her desk when she was talking to the Major.

Bell lived for three or four years in his living, at the end of which time, the Chaplainship of Coventry Island falling vacant, Frank applied for it privately, and having procured it, announced the appointment to his wife. She objected, as she did to everything. He told her bitterly that he did not want her to come; so she went. Bell went out in Governor Crawley's time and was very intimate with that gentleman in his later years. And it was in Coventry Island, years after his own marriage and five years after he had heard of the birth of Helen's boy, that his own daughter was born.

She was not the daughter of the first Mrs. Bell, who died of island fever very soon after Helen Pendennis and her husband, to whom Helen had told everything, wrote to inform Bell of the birth of their child. "I was old, was I?" said Mrs. Bell the first; "I was old, and her inferior, was I? but I married you, Mr. Bell, and kept you from marrying her?" and hereupon she died. Bell married a colonial lady, whom he loved fondly. But he was not doomed to prosper in love; and, this lady dying in childbirth, Bell gave up too, sending his little girl home to Helen Pendennis and her husband, with a parting prayer that they would befriend her.

The little thing came to Fairoaks from Bristol, which is not very far off, dressed in black, and in company of a soldier's wife, her nurse, at parting from whom she wept bitterly. But she soon dried up her grief under Helen's motherly care. Round her neck she had a locket with hair, which Helen had given, ah, how many years ago! to poor Francis, dead and buried. This child was all that was left of him, and she cherished, as so tender a creature would, the legacy which he had bequeathed to her. The girl's name, as his dying letter stated, was Helen Laura. But John Pendennis, though he accepted the trust, was always rather jealous of the orphan; and gloomily ordered that she should be called by her own mother's name, and not by that first one which her father had given her. She was afraid of Mr. Pendennis to the last moment of his life. And it was only when her husband was gone that Helen dared openly to indulge in the tenderness which she felt for the little girl.

Thus it was that Laura Bell became Mrs. Pendennis's daughter. Neither her husband nor that gentleman's brother, the Major, viewed her with very favorable eyes. She reminded the first of circumstances in his wife's life which he was forced to accept but would have forgotten much more willingly; and as for the second, how could he regard her? She was neither related to his own family of Pendennis nor to any nobleman in this empire, and she had but a couple of thousand pounds for her fortune.

And now let Mr. Pen come in, who has been waiting all this while.

Having strung up his nerves and prepared himself, without at the door, for the meeting, he came to it, determined to face the awful uncle. He had settled in his mind that the encounter was to be a fierce one and was resolved on bearing it through with all the courage and dignity of the famous family which he represented. And he flung open the door and entered with the most severe and warlike expression, armed cap-a-pie as it were, with lance couched and plumes displayed, and glancing at his adversary as if to say, "Come on, I'm ready."

The old man of the world, as he surveyed the boy's demeanor, could hardly help a grin at his admirable pompous simplicity. Major Pendennis too had examined his ground; and finding that the widow was already half won over to the enemy, and having a shrewd notion that threats and tragic exhortations would have no effect upon the boy, who was inclined to be perfectly stubborn and awfully serious, the Major laid aside the authoritative manner at once. With the most good-humored natural smile in the world, he held out his hands to Pen, shook the lad's passive fingers gaily, and said, "Well, Pen, my boy, tell us all about it."

Helen was delighted with the generosity of the Major's good humor. On the contrary, it quite took aback and disappointed poor Pen, whose nerves were strung up for a tragedy, and who felt that his grand entree was altogether baulked and ludicrous. He blushed and winced with mortified vanity and bewilderment. He felt immensely inclined to begin to cry—"I—I—I didn't know that you were come till just now," he said; "is—is—town very full, I suppose?"

If Pen could hardly gulp his tears down, it was all the Major could do to keep from laughter. He turned round and shot a comical glance at Mrs. Pendennis, who too felt that the scene was at once ridiculous and sentimental. And so, having nothing to say, she went up and kissed Mr. Pen; as he thought of her tenderness and soft obedience to his wishes, it is very possible too the boy was melted.

"What a couple of fools they are," thought the old guardian. "If I hadn't come down, she would have driven over in state to pay a visit and give her blessing to the young lady's family."

"Come, come," said he, still grinning at the couple, "let us have as little sentiment as possible, and, Pen, my good fellow, tell us the whole story."

Pen got back at once to his tragic and heroical air. "The story is, sir," said he, "as I have written it to you before. I have made the acquaintance of a most beautiful and most virtuous lady; of a high family, although in reduced circumstances: I have found the woman in whom I know that the happiness of my life is centred; I feel that I never, never can think about any woman but her. I am aware of the difference of our ages and other difficulties in my way. But my affection was so great that I felt I could surmount all these; that we both could: and she has consented to unite her lot with mine, and to accept my heart and my fortune."

"How much is that, my boy?" said the Major. "Has anybody left you some money? I don't know that you are worth a shilling in the world."

"You know what I have is his," cried out Mrs. Pendennis.

"Good heavens, madam, hold your tongue!" was what the guardian was disposed to say; but he kept his
