The Major and Captain Costigan were veterans of the old school, men who had stared down the enemy without flinching, so their composure remained unshaken. But the rest of the assembly in Cos's sitting-room found themselves thoroughly rattled by Pendennis's sudden appearance. Miss Fotheringay's heart, usually as steady as a clockwork, began to hammer like a trapped bird; her cheeks erupted in a flush so vibrant and healthy it seemed to glow from within, especially as Lieutenant Sir Derby Oaks fixed her with a glare that could curdle milk. Meanwhile, the little crooked old man perched in the window-seat, who had been trying to transcribe theatre music while watching the two gentlemen fence (a spectacle of such vigorous stamping and leaping that he had already abandoned his pen), looked up with wide-eyed anticipation as the Major, sporting boots blacker than midnight, swept into the room distributing bows so graceful they nearly knocked over the furniture.

"Me daughter—me friend, Mr. Bows—me gallant young pupil and friend, I may call 'um, Sir Derby Oaks," announced Costigan, waving his hand with the flourish of a man conducting an orchestra. "In one moment, Meejor, I'm your humble servant." With that, he dashed into his tiny sleeping chamber to perform a rapid transformation: twisting his lank hair with an ancient brush, tearing off a threadbare stock to reveal a pristine new one crafted by Emily, donning a crisp collar, and slipping into a fresh coat ordered specifically for her benefit. For the active Captain, this metamorphosis took less than a minute.

Sir Derby followed suit, emerging moments later encased in his tight-fitting shell-jacket, which hugged his large frame with the precision of a second skin—a garment that elicited admiration from Miss Fotheringay, poor Pen, and presumably everyone else present.

While the Major conversed with the actress, exchanging pleasantries about the weather, Costigan reappeared in his new "Shoot."

"I needn't apologize to ye, Meejor," he said, adopting his richest, most courteous tone, "for receiving ye in me shirt-sleeves."

"An old soldier can't be better employed than in teaching a young one the use of his sword," the Major replied gallantly. "I recall hearing in old times that you could wield yours with considerable skill, Captain Costigan."

"What, ye've heard of Jack Costigan, Major?" the other exclaimed, feigning great surprise.

The Major had indeed; he had pumped his nephew about this new Irish acquaintance. Whether he possessed any other knowledge of the Captain beyond this gossip, or if he genuinely remembered him, remains unclear. However, Major Pendennis was a man of honor and undoubted veracity. He stated with perfect conviction that he recalled meeting Mr. Costigan and hearing him sing at Sir Richard Strachan's table during the Walcheren campaign.

At this revelation, delivered with such bland cordiality, Bows looked up, utterly bewildered. "But we will discuss these matters another time," the Major continued, perhaps wishing to avoid committing himself further. "It is to Miss Fotheringay that I came to pay my respects today." He executed another bow so courtly and gracious that, if she had been a duchess, he could not have made it more handsome.

"I had heard of your performances from my nephew, madam," the Major said, "who raves about you, as I believe you know pretty well. But Arthur is but a boy, a wild and enthusiastic young fellow whose opinions one must not take *au pied de la lettre*. I confess I was anxious to judge for myself. Permit me to say your performance delighted and astonished me. I have seen our finest actresses, and on my word, I think you surpass them all. You are as majestic as Mrs. Siddons."

"Faith, I always said so," Costigan winked at his daughter. "Major, take a chair." Milly rose, retrieved an unripped satin garment from the only vacant seat, and brought the chair to Major Pendennis with one of her finest curtseys.

"You are as pathetic as Miss O'Neill," he continued, bowing and seating himself. "Your snatches of song reminded me of Mrs. Jordan in her prime, Captain Costigan; and your manner reminded me of Mars. Did you ever see the Mars, Miss Fotheringay?"

"There were two Mahers in Crow Street," remarked Miss Emily. "Fanny was well enough, but Biddy was no great shakes."

"Sure, the Major means the god of war, Milly, my dear," interjected the parent.

"It is not that Mars I meant, though Venus, I suppose, may be pardoned for thinking about him," the Major replied with a smile directed squarely at Sir Derby Oaks, who had now re-entered in his shell-jacket. But the lady failed to grasp the words, nor did the compliment pacify Sir Derby, who, likely misunderstanding it entirely, received it with great sulkiness and stiffness. He scowled uneasily at Miss Fotheringay with an expression that seemed to ask, *What the deuce is this man doing here?*

Major Pendennis was not in the least annoyed by the gentleman's ill-humor; on the contrary, it delighted him. "So," he thought, "a rival is in the field." He offered up silent vows that Sir Derby might be not only a rival but a winner in this love-match in which he and Pen were engaged.

"I fear I interrupted your fencing lesson," the Major said aloud. "But my stay in Chatteris is very short, and I was anxious to make myself known to my old fellow-campaigner, Captain Costigan, and to see a lady nearer who had charmed me so much from the stage. I was not the only man *épris* last night, Miss Fotheringay (if I must call you so, though your own family name is a very ancient and noble one). There was a reverend friend of mine who went home in raptures with Ophelia; and I saw Sir Derby Oaks fling a bouquet which no actress ever merited better. I should have brought one myself, had I known what I was going to see. Are not those the very flowers in a glass of water on the mantelpiece yonder?"

"I am very fond of flowers," said Miss Fotheringay, casting a languishing ogle at Sir Derby Oaks—but the Baronet still scowled sulkily.

"Sweets to the sweet—isn't that the expression of the play?" Mr. Pendennis asked, determined to remain good-humored.

"'Pon my life, I don't know. Very likely it is. I ain't much of a literary man," answered Sir Derby.

"Is it possible?" the Major continued, feigning surprise. "You don't inherit your father's love of letters, then, Sir Derby? He was a remarkably fine scholar, and I had the honor of knowing him very well."

"Indeed," said the other, giving a sulky wag of his head.

"He saved my life," continued Pendennis.

"Did he now?" cried Miss Fotheringay, rolling her eyes first upon the Major with surprise, then toward Sir Derby with gratitude—but the latter was proof against those glances. Far from appearing pleased that the Apothecary, his father, had saved Major Pendennis's life, the young man actually looked as if he wished the event had turned the other way.

"My father, I believe, was a very good doctor," the young gentleman said by way of reply. "I'm not in that line myself. I wish you good morning, sir. I've got an appointment—Cos, bye-bye—Miss Fotheringay, good morning." And, despite the young lady's imploring looks and appealing smiles, the Dragoon bowed stiffly out of the room. The clatter of his sabre echoed as he strode down the creaking stairs, followed by angry tones as he cursed little Tom Creed, who was playing in the passage, and whose peg-top Sir Derby kicked away with an oath into the street.

The Major did not smile, though he had every reason to be amused. "Monstrous handsome young man that—as fine a looking soldier as ever I saw," he said to Costigan.

"A credit to the army and to human nature in general," answered Costigan. "A young man of refined manners, polite affability, and princely fortune. His table is sumptuous: he's adored in the regiment: and he rides sixteen stone."

"A perfect champion," said the Major, laughing. "I have no doubt all the ladies admire him."

"He's very well, in spite of his weight, now he's young," said Milly; "but he's no conversation."

"He's best on horseback," Mr. Bows said; on which Milly replied that the Baronet had ridden third in the steeple-chase on his horse Tareaways, leading the Major to comprehend that the young lady herself lacked particular genius, and to wonder how she could be so dull yet act so well.

Costigan, with typical Irish hospitality, pressed refreshment upon his guest. The Major, who was no more hungry than one would be after a Lord Mayor's dinner, declared that he should like a biscuit and a glass of wine above all things, claiming to feel faint from long fasting—but he knew that receiving small kindnesses flattered the donors immensely, and that people must grow well-disposed toward you as they offer you hospitality.

"Some of the old Madeira, Milly, love," Costigan said, winking at his child. That lady, turning to her father with a glance of intelligence, went out of the room and down the stairs, where she softly summoned her little emissary, Master Tommy Creed. Giving him a piece of money, she ordered him to buy a pint of Madeira wine at the Grapes and sixpence worth of sorted biscuits at the baker's, instructing him to return in a hurry, noting he might have two biscuits for himself.

While Tommy Creed was gone on this errand, Miss Costigan sat below with Mrs. Creed, telling her landlady how Mr. Arthur Pendennis's uncle, the Major, was upstairs—a nice, soft-spoken old gentleman whose butter wouldn't melt in his mouth—and how Sir Derby had stormed out of the room in a rage of jealousy, pondering what must be done to pacify both of them.

"She keeps the keys of the cellar, Major," said Mr. Costigan as the girl left the room.

"Upon my word you have a very beautiful butler," answered Pendennis, gallantly. "And I don't wonder at the young fellows raving about her. When we were of their age, Captain Costigan, I think plainer women would have done our business."

"Faith, and ye may say that, sir—and lucky is the man who gets her. Ask me friend Bob Bows here whether Miss Fotheringay's mind is not even superior to her person, and whether she does not possess a cultivated intellect, a refined understanding, and an amiable disposition?"

"Oh of course," said Mr. Bows, rather drily. "Here comes Hebe blushing from the cellar. Don't you think it is time to go to rehearsal, Miss Hebe? You will be fined if you are later"—and he gave the young lady a look intimating that they had much better leave the room and the two elders together.

At this order, Miss Hebe took up her bonnet and shawl, looking uncommonly pretty, good-humored, and smiling. Bows gathered his roll of papers, hobbled across the room for his hat and cane.

"Must you go?" said the Major. "Can't you give us a few minutes more, Miss Fotheringay? Before you leave us, permit an old fellow to shake you by the hand, and believe that I am proud to have had the honor of making your acquaintance, and am most sincerely anxious to be your friend."

Miss Fotheringay made a low curtsey at the conclusion of this gallant speech, and the Major followed her retreating steps to the door, where he squeezed her hand with the kindest and most paternal pressure. Bows was puzzled by this exhibition of cordiality: "The lad's relatives can't be really wanting to marry him to her," he thought—and so they departed.

"Now for it," thought Major Pendennis. As for Mr. Costigan, he profited instantly by his daughter's absence to drink up the rest of the wine, tossing off bumper after bumper of the Madeira from the Grapes with an eager shaking hand. The Major came up to the table, took up his glass, and drained it with a jovial smack. If it had been Lord Steyne's particular vintage rather than public-house Cape, he could not have appeared to relish it more.

"Capital Madeira, Captain Costigan," he said. "Where do you get it? I drink the health of that charming creature in a bumper. Faith, Captain, I don't wonder that the men are wild about her. I never saw such eyes in my life, or such a grand manner. I am sure she is as intellectual as she is beautiful; and I have no doubt she's as good as she is clever."

"A good girl, sir,—a good girl, sir," said the delighted father. "And I pledge a toast to her with all my heart. Shall I send to the cellar for another pint? It's handy by. No? Well, indeed sir, ye may say she is a good girl, and the pride and glory of her father—honest old Jack Costigan. The man who gets her will have a jewel to a wife, sir; and I drink his health, sir, and ye know who I mean, Major."

"I am not surprised at young or old falling in love with her," said the Major. "And frankly must tell you, that though I was very angry with my poor nephew Arthur when I heard of the boy's passion—now I have seen the lady I can pardon him any extent of it. By George, I should like to enter for the race myself, if I weren't an old fellow and a poor one."

"And no better man, Major, I'm sure," cried Jack, enraptured.

"Your friendship, sir, delights me. Your admiration for my girl brings tears to
