The history of Mr. Garbetts, the Principal Tragedian, is a tale of promise, athleticism, and irregular habits. He was a jovial giant, a man of loud voice and fierce aspect, possessing the finest legs in the company and the strength to snap a poker across his arm merely for sport. He shared a considerable intimacy with Mr. Costigan, the two serving as the chief ornaments of the convivial club at the Magpie Hotel. They were friends of sorts, though their alliance was built on mutual financial necessity rather than deep affection; they frequently lent each other their valuable signatures to cover various bills. While Mr. Garbetts rarely visited Costigan's home—largely because Miss Fotheringay disliked him, a fact that fueled Mrs. Garbetts' jealousy—it was worth noting that Garbetts had once courted Miss Fotheringay and been rejected before ever offering his hand to Mrs. G. That romantic subplot, however, was irrelevant to the current crisis.

When Captain Costigan's daughter and Mr. Bows departed the house, the Captain summoned Mr. Garbetts immediately. He needed a friend capable of handling the delicate, albeit explosive, situation at hand.

"Run, Tommy," the Captain instructed his little messenger. "Fetch Mr. Garbetts from his lodgings over the tripe shop. Tell him to send two glasses of hot whisky-and-water from the Grapes."

Tommy vanished, and shortly thereafter, the formidable Mr. Garbetts arrived, accompanied by the requested spirits. The Captain, his mind sharpened by the alcohol, did not reveal the full extent of the previous events to his emissary. Instead, he dictated a letter of a threatening nature addressed to Major Pendennis. In this missive, he demanded that the Major offer no hindrance to the projected marriage between his daughter and Mr. Arthur Pendennis, setting an early date for the nuptials. He warned that failure to comply would result in a satisfaction customary among gentlemen of honor—a duel. Should the Major be disinclined to this, the Captain hinted grimly that he would force compliance using a horsewhip. The letter was sealed elaborately with the great silver seal of the Costigans, the only piece of family plate the Captain possessed.

Garbetts was dispatched with the letter and a handshake from the General, who squeezed his ambassador's hand while wishing Heaven blessings upon him. Once the messenger was gone, the Captain retrieved his venerable and murderous duelling pistols, flint-locked weapons that had claimed the lives of many a pretty fellow in Dublin. After inspecting them to ensure they were in satisfactory condition, he reached into a drawer to retrieve Pen's letters and poems. These were the treasures he always read before permitting his Emily to enjoy them.

Within twenty minutes, Garbetts returned, his countenance anxious and crestfallen.

"Have you seen him?" the Captain asked.

"Yes," Garbetts replied.

"And when is it for?" Costigan inquired, testing the lock of an ancient pistol and bringing it to his eye, which he referred to as his "oi."

"When is what for?" Garbetts asked, confused.

"The meeting, my dear fellow?"

"You don't mean to say you mean mortal combat, Captain," Garbetts exclaimed, aghast.

"What the devil else do I mean, Garbetts? I want to shoot that man who has trampled on my honor, or throw myself a victim on the sod!"

"I'll have nothing to do with carrying challenges," Garbetts replied doggedly. "I'm a family man, Captain, and I will have nothing to do with pistols. Take back your letter." To the surprise and indignation of Captain Costigan, the tragedian flung the letter down, its sprawling superscription and blotched seal landing with a thud.

"You don't mean to say you saw him and didn't give him the letter?" the Captain roared in a fury.

"I saw him, but I could not speak with him, Captain," Garbetts explained.

"And why the devil not?"

"There was one there I cared not to meet, nor would you," the tragedian answered in a sepulchral voice. "The minion Tatham was there, Captain."

"The cowardly scoundrel!" Costigan screamed. "He's frightened and already going to swear the peace against me."

"I'll have nothing to do with the fighting, mark that," Garbetts insisted. "And I wish I hadn't seen Tatham, nor that bit of—"

"Hold your tongue, Bob Acres. It's my belief you're no better than a coward," Costigan retorted, quoting Sir Lucius O'Trigger, a character he had performed with credit both on and off the stage. After some further parley, the two separated in poor humor.

The reader will note that the Captain's letter to Major Pendennis was never opened by that gentleman. Meanwhile, when Miss Costigan returned from rehearsal accompanied by the faithful Mr. Bows, she found her father pacing their apartment in a state of great agitation, surrounded by the powerful odor of spirits-and-water. The Pendennis papers lay on the table amidst empty goblets and a useless teaspoon. As Emily entered, he seized her in his arms, crying out, "Prepare yourself, me child, me blessed child," in a voice of agony, his eyes brimful of tears.

"You're tipsy again, Papa," Miss Fotheringay said, pushing him back. "You promised me you wouldn't take spirits before dinner."

"It's to forget my sorrows, me poor girl, that I've taken just a drop," cried the bereaved father. "It's to drown my care that I drain the bowl."

"Your care takes a deal of drowning, Captain dear," Mr. Bows mimicked, adopting his friend's accent. "What has happened? Has that soft-spoken gentleman in the wig been vexing you?"

"The oily miscreant! I'll have his blood!" roared Cos. Miss Milly had fled to her room to remove her bonnet and shawl, escaping the embrace.

"I thought he meant mischief. He was so uncommon civil," she noted.

"Oh, Bows! He has overwhelmed me," the Captain declared. "There's a hellish conspiracy on foot against my poor girl. Both those Pendennises, nephew and uncle, are infernal traitors and scoundrels who should be consumed from off the face of the earth."

"What is it? What has happened?" Mr. Bows asked, growing excited.

Costigan recounted the Major's statement that young Pendennis had neither two thousand nor two hundred pounds a year. He expressed his fury that he had allowed such an impostor to coax and wheedle his innocent girl, nourishing a viper in his own bosom. "I have shaken the reptile from me, however," Costigan said. "As for his uncle, I'll have such a revenge on that old man as shall make him rue the day he ever insulted a Costigan."

"What do you mean, General?" Bows asked.

"I mean to have his life, Bows—his villanous, skulking life, my boy," the Captain rapped ominously on the battered old pistol-case. Bows had often heard him appeal to that box of death, but the Captain did not reveal that he had actually written and sent a challenge to Major Pendennis. Consequently, Bows rather disregarded the pistols in the present instance.

Just then, Miss Fotheringay returned to the common sitting-room, looking perfectly healthy, happy, and unconcerned—a striking contrast to her father's delirious tremor of grief and anger. She brought in a pair of ex-white satin shoes, which she intended to rub clean with breadcrumbs before wearing them on Tuesday evening for her role as Ophelia.

She glanced at the papers on the table, paused as if to ask a question, but thought better of it. Instead, she went to the cupboard, selected a piece of bread, and returned to the table to sit comfortably with the shoes. In her honest Irish brogue, she asked her father, "What have you got those letters, poems, and stuff of Master Arthur's out for, Pa? Sure you don't want to be reading over that nonsense."

"Oh, Emilee!" cried the Captain. "That boy whom I loved as the boy of my bosom is only a scoundrel and a deceiver, me poor girl." He looked tragically at Mr. Bows, who gazed back with some anxiety.

"He! Pooh! Sure the poor lad's as simple as a schoolboy," she dismissed. "All those children write verses and nonsense."

"He's been acting the part of a viper to this fireside and a traitor in this family," the Captain cried. "I tell you he's no better than an impostor."

"What has the poor fellow done, Papa?" Emily asked.

"Done? He has deceived us in the most atrocious manner," her father declared. "He has trifled with your affections and outraged my own fine feelings. He represented himself as a man of property, and it turns out he is no better than a beggar. Haven't I often told you he had two thousand a year? He's a pauper, I tell you, Miss Costigan; dependent on the bounty of his mother, a good woman who may marry again and likely live forever, but who has but five hundred a year. How dare he ask you to marry into a family without the means to provide for you? You've been grossly deceived, Milly, and I believe his old ruffian of an uncle in a wig is in the plot against us."

"That soft old gentleman? What has he been doing, Papa?" Emily continued, still imperturbable.

Costigan informed Milly that when she was gone, Major Pendennis had told him in his double-faced Pall Mall polite manner that young Arthur had no fortune at all. The Major had asked Costigan to visit the lawyers—wherein he knew the scoundrels had a bill of his, and he couldn't meet them—to see the lad's father's will. Finally, he claimed an infernal swindle had been practiced upon him by the pair, and he was resolved either on a marriage or on the blood of both of them.

Milly looked grave and thoughtful, rubbing the white satin shoes. "Sure, if he's no money, there's no use marrying him, Papa," she said sententiously.

"Why did the villain say he was a man of property?" Costigan asked.

"The poor fellow always said he was poor," the girl answered. "'Twas you who wanted him to be rich, Papa—and made me agree to take him."

"He should have been explicit and told us his income, Milly," the father replied. "A young fellow who rides a blood mare and makes presents of shawls and bracelets is an impostor if he has no money. As for his uncle, bedad, I'll pull off his wig whenever I see him. Bows, here, shall take a message to him and tell him so. Either it's a marriage, or he meets me in the field like a man, or I tweak him on the nose in front of his hotel or in the gravel walks of Fairoaks Park before all the county, bedad."

"Bedad, you may send somebody else with the message," Bows laughed. "I'm a fiddler, not a fighting man, Captain."

"Pooh, you've no spirit, sir," roared the General. "I'll be my own second if no one will stand by and see me injured. And I'll take my case of pistols and shoot them in the Coffee-room of the George."

"And so poor Arthur has no money?" Miss Costigan sighed plaintively. "Poor lad, he was a good lad too: wild and talking nonsense with his verses and poems and that, but a brave, generous boy, and indeed I liked him—and he liked me too," she added softly, rubbing away at the shoe.

"Why don't you marry him if you like him so?" Mr. Bows said savagely. "He is not more than ten years younger than you are. His mother may relent, and you might go and live and have enough at Fairoaks Park. Why not go and be a lady? I could go on with the fiddle, and the General live on his half-pay. Why don't you marry him? You know he likes you."

"There's others that like me as well, Bows, that have no money and that's old enough," Miss Milly said sententiously.

"Yes, damn it," Bows cursed bitterly. "That are old enough and poor enough and fools enough for anything."

"There's old fools, and young fools too. You've often said so, you silly man," the imperious beauty replied, casting a conscious glance at the old gentleman. "If Pendennis has not enough money to live upon, it's folly to talk about marrying him: and that's the long and short of it."

"And the boy?" Bows asked. "By Jove! you throw a man away like an old glove, Miss Costigan."

"I don't know what you mean, Bows," Miss Fotheringay said placidly, rubbing the second shoe. "If he had had half of the two thousand a year that Papa gave him, or even half of that, I would marry him. But what is the good of taking on with a beggar? We're poor enough already. There's no use in my going to live with an old lady that's testy and cross, maybe, and would grudge me every morsel of meat." She noted that it was nearly dinner time and Suky had not yet laid the cloth. "And then," she added simply, "suppose there was a family?—why, Papa, we shouldn't be as well off as we are now."

"Deed, then, you would not, Milly dear," answered the father.

"And there's an end to all the fine talk about Mrs. Arthur Pendennis of Fairoaks Park—the Member of Parliament's lady," Milly laughed. "Pretty carriages and horses we should have to ride!—that you were always talking about, Papa! But it's always the same. If a man looked at me, you fancied he was going to marry me; and if he
