At Fairoaks, the silence surrounding the Major's absence was becoming a subject of genuine wonder. Dr. Portman and his wife, returning to Clavering, paused at Helen's lodge-gate to deliver a brief note from Major Pendennis. The Major explained he intended to stay at Chatteris another day, eager to consult with Messrs. Tatham regarding some legal business scheduled for the afternoon. Notably, the note omitted any mention of the morning's dramatic transaction. Indeed, it was penned during a lull in the Major's defeat, a document written when he had decisively lost the battle.

Pen, meanwhile, found himself in a peculiar predicament. He had no desire to venture into the town while his uncle was present. The thought of his guardian potentially spying on him from the Dean's grass-plat while he attempted to woo Miss Costigan was unbearable. The sheer joy of a solitary walk—a rare indulgence for him—would be ruined by the sight of the man with the polished boots. Pen's affection was a secret, confined to his eyes, which he used to gaze violently at his object, yet remained utterly silent in the presence of others. It was a prudent strategy; the language of love-making, to the uninitiated, is often the vocabulary without the key, a lamp without the flame. Consider the old love-letters one might find: blank, meaningless, and devoid of the glamour that once made them beautiful. Yet, there were times when one kissed those silly lines with rapture, living on six absurd words for a week, only to suffer a reactionary period of misery until fresh folly arrived.

For this reason, we respectfully decline to publish the letters and verses Mr. Pen composed during this tumultuous phase of his life. They are too spooney and wild for the young ladies of today to read in cold blood. Bide your time, fair readers; perhaps you will compose similar missives soon. For now, let us keep Mr. Pen's first outpourings sealed behind Miss Fotheringay's string and Captain Costigan's great silver seal.

The Major emerged from his interview with Captain Costigan in a state of concentrated fury that made him terrifying to approach. "The impudent bog-trotting scamp," he fumed internally, "dare to threaten me! Dare to suggest his damned Costigans marry the Pendennises! Send me a challenge! If the fellow can find a gentleman to carry it, I have the greatest mind in life not to baulk him.—Psha! What would the world say if I went out with a tipsy mountebank over a row with an actress in a barn!" Consequently, when Dr. Portman approached anxiously to inquire about the outcome of his battle with the dragon, the Major chose not to reveal the General's insolence. Instead, he labeled the affair ugly and disagreeable, insisting it was far from over.

He strictly enjoined Doctor and Mrs. Portman to say nothing about the business at Fairoaks, sending only the aforementioned note. Then, he retreated to his hotel, where he vented his wrath upon Mr. Morgan, his valet, cursing upstairs and downstairs, a spectacle Mr. Morgan later recounted to Mr. Foker's man in the servants' room of the George.

The servant relayed the news to his master. Mr. Foker, having finished his breakfast around two in the afternoon, remembered his eagerness to learn the result of the Major's interview. Dressed in his brocade dressing-gown, he knocked at the Major's sitting-room.

Inside, the Major was engaged in business regarding a lease for the widow's estate, consulting with old Mr. Tatham, the lawyer who had managed his brother's affairs. Seeing the Major deep in red tape with an elderly gentleman, the modest youth initially hesitated to intrude. However, the Major beckoned him in with a smile. Mr. Foker removed his embroidered tarboosh, bowed graciously, and seated himself, spreading out his crimson skirts. "You seem to like my dressing-gown, sir," he remarked to Mr. Tatham. "A pretty thing, isn't it? Neat, but not gaudy."

There was something in Foker's manner that would have put an Inquisitor in a good mood, smoothing the wrinkles under Pendennis's head of hair.

"I have had an interview with that Irishman," the Major began, addressing Mr. Tatham openly since Foker was present. "It was not satisfactory. He refuses to believe my nephew is poor; he calls us both liars. He even hinted I was a coward as I took my leave. I thought you might be the gentleman bringing a challenge from Mr. Costigan—that is how the world treats me, Mr. Foker."

"You don't mean the Irishman, the actress's father?" cried Mr. Tatham, a dissenter who held no patronage for the drama.

"That Irishman, the actress's father—the very man. Have you heard what a fool my nephew has made of himself about the girl?" Mr. Tatham, having never entered a theater, knew nothing of the affair, so the Major recounted the story of his nephew's loves, with Mr. Foker adding appropriate comments in his familiar tongue.

Mr. Tatham was lost in wonder at the narrative, lamenting that Mrs. Pendennis had not married a serious man and kept this unfortunate boy from perdition. Regarding Miss Costigan, he offered no defense; her profession was sufficient characterization. Mr. Foker interjected that he had known uncommon good people in the booths, the Temple of the Muses. While Mr. Tatham hoped so, he knew the father personally: a wine-bibber, an idler in taverns, and a notorious insolvent. "I understand why the fellow wouldn't come to my office," Tatham explained. "We have a writ out against him and another disreputable actor for a bill given to Mr. Skinner, a respectable grocer and Friend. This Costigan came crying to Mr. Skinner in the shop, and we haven't proceeded against them as neither were worth powder and shot."

Just as Mr. Tatham was finishing this tale, a third knock interrupted them. An athletic gentleman in a shabby braided frock entered, bearing a letter with a large, blotched red seal.

"Can I have the honor of speaking with Major Pendennis in private?" he began, claiming to be a bearer of a mission from Captain Costigan. But the man with the bass voice faltered, turned pale, and caught sight of the red-faced Mr. Tatham.

"Hullo, Garbetts, speak up!" cried Mr. Foker, delighted.

"Why, bless my soul, it is the other party to the bill!" exclaimed Mr. Tatham. "Stop, sir!" But Garbetts, his face as blank as Macbeth's upon seeing Banquo's ghost, gasped inarticulate words and fled.

The Major's gravity dissolved instantly into laughter, followed by Mr. Foker and the attorney, despite his profession's seriousness.

"I don't think there'll be any fight, Major," young Foker said, mimicking the tragedian. "If there is, the old gentleman—Mr. Tatham—may send the bailiffs to separate the men." Mr. Tatham promised to do so. The Major was not sorry for the ludicrous conclusion to the quarrel. "It seems to me, sir," he told Foker, "that you always arrive to put me into good humor."

This was not the only occasion Mr. Foker was destined to serve the Pendennis family that day. Knowing Captain Costigan's haunts, he decided to visit the General to hear the morning's conversation firsthand. Costigan was absent, having been encouraged by his daughter to visit the convivial club at the Magpie Hotel, where he was likely bragging of his desire to murder a certain ruffian.

Captain Costigan was gone, but Miss Fotheringay was at home, washing tea-cups while Mr. Bows sat opposite.

"Just done breakfast, I see—how do?" said Mr. Foker, popping his funny little head in.

"Get out, you funny little man," cried Miss Fotheringay.

"You mean come in," answered the other. "Here we are!" Entering the room, he folded his arms and began twirling his head with immense rapidity, like Harlequin emerging from his cocoon. Miss Fotheringay laughed with all her heart; a wink from Foker would set her off, whereas the bitterest jokes from Bows or the finest speeches from poor Pen would only puzzle her. At the end of his harlequinade, he sank to one knee and kissed her hand. "You're the drollest little man," she said, giving him a great good-natured slap. Pen used to tremble as he kissed her hand; Pen would have died of a slap.

Once these preliminaries were over, the three began to talk. Mr. Foker recounted the scene of Garbetts' discomfiture, revealing how far the General had carried his wrath. He spoke strongly in favor of the Major's veracity and honor, describing him as a tip-top swell who would never submit to deceit, especially not to deceive a charming young woman like Miss Foth.

He touched delicately on the marriage question, though he couldn't help showing he held Pen rather cheap. In fact, he possessed a perhaps just contempt for Mr. Pen's high-flown sentimentality, his own weakness lying elsewhere. "I knew it wouldn't do, Miss Foth," he nodded. "Couldn't do. Didn't like to put my hand into the bag, but knew it couldn't do. He's too young for you: too green: a deal too green: and he turns out to be poor as Job. Can't have him at no price, can she, Mr. Bo?"

"Indeed he's a nice poor boy," said the Fotheringay rather sadly.

"Poor little beggar," said Bows, stealing a queer look at Miss Fotheringay. Perhaps he wondered at the way women played with men, coaxed them, won them, and dropped them.

Mr. Bows had no objection to acknowledging that Miss Fotheringay was perfectly right in giving up Mr. Arthur Pendennis; in his view, the match was always absurd. Miss Costigan admitted she thought so herself, only she couldn't send away two thousand a year. "It all comes of believing Papa's silly stories," she said. "Faith, I'll choose for myself another time"—and very likely, the large image of Lieutenant Sir Derby Oaks entered her mind at that instant.

After praising Major Pendennis, whom Miss Costigan declared to be a proper gentleman smelling of lavender and as neat as a pin, Mr. Foker suddenly invited the pair to meet the Major that evening for dinner at his apartment at the George. "He agreed to dine with me, and I think, after the little shindy this morning, in which I must say the General was wrong, it would look kind, you know. I know the Major fell in love with you, Miss Foth: he said so."

"So she may be Mrs. Pendennis still," Bows said with a sneer. "No, thank you, Mr. F.—I've dined."

"Sure, that was at three o'clock," said Miss Costigan, who had an honest appetite, "and I can't go without you."

"We'll have lobster-salad and champagne," said the little monster, who couldn't construe a line of Latin or do a sum beyond the Rule of Three. Now, for lobster-salad and champagne in an honorable manner, Miss Costigan would have gone anywhere. Thus, Major Pendennis found himself at seven o'clock seated at a dinner table with Mr. Bows, a professional fiddler, and Miss Costigan, whose father had wanted to blow his brains out a few hours prior.

To complete the happy meeting, Mr. Foker, knowing Costigan's haunts, dispatched Stoopid to the Magpie club where the General was singing a pathetic song, bringing him off to supper. Finding his daughter and Bows at the board was a surprise indeed. Major Pendennis laughed and cordially held out his hand, which the General Officer grasped *avec effusion*. In fact, he was considerably inebriated and had already been crying over his own song before joining the little party. He burst into tears more than once during the entertainment, calling the Major his dearest friend. Stoopid and Mr. Foker walked him home; the Major gallantly gave his arm to Miss Costigan.

He was received with great friendliness the next day, and many civilities passed between the gentlemen. On taking leave, he expressed his anxious desire to serve Miss Costigan on any occasion and shook hands with Mr. Foker most cordially, saying that gentleman had done him the very greatest service.

"All right," said Mr. Foker. They parted with mutual esteem.

On his return to Fairoaks the next day, the Major did not disclose what had happened the previous night or allude to the company he had kept. However, he engaged Mr. Smirke to stop for dinner. Any observer might have noted a constraint in his hilarity and talkativeness, and an unusual graciousness in his communications with his nephew. He gave Pen an emphatic "God-bless-you" when the lad went to bed. As they prepared to part for the night, he seemed about to say something to Mrs. Pendennis but bethought himself that speaking might spoil her rest, allowing her to sleep in peace.

The next morning, he was down in the breakfast-room earlier than usual, saluting everyone with great cordiality. When John, the old servant, discharged the mail, the Major looked hard at Pen as the lad retrieved his letters. Arthur blushed and put his letter down. He knew the hand; it was that of old Costigan, and he did not care to read it in public. The Major knew the letter too; he had put it in the post himself in Chatteris the day before.

He sent little Laura away, the child having a thorough dislike for him. As the door closed, he took Mrs. Pendennis's hand, gave her a look full of meaning, and pointed to the letter under the newspaper Pen was pretending to read. "Will you come into the drawing-room?" he said. "I want to speak to you." She followed
