Major Pendennis had drawn a line in the sand regarding Fairoaks. Until the enemy withdrew completely from the vicinity, the Major was resolved to keep his garrison there. He didn't bother watching Pen's every move or imposing strict rules on his nephew's conduct; instead, he employed a subtle, invisible net. Young Arthur's comings and goings were meticulously tracked by the Major's agents, ensuring the lad remained perpetually under surveillance, even if he wasn't directly in the Major's sight.

Let us pause here to address a universal truth of the human condition: almost every man who reads a novel—or indeed, lives in the world—has been thwarted in love by fate, circumstance, deceitful women, or his own foolishness. Let the worthy reader recall his own heartbreak and apply it to Mr. Pen's current agony. Ah, the weary nights! The sickening fevers! The mad desires crashing against rocks of indifference and bouncing back from unimpressionable granite! Imagine a list compiled tonight in London of the groans, thoughts, and curses of tossing lovers. What a catalogue! I wonder what percentage of the male population of the metropolis will be lying awake at two or three o'clock tomorrow, counting the hours, rolling restlessly from left to right, yearning and heart-sick. What a pang it is! I have never known a man die of love certainly, but I have seen a twelve-stone man shrink to nine-stone five under a disappointed passion; nearly a quarter of him has perished. He will likely bounce back to his old size, perhaps bigger than ever, as a new affection closes round his heart and makes him comfortable. Young Pen will console himself like the rest of us. We say this so the ladies won't prematurely deplore him or worry unduly about his complaint. His mother worried, of course, but what will not a maternal fondness fear or invent? "Depend on it, my dear creature," Major Pendennis would say gallantly to her, "the boy will recover. As soon as we get her out of the country, we'll take him somewhere and show him a little life. Meantime, make yourself easy. Half a fellow's pangs at losing a woman result from vanity more than affection. To be left by a woman is the deuce and all, to be sure; but look how easily we leave 'em."

Mrs. Pendennis, however, knew nothing of this specific knowledge. It was beyond the simple lady's scope. Indeed, she disliked the subject; her own heart had suffered a private misadventure, which she had borne and cured, leaving her with little patience for other folk's passions—except, naturally, Arthur's. She felt his sufferings as her own, experiencing many of his illnesses and pains far more acutely than Pen himself endured. She watched him through this present grief with a jealous, silent sympathy, though he never spoke to her of his unfortunate condition.

One must grant the Major considerable merit and forbearance, exhibiting a highly creditable degree of family affection. Life at Fairoaks was uncommonly dull for a man who had the entrée to half the houses in London and was accustomed to making his bows in three or four drawing-rooms nightly. A dinner with Doctor Portman or a neighboring Squire now and then; a dreary rubber at backgammon with the Widow, who did her utmost to amuse him; these were his chief pleasures. He longed for the arrival of the bag with the letters and devoured every word of the evening paper. He doctored himself assiduously, believing a course of quiet living suited him well after London banquets. He dressed laboriously every morning and afternoon, taking regular exercise up and down the terrace walk. Thus, armed with his cane, his toilet, his medicine-chest, his backgammon-box, and his newspaper, this worthy worldly philosopher fenced himself against ennui. If he didn't improve each shining hour like bees by the widow's garden wall, Major Pendennis made one hour after another pass as he could, rendering his captivity just tolerable. After this period, it was remarked that he was fond of steering the conversation toward the American War, the massacre of Wyoming, and the brilliant actions of Saint Lucie, the fact being that he possessed two volumes of the *Annual Register* in his bedroom which he studiously consulted. It is thus a well-regulated man accommodates himself to circumstances and shows himself calmly superior to fortune.

Pen sometimes took the box at backgammon at night or listened to his mother's simple music on summer evenings, but he remained restless and wretched in spite of everything. He was known to be up before early daylight, descending to a carp-pond in Clavering Park—a dreary pool with innumerable whispering rushes and green alders, where a milkmaid had drowned herself in the Baronet's grandfather's time, and her ghost was said to walk still. But Pen did not drown himself, as perhaps his mother fancied might be his intention. He liked to go and fish there, thinking and thinking at leisure as the float quivered in the little eddies of the pond and the fish flapped about him. If he got a bite, he was excited enough; in this way, he occasionally brought home carps, tenches, and eels, which the Major cooked in the Continental fashion.

By this pond, under a tree which was his favorite resort, Pen composed a number of poems suitable to his circumstances, verses over which he blushed in after days, wondering how he could ever have invented such rubbish. As for the tree, it is in a hollow of this very tree, where he used to put his tin-box of ground-bait and other fishing commodities, that he afterwards... well, we are advancing matters. Suffice it to say, he wrote poems and relieved himself very much. When a man's grief or passion is at this point, it may be loud, but it is not very severe. When a gentleman is cudgelling his brain to find any rhyme for sorrow besides "borrow" and "tomorrow," his woes are nearer at an end than he thinks for. So were Pen's. He had his hot and cold fits, his days of sullenness and peevishness, of blank resignation and despondency, and occasional mad paroxysms of rage and longing, in which fits Rebecca would be saddled and galloped fiercely about the country or into Chatteris, her rider gesticulating wildly on her back, astonishing carters and turnpikemen as he passed, crying out the name of the false one.

Mr. Foker became a very frequent and welcome visitor at Fairoaks during this period, where his good spirits and oddities always amused the Major and Pendennis, while they astonished the Widow and little Laura not a little. His tandem made a great sensation in Clavering marketplace, where he upset a market stall, cut Mrs. Pybus's poodle over the shaven quarters, and drank a glass of raspberry bitters at the Clavering Arms. All the society in the little place heard who he was and looked up his name in their Peerages. He was so young, and their books so old, that his name did not appear in many of their volumes; his mother, now quite an antiquated lady, figured amongst the progeny of the Earl of Rosherville as Lady Agnes Milton still. But his name, wealth, and honorable lineage were speedily known about Clavering, where you may be sure that poor Pen's little transaction with the Chatteris actress was also pretty freely discussed.

Looking at the little old town of Clavering St. Mary from the London road as it runs by the lodge at Fairoaks, and seeing the rapid and shining Brawl winding down from the town and skirting the woods of Clavering Park, and the ancient church tower and peaked roofs of the houses rising up amongst trees and old walls, behind which swells a fair background of sunshiny hills that stretch from Clavering westwards towards the sea—the place looks so cheery and comfortable that many a traveler's heart must have yearned towards it from the coach-top, and he must have thought that it was in such a calm friendly nook he would like to shelter at the end of life's struggle. Tom Smith, who used to drive the Alacrity coach, would often point to a tree near the river, from which a fine view of the church and town was commanded, and inform his companion on the box that "Artises come and take hoff the Church from that there tree—It was a Habby once, sir:"—and indeed a pretty view it is, which I recommend to Mr. Stanfield or Mr. Roberts for their next tour.

Like Constantinople seen from the Bosphorus; like Mrs. Rougemont viewed in her box from the opposite side of the house; like many an object which we pursue in life and admire before we have attained it; Clavering is rather prettier at a distance than it is on closer acquaintance. The town so cheerful of aspect a few furlongs off looks very blank and dreary. Except on market days there is nobody in the streets. The clack of a pair of pattens echoes through half the place, and you may hear the creaking of the rusty old ensign at the Clavering Arms without being disturbed by any other noise. There has not been a ball in the Assembly Rooms since the Clavering volunteers gave one to their Colonel, the old Sir Francis Clavering; and the stables which once held a great part of that brilliant, but defunct regiment, are now cheerless and empty, except on Thursdays, when the farmers put up there, and their tilted carts and gigs make a feeble show of liveliness in the place, or on Petty Sessions, when the magistrates attend in what used to be the old card-room.

On the south side of the market rises up the church, with its great grey towers, of which the sun illuminates the delicate carving, deepening the shadows of the huge buttresses and gilding the glittering windows and flaming vanes. The image of the Patroness of the Church was wrenched out of the porch centuries ago; such of the statues of saints as were within reach of stones and hammer at that period of pious demolition are maimed and headless, and of those who were out of fire, only Doctor Portman knows the names and history, for his curate, Smirke, is not much of an antiquarian, and Mr. Simcoe (husband of the Honourable Mrs. Simcoe), incumbent and architect of the Chapel of Ease in the lower town, thinks them the abomination of desolation.

The Rectory is a stout, broad-shouldered brick house of the reign of Anne. It communicates with the church and market by different gates and stands at the opening of Yew-tree Lane, where the Grammar School (Rev. —— Wapshot) is; Yew-tree Cottage (Miss Flather); the butchers' slaughtering-house, an old barn or brew-house of the Abbey times; and the Misses Finucane's establishment for young ladies. The two schools had their pews in the loft on each side of the organ until the Abbey Church, getting rather empty through the falling-off of the congregation who were inveigled to the Heresy-shop in the lower town, induced the Misses Finucane to bring their pretty little flock downstairs; and the young ladies' bonnets make a tolerable show in the rather vacant aisles. Nobody is in the great pew of the Clavering family except the statues of defunct baronets and their ladies: there is Sir Poyntz Clavering, Knight and Baronet, kneeling in a square beard opposite his wife in a ruff; a very fat lady, the Dame Rebecca Clavering, in alto-relievo, is borne up to Heaven by two little blue-veined angels who seem to have a severe task—and so forth. How well in after life Pen remembered those effigies, and how often in youth he scanned them as the Doctor was grumbling the sermon from the pulpit and Smirke's mild head and forehead curl peered over the great prayer-book in the desk!

The Fairoaks folks were constant at the old church; their servants had a pew, so had the Doctor's, so had Wapshot's, and those of the Misses Finucane's establishment, three maids and a very nice-looking young man in a livery. The Wapshot Family were numerous and faithful. Glanders and his children regularly came to church; so did one of the apothecaries. Mrs. Pybus went, turn and turn about, to the Low Town church and to the Abbey; the Charity School and their families of course came; Wapshot's boys made a good cheerful noise, scuffling with their feet as they marched into church and up the organ-loft stair, and blowing their noses a good deal during the service. To be brief, the congregation looked as decent as might be in these bad times. The Abbey Church was furnished with a magnificent screen and many hatchments and heraldic tombstones. The Doctor spent a great part of his income in beautifying his darling place; he had endowed it with a superb painted window bought in the Netherlands and an organ grand enough for a cathedral.

But in spite of organ and window, in consequence of the latter very likely, which had come out of a Papistical place of worship and was blazoned all over with idolatry, Clavering New Church prospered scandalously in the teeth of Orthodoxy, and many of the Doctor's congregation deserted to Mr. Simcoe and the honorable woman his wife. Their efforts had thinned the very Ebenezer hard by them, which building before Simcoe's advent used to be so full that you could see the backs of the congregation squeezing out of the arched windows thereof. Mr. Simcoe's tracts fluttered into the doors of all the Doctor's cottages and were taken as greedily as honest Mrs. Portman's soup, with the quality of which the graceless people found fault. With the folks at the Ribbon Factory situated by the weir on the Brawl side, and round which the Low Town had grown, Orthodoxy could make no way at all. Quiet Miss Myra was put out of court by impetuous Mrs. Simcoe and her female aides-de-camp. Ah, it was a hard burden for the Doctor's lady to bear, to behold her husband's congregation dwindling away; to give the precedence on the few occasions when they met to
