To anyone with even a smattering of heraldry and genealogy, the crest of the Pendennis family is well known: a nest teeming with tiny pelicans pecking at the bleeding breast of a large, maternal bird, which generously feeds them. It is said that female pelicans enjoy this self-flagellation; certainly, women do. There must be a peculiar, masculine-incomprehensible pleasure in the agony of being scarified. Some women would rather endure the wound than avoid it. They derive a strange joy from sacrificing themselves for the object their instincts dictate they love—whether a reckless husband, a dissipated son, or a darling rogue of a brother. Their hearts are ready to pour out their finest treasures for the sake of the cherished one. And what a feast of forgiveness we men are prepared to serve these soft creatures! Scarcely a reader here has not, at some point, administered this specific pleasure to his woman, treating her to the luxury of absolving him. They don't mind how they live themselves; but when the prodigal returns, they rejoice, kill the fatted calf, and prepare a festival where Mercy and Forgiveness smile out to welcome him. I hope this remains true forever; if we must rely solely on Justice, Heaven help us!

During the latter part of Pen's tenure at Oxford, his uncle's affection had swelled to a fever pitch. The Major was proud of Arthur—high-spirited, frank, a good soul, and possessing a bearing that screamed "gentleman." It delighted the old bachelor to see Pen striding alongside the young patricians of the university. Though stinginess was a byword among the Club wags who envied his endless engagements yet refused to acknowledge his poverty, the Major was charmed to treat his nephew and the young lords to snug dinners, fine claret, and his very best *bons mots*. Some of these jokes were so delicate they would be ruined by repetition; others were so terrible that repeating them would harm no one. He courted their parents through the boys and courted himself by their company. He visited Oxford repeatedly, where the young fellows amused the old gentleman with parties, breakfasts, and fetes, partly to joke him and partly to honor him. He regaled them with stories, becoming juvenile and hilarious in their midst. He attended a grand debate at the Union, crowing and cheering, rapping his stick in time with the students, astounded by the boy's eloquence and fire. He thought he had a young Pitt for a nephew. He possessed an almost paternal fondness for Pen, writing letters filled with playful advice and town gossip. He bragged at his clubs, introducing Arthur with pleasure, claiming that the new generation—Young Lord Plinlimmon, Young Lord Magnus Charters—would eclipse their fathers. He begged permission to bring Arthur to a grand fête at Gaunt House, watching him dance with the sisters of the nobility with ineffable satisfaction. He procured invitations with the diligence of a mother seeking a match for her daughter, boasting of Arthur's talents and the brilliant degree he was about to take. Lord Runnymede would take him on embassy; the Duke would seat him in Parliament. He wrote this over and over to Helen, who was too eager to believe anything favorable about her son.

And all this pride and affection had been trampled by Pen's wicked extravagance and idleness! I do not envy Pen's feelings as he contemplated his actions. He had slept, and the tortoise had won the race. He had marred at the outset what might have been a brilliant career. He had dipped ungenerously into a generous mother's purse, basely and recklessly spilling her little cruse. Oh, it was a coward's hand that could strike and rob a creature so tender. If Pen felt the wrong he had done others, surely a vain young gentleman felt the shame brought upon himself even more keenly. There is no cruelty equal to remorse, no groan more piteous than that of wounded self-love. Like Joel Miller's friend, the Senior Wrangler, who bowed to the audience from his box merely because the King entered the theater at the same moment—a fatuity not entirely agreeable to himself—poor Arthur Pendennis was convinced that all England would remark the absence of his name from the examination lists and discuss his misfortune. His wounded tutor, his creditors, the skip and bed-maker who waited on him, the undergraduates he had patronized or scorned—how could he bear to look any of them in the face? He rushed to his rooms, locked himself inside, and penned a letter to his tutor full of thanks, regards, remorse, and despair, requesting his name be removed from the college books and intimating that death would soon end the woes of the disgraced Arthur Pendennis.

Then he slunk out, scarcely knowing where he went, mechanically taking the unfrequented lanes behind the colleges until he cleared the university precincts and reached the banks of the Cam, now deserted, once alive with boat races and cheering gownsmen. He wandered on until he found himself miles from Oxford, or rather, was found by acquaintances leaving the city.

As Pen climbed a hill, a drizzling January rain beating in his face and his ragged gown flying behind him—he had not divested himself of his academic garb since morning—a postchaise rattled up the road. A servant sat on the box, while within, half out of the window, sat a young gentleman smoking a cigar and loudly encouraging the postboy. It was our acquaintance from Baymouth, Mr. Spavin, who had earned his degree and was driving homeward in triumph in his yellow postchaise. He spotted the figure madly gesticulating as it worked up the hill and poor Pen's pale, ghastly face as the chaise whirled past.

"Whoa!" roared Mr. Spavin to the postboy. The horses stopped in their mad career, and the carriage pulled up some fifty yards before Pen. Presently, he heard his own name shouted and beheld the upper half of Mr. Spavin's body thrust out of the side window, beckoning Pen vehemently.

Pen stopped, hesitated, nodded his head fiercely, and pointed onwards, as if desiring the postillion to proceed. He said nothing, but his countenance looked so desperate that young Spavin, staring with blank alarm, jumped out, ran toward Pen, grasped his hand, and said, "I say—hullo, old boy, where are you going, and what's the row now?"

"I'm going where I deserve to go," said Pen, with an imprecation.

"This ain't the way," said Mr. Spavin, smiling. "This is the Fenbury road. I say, Pen, don't take on because you are plucked. It's nothing when you are used to it. I've been plucked three times, old boy—and after the first time I didn't care. Glad it's over, though. You'll have better luck next time."

Pen looked at his early acquaintance—who had been plucked, rusticated, and who, despite repeated failures, had only recently learned to read and write correctly, yet attained the honor of a degree. "This man has passed," he thought, "and I have failed!" It was almost too much to bear.

"Good-bye, Spavin," said he. "I'm very glad you are through. Don't let me keep you; I'm in a hurry—I'm going to town tonight."

"Gammon," said Mr. Spavin. "This ain't the way to town; this is the Fenbury road, I tell you."

"I was just going to turn back," Pen said.

"All the coaches are full with the men going down," Spavin said. Pen winced. "You'd not get a place for a ten-pound note. Get into my yellow; I'll drop you at Mudford, where you have a chance of the Fenbury mail. I'll lend you a hat and a coat; I've got lots. Come along; jump in, old boy—go it, leathers!" Thus, Pen found himself in Mr. Spavin's postchaise, riding with that gentleman as far as the Ram Inn at Mudford, fifteen miles from Oxford, where the mail changed horses and Pen secured a place to London.

The next day, immense excitement reigned in Boniface College, Oxford. For some time, a rumor had terrified Pen's tutor and tradesmen that Pendennis, maddened by losing his degree, had made away with himself. A battered cap, in which his name was almost discernible, together with a seal bearing his crest of an eagle looking at a now-extinct sun, had been found three miles on the Fenbury road near a mill-stream. For twenty-four hours, it was believed that poor Pen had thrown himself into the stream, until letters arrived from him bearing the London postmark.

The mail reached London at the dreary hour of five. He hastened to the inn at Covent Garden where he usually stayed. The ever-wakeful porter admitted him and showed him to a bed. Pen looked hard at the man, wondering whether Boots knew he was plucked. When in bed, he could not sleep. He tossed until the dismal London daylight appeared, then sprang up desperately and walked off to his uncle's lodgings in Bury Street. The maid, scouring the steps, looked up suspiciously at him as he came with an unshaven face and yesterday's linen. She seemed to know of his mishap, too.

"Good 'evens! Mr. Harthur, what as 'appened, sir?" asked Mr. Morgan, the valet, who had just arranged the well-brushed clothes and shiny boots at the door of his master's bedroom and was carrying in his wig for the Major.

"I want to see my uncle," he cried in a ghastly voice, flinging himself down on a chair.

Morgan backed away from the pale, desperate-looking young man with terrified, wondering glances and disappeared into the master's apartment.

The Major put his head out of the bedroom door as soon as he had his wig on. "What? examination over? Senior Wrangler, double First Class, hay?" said the old gentleman. "I'll come directly;" and the head disappeared.

"They don't know what has happened," groaned Pen. "What will they say when they know all?"

Pen stood with his back to the window, bathed in the dubious light of a foggy January morning in Bury Street, so that his uncle could not see the expression of the young man's countenance or the looks of gloom and despair that even Mr. Morgan had remarked.

But when the Major came out of his dressing-room neat and radiant, preceded by faint odors from Delcroix's shop (from which emporium the Major's wig and pocket-handkerchief derived their perfume), he held out one of his hands to Pen and was about addressing him in his cheery, high-toned voice when he caught sight of the boy's face. Dropping his hand, he said, "Good God! Pen, what's the matter?"

"You'll see it in the papers at breakfast, sir," Pen said.

"See what?"

"My name isn't there, sir."

"Hang it, why should it be?" asked the Major, more perplexed.

"I have lost everything, sir," Pen groaned out. "My honour's gone; I'm ruined irretrievably; I can't go back to Oxbridge."

"Lost your honour?" screamed the Major. "Heaven alive! you don't mean to say you have shown the white feather?"

Pen laughed bitterly at the word "feather" and repeated it. "No, it isn't that, sir. I'm not afraid of being shot; I wish to God anybody would. I have not got my degree. I—I'm plucked, sir."

The Major had heard of plucking but in a very vague, cursory way, concluding it was some ceremony performed corporally upon rebellious university youth. "I wonder you can look me in the face after such a disgrace, sir," he said. "I wonder you submitted to it as a gentleman."

"I couldn't help it, sir. I did my classical papers well enough: it was those infernal mathematics, which I have always neglected."

"Was it—was it done in public, sir?" asked the Major.

"What?"

"The—the plucking?" asked the guardian, looking Pen anxiously in the face.

Pen perceived the error under which his guardian labored, and in the midst of his misery, the blunder caused the poor wretch a faint smile, serving to bring the conversation down from the tragedy key in which Pen had intended to carry it. He explained that he had gone in to pass his examination and failed. On this, the Major said that though he had expected far better things of his nephew, there was no great misfortune in this, no dishonor as far as he saw, and that Pen must try again.

"Me again at Oxbridge," Pen thought, "after such a humiliation as that!" He felt that, unless he went down to burn the place, he could not enter it.

But it was when he came to tell his uncle of his debts that the other felt surprise and anger most keenly, breaking out in severe speeches which the lad bore, as best he might, without flinching. He had determined to make a clean breast of it, forming a full, true, and complete list of all his bills and liabilities at the university and in London. They consisted of various items:

*London Tailor, Haberdasher (for shirts and gloves), College Cook, Binding, Bootmaker, Hotel bill in London, Wine Merchant in London, Sundries.*

All which items the reader may fill in at his pleasure—such accounts have been inspected by the parents of many university youths—and it appeared that Mr. Pen's bills in all amounted to about seven hundred pounds; furthermore, it was calculated that he had had more than twice that sum of ready money during his stay at Oxford. This sum he had spent, and for it had to show—what?

"You need not press a man who is down, sir," Pen said to his uncle, gloomily. "I know very well,
