There is a saying that every house harbors a skeleton in its closet, and for the unfortunate, it is a solace to believe that even the wealthiest neighbors carry their own burdens. In Clavering House, that skeleton was a tiny, radiant fairy named Blanche Amory. To the outside world, she was a singing, sweet-talking muse who seemed to sprinkle sunshine wherever she tread. Inside, however, she was the Nemesis of the household, a walking disaster waiting to happen. Just as a single pebble in a shoe can ruin an entire journey, Blanche possessed the unique ability to turn a minor inconvenience into a lifetime of misery. Who could have imagined that such a smiling sprite could be the architect of domestic discord?

One afternoon, after dinner, the Baronet and Captain Strong sat by the billiard table, cigars clutched like weapons of mass destruction.

"I say, Strong," the Baronet boomed, "I wish to the doose your wife was dead."

"So do I," Strong replied, puffing smoke with perfect equanimity. "That's a cannon, by Jove. But she won't; she'll live forever—you see if she don't. Why do you wish her off the hooks, Frank?"

"Because then you might marry Missy," the Baronet drawled. "She ain't bad-looking. She'll have ten thousand pounds, and that's a good bit of money for a poor old devil like you."

"And gad, Strong, I hate her worse and worse every day. I can't stand her, by gad, I can't."

"I wouldn't take her at twice the price," Strong laughed. "I've never seen such a little devil in my life."

"I should like to poison her," the Baronet declared sententiously. "By Jove, I should."

"Why, what has she been at now?" his friend asked.

"Nothing particular," the Baronet answered with a grimace. "Only her old tricks. That girl has such a knack of making everyone miserable that it's quite surprising. Last night she sent the governess crying away from the dinner table. Afterwards, I heard the poor little beggar howling in the dark; his sister had been frightening his soul out of his body by telling him stories about the ghost in the house. At lunch, she gave my lady a turn. Though my wife is a fool, she's a good soul—I'm hanged if she ain't."

"What did Missy do to her?" Strong inquired.

"Why, hang me, if she didn't begin talking about the late Amory, my predecessor," the Baronet grinned. "She got a picture out of the *Keepsake* and said she was sure it looked like her dear father. She wanted to know where her father's grave was. Hang her father! Whenever Miss Amory talks about him, Lady Clavering bursts into tears. And the little devil talks about him just to spite her mother. Today, when she started, I flew into a rage and claimed to be her father. Then, sir, she took a shy at me."

"And what did she say about you, Frank?" Strong asked, still chuckling.

"Gad, she said I wasn't her father; that I wasn't fit to comprehend her; that her father must have been a man of genius and fine feelings, whereas I had married her mother for money."

"Well, didn't you?" Strong pressed.

"It don't make it any the pleasanter to hear because it's true, don't you know," Sir Francis Clavering answered. "I ain't a literary man, but I ain't such a fool as she makes me out. She always manages to put me in the hole. She turns the whole house around her with her quiet ways and confounded sentimental airs. I wish she was dead, Ned."

"It was my wife you wanted dead just now," Strong pointed out, maintaining his good humor. Upon this, the Baron, with his customary candor, admitted, "Well, when people bore my life out, I do wish they were dead, and I wish Missy were down a well, with all my heart."

From this candid exchange, it becomes clear that our accomplished little friend possessed peculiarities that rendered her unpopular. She was a young lady of genius, exquisite sympathies, and considerable literary attainments, living with relatives who could not comprehend her. Neither her mother nor her stepfather were literary souls; the Baronet's reading stopped at *Bell's Life* and the *Racing Calendar*, while Lady Clavering still wrote like a thirteen-year-old schoolgirl with a total disregard for grammar. Feeling keenly that she was not appreciated and lived among intellectual inferiors, Blanche lost no opportunity to announce their inferiority to her family circle. She was a martyr, but she ensured everyone knew it. If she suffered, as she claimed, severely, should we wonder that a creature of such delicate sensibilities should shriek and cry? Without sympathy, life is nothing; would it not be a lack of candor to pretend cheerfulness when one feels nothing but despair? If a poetess may not bemoan her lot, what use is her lyre? Blanche struck hers only to the saddest tunes, singing elegies over dead hopes and dirges over frost-nipped buds of affection, fitting for such a melancholy fate.

Her actual distresses had not been great, but her griefs lay in her own soul. Being sad and habitually dissatisfied, what wonder that she wept? Tears dribbled from her eyes at command; she could furnish an unlimited supply, and her faculty for shedding them increased with practice. Sentiment, like the dropsy mentioned by Horace, increases by self-indulgence. The more one cries, the more one desires to do so.

Missy had begun to gush at a very early age. Lamartine was her favorite bard from the moment she could feel, and she subsequently improved her mind by devouring the novels of Balzac and George Sand by the time she was sixteen. However little she sympathized with her relatives, she claimed friends in the spirit-world: the tender Indiana, the passionate Lelia, the amiable Trenmor, the high-souled convict, the fiery Stenio, and countless other heroes of French romance. She had been in love with Prince Rodolph and Prince Djalma while still at school, settling the divorce question and the rights of woman with Indiana before she had even taken off her pinafores. The impetuous little lady played at love with these imaginary worthies as she once played at maternity with her doll. It is curious to watch them with those playthings; today the blue-eyed one is the favorite, tomorrow the black-eyed one is pushed behind the drawers. One day a blue-eyed doll is neglected and replaced by an odious wretch with a burnt nose and torn hair, who takes the first place in Miss's affection.

Novelists, supposedly knowing the secrets of female hearts, reveal that at eleven, Mademoiselle Betsi (as Miss Amory was then called) felt tender emotions for a young Savoyard organ-grinder she believed to be a prince. At twelve, an old, hideous drawing-master agitated her young heart. At thirteen, while at Madame de Caramel's boarding school in the Champs Élysées, a correspondence took place between the seductive Miss Betsi and two young gentlemen of the College of Charlemagne.

In the above paragraph, our young friend is called by a Christian name different from that under which we were introduced. The fact is, Miss Amory, called Missy at home, was christened Betsy but assumed the name of Blanche of her own will and fantasy. The weapon the Baronet held over her was the threat to call her publicly "Betsy," a menace he sometimes used to keep the young rebel in order.

We have spoken of children's dolls and their inconstancy. Very likely, this history shows that Miss Blanche assumed and put away her live dolls with similar girlish fickleness. She had hosted hosts of dear friends, gathering a little museum of locks of hair in her treasure-chest. Some dear friends had married; some had gone to other schools; one beloved sister she had lost from the pension, only to find again, O horror! her darling Leocadie keeping the books in her father's shop, a grocer in the Rue du Bac. In fact, she had met with numerous disappointments, estrangements, and disillusionments, which she called "disillusions" in her pretty French jargon, and had seen and suffered greatly for so young a woman. But it is the lot of sensibility to suffer, and of confiding tenderness to be deceived. She felt she was only undergoing the penalties of genius in these pangs.

Meanwhile, she managed to make her honest mother as uncomfortable as circumstances permitted and caused her worthy stepfather to wish she were dead. With the exception of Captain Strong, whose invincible good-humor was proof against her sarcasms, the little lady ruled the whole house with her tongue. If Lady Clavering talked about Sparrowgrass instead of Asparagus, or called an object a "hobject," Missy calmly corrected her, frightening the good soul into errors that became more frequent as she grew more nervous under her daughter's eye.

It is not to be supposed that Madame Fribsby alone, of all the folks in Clavering, should have remained unmoved by the arrival of the Park family. At the first appearance of the Park family in church, Madame noted every article of toilette the ladies wore, from bonnets to brodequins, and surveyed the attire of the ladies' maids in the pew. We fear that Doctor Portman's sermon, though one of his oldest compositions, had little effect upon Madame Fribsby that day.

In a few days, she secured an interview with Lady Clavering's confidential attendant in the housekeeper's room. Her cards, in French and English, stating that she received the newest fashions from Paris and made court dresses for the nobility, were favorably received by Lady Clavering and Miss Amory.

Mrs. Bonner, Lady Clavering's lady, soon became a great frequenter of Madame Fribsby's drawing-room, partaking of meals of green tea, scandal, hot Sally-Lunn cakes, and novel reading. She found much more time for these pleasures than her junior officer, Miss Amory's maid, who was worked as hard as a factory-girl by that inexorable little Muse, her mistress.

The Muse loved to be dressed becomingly. Having a lively fancy and a poetic desire for change, she altered her attire every day. Her maid, Pincott, who had been an apprentice to dressmaking in Paris, was kept from morning till night altering and remodelling Miss Amory's habiliments. Pincott rose very early and went to bed very late, obeying the untiring caprices of her little taskmistress. The girl was of respectable English parents, colonists of Paris who had seen better days but could not get on without charity. Her father was a cripple incapable of work, and her return home would only increase the burden on her family. Poor Pincott was fain to stay where she could maintain herself and spare a little relief to her parents.

Our Muse, with the candour which distinguished her, never failed to remind her attendant of the real state of matters. "I should send you away, Pincott, for you are a great deal too weak, and your eyes are failing you, and you are always crying and snivelling and wanting the doctor; but I wish that your parents at home should be supported, and I go on enduring you for their sake, mind," the dear Blanche would say to her timid little attendant. Or, "Pincott, your wretched appearance and slavish manner, and red eyes, positively give me the migraine; and I think I shall make you wear rouge, so that you may look a little cheerful;" or, "Pincott, I can't bear, even for the sake of your starving parents, that you should tear my hair out of my head in that manner; and I will thank you to write to them and say that I dispense with your services." After such speeches, and after keeping her trembling over her hair for an hour while the young lady combed it while perusing a favorite French novel, she would go to bed at one o'clock and say, "Pincott, you may kiss me. Good night. I should like you to have the pink dress ready for the morning." And so, with blessing upon her attendant, she would turn round and go to sleep.

The Muse might lie in bed as long as she chose in the morning, but Pincott had to rise very early indeed to get her mistress's task done. She had to appear next day with the same red eyes and wan face, which displeased Miss Amory by their want of gaiety and caused the mistress to be angry because the servant persisted in being and looking unwell. Not that Blanche ever thought she was a hard mistress. Indeed, she made quite a friend of Pincott at times, writing very pretty verses about the lonely little tiring-maid whose heart was far away. Our beloved Blanche was a superior being, expecting to be waited upon as such. I do not know whether there are any other ladies in this world who treat their servants so, but it may be that there are such, and that the tyranny they exercise over their subordinates, and the pangs they inflict with a soft voice and a well-bred simper, are as cruel as those a slave-driver administers with an oath and a whip.

But Blanche was a Muse—a delicate little creature, quite tremulous with excitability, whose eyes filled with tears at the smallest emotion. Who knows, but that it was the very fineness of her feelings which caused them to be froissed so easily? You crush a butterfly by merely touching it. Vulgar people have no idea of the sensibility of a Muse.

So little Pincott, occupied all day and night in stitching, hemming, ripping, combing, ironing, and crimping for her mistress, reading to her when in bed—for the girl was mistress of both languages and had a sweet voice and manner—could take no share in Madame Fribsby's soirées, nor indeed was she much missed or considered of sufficient consequence to appear at their entertainments.

But there was another person connected with the Clavering establishment
