Arthur Pendennis stood before the mirror in his tiny bedroom, admiring the reflection of a young man who had recently begun to resemble a ghost. His revels were over, or at least, the funds to sustain them had evaporated. The awful sword of impecuniosity hung over him, sharp and inevitable. His money was gone; his club subscription had swallowed a third of his estate, and the furniture of his little sanctuary had been paid for with the last of his reserves. He was down to the final five-pound note in his pocket-book, staring at it with the horror of a prince suddenly stripped of his crown.

His companion, Warrington, knew nothing of this precipice. To Warrington, Pen appeared as a young aristocrat in the making, bred like a child in arms fed by a doting mother. He saw the gold chains and the dressing-case fit for a lord, and he assumed the habits of an aristocrat were merely a matter of style, not substance. Pen dined on porter and beef with perfect contentment, yet he possessed a terrifying inability to economize. He could not give twopence to a waiter without feeling insulted; he could not resist a cab, rain or shine, and invariably overpaid the driver. He scorned cleaned gloves and minor frugalties. If he had been born to ten thousand a year, he would have been indistinguishable from a spendthrift; if he were a beggar, he would still be generous to a fault, unable to resist handing money to a sad story or a pair of piteous-faced children. It was a sumptuous nature, perhaps, that could not regard money, a natural kindness mixed with a petty vanity that loved the praise of waiters and cabmen.

Warrington, however, had not yet been subjected to the full audit of Pen's finances. He knew Pen had been wild at college, but the extent of the extravagance versus the mother's dwindling means remained a secret. That secret finally spilled out while Pen grimly surveyed the change for his last five-pound note lying on the public-house tray beside Warrington's pot of ale.

"It is the last rose of summer," Pen declared, his voice heavy with the weight of his situation. "Its blooming companions have gone long ago; and behold, the last one of the garland has shed its leaves." He recounted the whole saga: his mother's limited means, his own follies, and Laura's generous attempts to prop him up. Warrington smoked his pipe, listening intently.

"Impecuniosity will do you good," Warrington said, tapping ash from his pipe. "For an honest man, it is the most wholesome medicine. It keeps your moral man in a perpetual state of excitement, like a rider facing a fence or an opponent's single-stick. A little necessity brings out your pluck. You'll discover what you can do without when you have no money for new gloves, varnished boots, eau de Cologne, or cabs. You've been bred a molly-coddle, Pen, spoilt by women. A single man with health and brains who can't find a livelihood doesn't deserve to stay in it. Pay your last halfpenny and jump over Waterloo Bridge. Steal a leg of mutton, get transported, and leave the country. *Dixi*; I have spoken. Give us another pull at the pale ale."

"But how is one to live?" Pen asked, despairing. "There is beef and bread in plenty in England, but you must pay for it with work or money. And who will take my work? What work can I do?"

Warrington burst into laughter. "Suppose we advertise in the *Times*," he suggested. "For an usher's place at a classical and commercial academy: *A gentleman, B.A. of St. Boniface College, and who was plucked for his degree—Wishes to give lessons in classics and mathematics, and the rudiments of the French language; he can cut hair, attend to the younger pupils, and play a second on the piano with the daughters of the principal. Address A. P., Lamb Court, Temple.*"

"Confound you!" cried Pen.

"Men take to all sorts of professions," Warrington continued, undeterred. "Your friend Bloundell is a professional blackleg, traveling the Continent to fleece young gentlemen of fashion. There is Bob O'Toole, who drives the Ballynafad mail. I know a doctor's son who, upon reaching his last five-pound note, let his mustachios grow, went to a provincial town, announced himself as Professor Spineto, chiropodist to the Emperor of All the Russians, and established a practice by operating on the local newspaper editor. He lives respectably now and has succeeded to his father's gallypots."

"Hang gallypots," Pen retorted. "I can't drive a coach, cut corns, or cheat at cards. There's nothing else you propose."

"Yes; there's our own correspondent," Warrington said, his tone shifting. "Before you told me your story, I thought you a man of fortune. Clearly, you must not touch your mother's income anymore. You can't go on spunging on the women. You must pay off that trump of a girl—Laura, is her name? Here is your health, Laura!—and carry a hod rather than ask for a shilling from home."

"But how earn one?" Pen asked.

"How do I live, think you?" Warrington replied, his countenance falling slightly. "On my younger brother's allowance, Pendennis? I have secrets of my own. I made away with that allowance five years ago; if I had made away with myself a little time before, it would have been better. I have played off my own bat ever since. I don't want much money. When my purse is out, I go to work and fill it, then lie idle like a serpent until I have digested the mass. Look, I begin to feel empty." He held up a long, lean purse containing but a few sovereigns.

"I write," Warrington admitted, blushing. "I don't tell the world I do so. I don't wish it said that George Warrington writes for bread. But I write in the *Law Reviews*. Look here." He turned over some sheets. "I write in a newspaper now and then, too." He fetched a file of the *Dawn* and pointed silently to a few articles. Pen read them with delight, recognizing the strong thoughts, curt periods, satire, and scholarship.

"I am not up to this," Pen admitted with genuine admiration. "I know very little about politics or history, Warrington; and have but a smattering of letters. I can't fly upon such a wing as yours."

"But you can on your own, my boy, which is lighter, and soars higher, perhaps," Warrington said kindly. "Those little scraps and verses I have seen show a natural gift, rare in these days. You needn't blush, you conceited young jackanapes. You have the sacred flame—a little of the real poetical fire. You are a poet, Pen, my boy." He stretched out his broad hand and clapped Pen on the shoulder.

Arthur was so delighted that tears came into his eyes. "How kind you are to me, Warrington!" he exclaimed.

"I like you, old boy," Warrington said. "I was devilish lonely in chambers and wanted somebody. The sight of your honest face somehow pleased me. I liked the way you laughed at Lowton—that poor good little snob. In fine, the reason why I cannot tell—but so it is, young 'un. I'm alone in the world, sir; and I wanted someone to keep me company." A glance of extreme kindness and melancholy passed from Warrington's dark eyes.

Pen was too pleased with his own thoughts to perceive the sadness of the friend complimenting him. "Thank you, Warrington," he said. "Thank you for your friendship and what you say about me. I have often thought I was a poet. I will be one—I think I am one, as you say so, though the world mayn't. Is it the *Ariadne in Naxos* you liked, or the Prize Poem?"

Warrington burst into a roar of laughter. "Why, young goose," he yelled, "of all the miserable weak rubbish I ever tried, *Ariadne in Naxos* is the most mawkish and disgusting. The Prize Poem is so pompous and feeble that I'm surprised it didn't get the medal. You don't suppose you are a serious poet, do you? Are you setting up to be a Pindar, you absurd little tom-tit, fancying you have the strength of the Theban eagle? No, my boy, I think you can write a magazine article and turn a pretty copy of verses; that's what I think of you."

"By Jove!" said Pen, bouncing up and stamping his foot. "I'll show you that I am a better man than you think for."

Warrington only laughed the more, blowing twenty-four puffs rapidly from his pipe.

Opportunity soon presented itself. Mr. Bacon, the eminent publisher of Paternoster Row, owned the *Legal Review* and other periodicals. Every year he presented a beautiful gilt volume called the *Spring Annual*, edited by Lady Violet Lebas, featuring the most fashionable poets of the time. Young Lord Dodo, the Honourable Percy Popjoy, and others had their works fast given to the world in this miscellany, which had since perished like other vernal blossoms. The book was daintily illustrated with pictures of reigning beauties. As these plates were prepared long beforehand, the eminent poets had to write to the plates, not the other way around.

One day, just as the volume was on the eve of publication, Warrington called on Mr. Hack, Bacon's reader and general manager. He found Hack with a bundle of proof plates and sheets. Percy Popjoy had written verses for a picture called *The Church Porch*: a Spanish damsel hastening to church with a large prayer-book, watched by a youth in a cloak hidden in a niche. The picture was pretty, but Popjoy's genius had deserted him; he had made the most execrable verses ever perpetrated by a young nobleman.

Warrington burst out laughing as he read the poem, and Mr. Hack laughed too, with a rueful face. "It won't do," he said. "The public won't stand it. Bungay's people are bringing out a very good book and have set up Miss Bunyan against Lady Violet. We have most titles, but the verses are too bad. Lady Violet herself owns it; she's busy with her own poem. What's to be done? We can't lose the plate. The governor gave sixty pounds for it."

"I know a fellow who would do some verses, I think," Warrington said. "Let me take the plate home in my pocket and send to my chambers in the morning for the verses. You'll pay well, of course."

"Of course," said Mr. Hack. Warrington went home to Pen, plate in hand.

"Now, boy, here's a chance for you. Turn me off a copy of verses to this."

"What's this? A Church Porch—A lady entering it, and a youth out of a wine-shop window ogling her.—What the deuce am I to do with it?"

"Try," said Warrington. "Earn your livelihood for once, you who long so to do it."

"Well, I will try," said Pen.

"And I'll go out to dinner," Warrington said, leaving Pen in a brown study.

When Warrington returned that night, the verses were done. "There they are," said Pen. "I've screwed 'em out at last. I think they'll do."

"They will," Warrington said after reading them. They ran as follows:

> **The Church Porch**
>
> Although I enter not,
> Yet round about the spot
>     Sometimes I hover,
> And at the sacred gate,
> With longing eyes I wait,
>     Expectant of her.
>
> The Minster bell tolls out
> Above the city's rout
>     And noise and humming
> They've stopp'd the chiming bell,
> I hear the organ's swell
> She's coming, she's coming!
>
> My lady comes at last,
> Timid and stepping fast,
>     And hastening hither,
> With modest eyes downcast.
> She comes—she's here—she's past.
>     May Heaven go with her!
>
> Kneel undisturb'd, fair saint,
> Pour out your praise or plaint
>     Meekly and duly.
> I will not enter there,
> To sully your pure prayer
>     With thoughts unruly.
>
> But suffer me to pace
> Round the forbidden place,
>     Lingering a minute,
> Like outcast spirits, who wait
> And see through Heaven's gate
>     Angels within it.

"Have you got any more, young fellow?" asked Warrington. "We must make them give you a couple of guineas a page; and if the verses are liked, you'll get an entree into Bacon's magazines and may turn a decent penny."

Pen examined his portfolio and found another ballad he thought might figure with advantage in the *Spring Annual*. Consigning these two precious documents to Warrington, the pair walked from the Temple to Paternoster Row.

Bacon's shop was an ancient low-browed building, with a few books displayed under a bust of Lord Verulam. Exactly opposite was Mr. Bungay's house, newly painted and elaborately decorated in the seventeenth-century style, looking as if Mr. Evelyn or Mr. Pepys might step out. Warrington went into Bacon's shop, but Pen stayed outside. It was agreed that his ambassador should act for him entirely. The young fellow paced up and down the street in a nervous condition, waiting
