On the appointed day, our two friends made their appearance at Mr. Bungay's door in Paternoster Row. They did not enter through the public throng, where bookboys lugged sacks of Bungay's volumes and timid aspirants clutched virgin manuscripts hoping for a sale to Sultan Bungay. Instead, they sought the private entrance, the secret portal from whence the splendid Mrs. Bungay emerged to mount her chaise, settle onto her cushions, and cast looks of defiant superiority at Mrs. Bacon's opposite windows.

Mrs. Bacon, currently a chaiseless woman, was a woman of considerable spirit. On such occasions, when wroth at her sister-in-law's ostentation, she would fling up the sash of her drawing-room window and gaze out at the chaise with her four children. Her message was clear: *"Behold these four darlings! Flora Bungay! This is precisely why I cannot drive in a carriage; you would give a coach-and-four just to have the same excuse."* It was with these verbal arrows that Emma Bacon shot at Flora Bungay, who sat in her chariot, envying the motherhood she lacked.

As Pen and Warrington approached Bungay's door, a carriage and cab pulled up to Bacon's residence. Old Dr. Slocum descended heavily from the first vehicle; his equipage was as ponderous as his style, yet both possessed a fine, sonorous effect upon the publishers lining the Row. From the cab stepped a couple of dazzling white waistcoats.

Warrington laughed. "You see, Bacon has his dinner-party too. That is Dr. Slocum, author of 'Memoirs of the Poisoners.' You would hardly recognize our friend Hoolan in that gallant white waistcoat. Doolan is one of Bungay's men, and faith, here he comes." Indeed, Messrs. Hoolan and Doolan had arrived from the Strand in the same cab, tossing a coin to decide who should pay the shilling. Mr. Doolan stepped from the other side of the road, arrayed in black with a large pair of white gloves spread wide on his hands, which he regarded with distinct pleasure.

The house porter, dressed in an evening coat, along with gentlemen sporting gloves as large as Doolan's but made of the famous Berlin web, stood on the passage of Mr. Bungay's house to receive hats and coats and bawl names up the stairs. Some guests had already arrived; however, only Mrs. Bungay, clad in red satin and a turban, represented her own charming sex. She curtsied to each newcomer as he entered the drawing-room, though her mind was evidently preoccupied by extraneous thoughts. The fact was, Mrs. Bacon's dinner-party was disturbing her. As soon as she received each member of her own company, Flora Bungay would fly back to the window embrasure to rake the carriages of Emma Bacon's friends as they rattled up the Row. The sight of Dr. Slocum's large carriage, with its gaunt job-horses, crushed Flora; none but hack cabs had driven up to her own door that day.

They were all literary gentlemen, though unknown to Pen. There was Mr. Bole, the real editor of the magazine (Mr. Wagg being merely the nominal chief); Mr. Trotter, who, having burst onto the world as a poet of a tragic and suicidal cast, had now subsided into one of Mr. Bungay's back shops as a reader; and Captain Sumph, an ex-beau reader about town, related in some indistinct manner to Literature and the Peerage. He was said to have written a book, to have been a friend of Lord Byron, and to be related to Lord Sumphington. In fact, anecdotes of Byron formed his staple. He seldom spoke without invoking that poet or his contemporaries: *"I remember poor Shelley, at school, being sent up for good for a copy of verses, every line of which I wrote, by Jove!"* or, *"I recollect, when I was at Missolonghi with Byron, offering to bet gamba,"* and so forth. This gentleman, Pen remarked, was listened to with great attention by Mrs. Bungay. His anecdotes of the aristocracy, of which he was a middle-aged member, delighted the publisher's lady. Had he but come in his own carriage, Mrs. Bungay would have made Mr. Bungay purchase any given volume from his pen.

Mr. Bungay went about to his guests as they arrived, doing the honours of his house with much cordiality. "How are you, sir? Fine day, sir. Glad to see you year, sir. Flora, my love, let me have the honour of introducing Mr. Warrington to you. Mr. Warrington, Mrs. Bungay; Mr. Pendennis, Mrs. Bungay. Hope you've brought good appetites with you, gentlemen. You, Doolan, I know have, for you've always had a deuce of a twist."

"Lor, Bungay!" said Mrs. Bungay.

"Faith, a man must be hard to please, Bungay, who can't eat a good dinner in this house," Doolan said, winking and stroking his lean chops with his large gloves, making appeals of friendship to Mrs. Bungay which that honest woman refused with scorn. "She couldn't abide that Doolan," she said in confidence to her friends. Indeed, all his flatteries failed to win her.

As they talked, Mrs. Bungay surveying mankind from her window, a magnificent vision of an enormous grey cab-horse appeared and neared rapidly. A pair of white reins, held by small white gloves, were visible behind it; a face pale but richly decorated with a chin-tuft, the head of an exiguous groom bobbing over the cab-head—these bright things were revealed to the delighted Mrs. Bungay. "The Honourable Percy Popjoy's quite punctual, I declare," she said, sailing to the door to be in waiting at the nobleman's arrival.

"It's Percy Popjoy," said Pen, looking out the window and seeing an individual in extremely lacquered boots descend from the swinging cab. Indeed, it was that young nobleman, Lord Falconet's eldest son, who was come to dine with the publisher—his publisher of the Row.

"He was my fag at Eton," Warrington said. "I ought to have licked him a little more." He and Pen had had some bouts at the Oxbridge Union debates, in which Pen had had very much the better of Percy, who presently appeared with his hat under his arm and a look of indescribable good humour and fatuity in his round, dimpled face. Upon this face, Nature had burst out with a chin-tuft but, exhausted with the effort, had left the rest of the countenance bare of hair.

The temporary groom of the chambers bawled out, "The Honourable Percy Popjoy," much to that gentleman's discomposure at hearing his titles announced.

"What did the man want to take away my hat for, Bungay?" he asked of the publisher. "Can't do without my hat—want it to make my bow to Mrs. Bungay. How well you look, Mrs. Bungay, to-day. Haven't seen your carriage in the Park: why haven't you been there? I missed you; indeed, I did."

"I'm afraid you're a sad quiz," said Mrs. Bungay.

"Quiz! Never made a joke in my—hullo! who's here? How d'ye do, Pendennis? How d'ye do, Warrington? These are old friends of mine, Mrs. Bungay. I say, how the doose did you come here?" he asked of the two young men, turning his lacquered heels upon Mrs. Bungay, who respected her husband's two young guests now that she found they were intimate with a lord's son.

"What! do they know him?" she asked rapidly of Mr. B.

"High fellers, I tell you—the young one related to all the nobility," said the publisher, and both ran forward, smiling and bowing, to greet almost as great personages as the young lord—no less characters, indeed, than the great Mr. Wenham and the great Mr. Wagg, who were now announced.

Mr. Wenham entered wearing the usual demure look and stealthy smile with which he commonly surveyed the tips of his neat little shining boots, a look he but seldom brought to bear upon the person who addressed him. Wagg's white waistcoat, on the contrary, spread out with profuse brilliancy; his burly, red face shone resplendent over it, lighted up with the thoughts of good jokes and a good dinner. He liked to make his entry into a drawing-room with a laugh, and, when he went away at night, to leave a joke exploding behind him. No personal calamities or distresses could altogether keep his humour down. Whatever his griefs might be, the thought of a dinner rallied his great soul; and when he saw a lord, he saluted him with a pun.

Wenham went up, then, with a smug smile and whisper, to Mrs. Bungay, looked at her from under his eyes, and showed her the tips of his shoes. Wagg said she looked charming and pushed on straight at the young nobleman, whom he called Pop, to whom he instantly related a funny story seasoned with what the French call *gros sel*. He was delighted to see Pen, too, shaking his hand and slapping him on the back cordially, for he was full of spirits and good humour. He talked in a loud voice about their last place and occasion of meeting at Baymouth, asked how their friends of Clavering Park were, whether Sir Francis was not coming to London for the season, and whether Pen had been to see Lady Rockminster, who had arrived—a fine old lady, Lady Rockminster! These remarks Wagg made not for Pen's ear so much as for the edification of the company, whom he was glad to inform that he paid visits to gentlemen's country seats and was on intimate terms with the nobility.

Wenham also shook hands with our young friend—all of which scenes Mrs. Bungay remarked with respectful pleasure, communicating her ideas to Bungay afterwards regarding the importance of Mr. Pendennis—ideas by which Pen profited much more than he was aware.

Pen, who had read and rather admired some of her works (and expected to find in Miss Bunion a person somewhat resembling her own description of herself in the 'Passion-Flower,' in which she stated that her youth resembled—"A violet, shrinking meanly / When blows the March wind keenly; / A timid fawn, on wild-wood lawn, / Where oak-boughs rustle greenly"—and that her maturer beauty was something very different, certainly, to the artless loveliness of her prime, but still exceedingly captivating and striking), beheld, rather to his surprise and amusement, a large and bony woman in a crumpled satin dress who came creaking into the room with a step as heavy as a grenadier's. Wagg instantly noted the straw which she brought in at the rumpled skirt of her dress and would have stooped to pick it up; but Miss Bunion disarmed all criticism by observing this ornament herself. Putting her own large foot upon it, so as to separate it from her robe, she stooped and picked up the straw, saying to Mrs. Bungay that she was very sorry to be a little late, but that the omnibus was very slow and what a comfort it was to get a ride all the way from Brompton for sixpence. Nobody laughed at the poetess's speech; it was uttered so simply. Indeed, the worthy woman had not the least notion of being ashamed of an action incidental upon her poverty.

"Is that 'Passion-Flowers?'" Pen said to Wenham, by whom he was standing. "Why, her picture in the volume represents her as a very well-looking young woman."

"You know passion-flowers, like all others, will run to seed," Wenham said. "Miss Bunion's portrait was probably painted some years ago."

"Well, I like her for not being ashamed of her poverty."

"So do I," said Mr. Wenham, who would have starved rather than have come to dinner in an omnibus, "but I don't think that she need flourish the straw about, do you, Mr. Pendennis? My dear Miss Bunion, how do you do? I was in a great lady's drawing-room this morning, and everybody was charmed with your new volume. Those lines on the christening of Lady Fanny Fantail brought tears into the Duchess's eyes. I said that I thought I should have the pleasure of meeting you to-day, and she begged me to thank you, and say how greatly she was pleased."

This history, told in a bland smiling manner of a Duchess whom Wenham had met that very morning, quite put poor Wagg's dowager and baronet out of court and placed Wenham beyond Wagg as a man of fashion. Wenham kept this inestimable advantage, having the conversation to himself, and ran on with a number of anecdotes regarding the aristocracy. He tried to bring Mr. Popjoy into the conversation by making appeals to him, saying, "I was telling your father this morning," or, "I think you were present at W. house the other night when the Duke said so-and-so," but Mr. Popjoy would not gratify him by joining in the talk, preferring to fall back into the window recess with Mrs. Bungay and watch the cabs that drove up to the opposite door. At least, if he would not talk, the hostess hoped that those odious Bacons would see how she had secured the noble Percy Popjoy for her party.

And now the bell of Saint Paul's tolled half an hour later than that for which Mr. Bungay had invited his party, and it was complete with the exception of two guests, who at last made their appearance, and in whom Pen was pleased to recognise Captain and Mrs. Shandon.

When these two had made their greetings to the master and mistress of the house and exchanged nods of more or less recognition with most of the people
