Noble Henry Foker, whom we had briefly lost sight of, had been diligently engaged in the pursuit of his all-consuming passion. It is a curious economic fact that the pursuit of love is one of the most expensive hobbies a man can indulge in, a truth that young gentlemen and ladies of "ill-regulated minds" might do well to calculate. One sacrifices precious sleep, arrives late to breakfast with a mind already wandering, performs one's daily duties with the enthusiasm of a zombie, neglects friends and family, and finds the blandishments of home utterly unbearable. Life itself becomes intolerable except when one is actively hunting one's flame.

Mr. Foker, having been bred to indulge every propensity, had surrendered completely to this one with his usual selfish enthusiasm. Nor should anyone be surprised that a man who had previously preached sound advice to his friend Arthur Pendennis should now become a slave to passion himself. Who among us has not preached virtue while secretly practicing vice? We reserve our sympathy for the humble and the stumbling; the serene, perfect beings who never fall are simply lonely, and we cannot reach up to talk familiarly with such potentates. So, we leave the angels alone and focus on the mortals who struggle, stumble, and get up again.

The young person in question was not currently in London, and it was certainly not for her that Mr. Foker's mind was currently agitated. But what matters a few failings? Do we need to be angels to be worshipped? Let us admire the diversity of human taste. History is full of magnificent passions: the love of a transported pickpocket for a female convict, the flame of a Polish dwarf for a Dresden baroness, or the recent escapade of Cornet Tozer and Mrs. Battersby. Are we ashamed that the highest-placed Ajax may one day prostrate himself before the pattens of his kitchen maid? There is no poverty, shame, or crime that a woman's perverse fidelity and admirable constant folly will not support, hugging it closer than virtue ever could.

Thus, Henry Foker, Esquire, longed for his love and cursed the fate that separated them. While Lord Gravesend's family had retreated to the country, Harry remained in London, lingering on certainly not to the sorrow of Lady Ann, to whom he was affianced and who did not miss him in the least. Wherever Miss Clavering went, this infatuated young fellow followed, forced to keep his passion a secret lest it explode and collapse him.

A grand entertainment had taken place at Gaunt House on a beautiful June evening. The journals the next day listed the nobility and gentry in dense columns. Among the guests were Sir Francis and Lady Clavering, Miss Amory (secured by the indefatigable Major Pendennis), and our two young friends, Arthur and Harry. Both youths exerted themselves, dancing extensively with Miss Blanche. The worthy Major assumed charge of Lady Clavering, guiding her to the refreshment room—a department where her ladyship particularly distinguished herself. Surrounded by pictures of Titian and Vandyke, enormous salvers, pyramids of flowers, and constellations of wax candles, a supper was served all night. The Major, with admirable patience, administered to Lady Clavering's various wants, calling to solemn male attendants and lovely servant-maids, while suffering silently as he followed the honest woman about.

Mr. Wagg, counting up the dishes Lady Clavering consumed (though his powers of calculation were compromised by his own free consumption of champagne), recommended Mr. Honeyman, Lady Steyne's physician, to check on the Begum the following day.

Sir Francis Clavering appeared, skulked about the magnificent rooms, found the company and splendour distasteful, tossed off a tumbler or two at the buffet, and departed for Jermyn Street to join his friends Loder, Punter, little Moss Abrams, and Captain Skewball at their familiar green table. In the rattle of the box and their agreeable conversation, Sir Francis's spirits rose to their accustomed point of feeble hilarity.

Mr. Pynsent, who had requested Miss Amory's hand, approached to claim her, but having already exchanged scowls of recognition with Arthur Pendennis in the dancing-room, Arthur suddenly rose and claimed Miss Amory as his partner for the present dance. Mr. Pynsent, biting his lips and scowling savagely, withdrew with a profound bow, surrendering his claim. There are some men who are always falling in one's way in life. Pynsent and Pen held a mutual view of each other; each regarded the other accordingly.

"What a confounded conceited provincial fool that is!" thought one. "Because he has written a twopenny novel, his absurd head is turned, and a kicking would take his conceit out of him."

"What an impertinent idiot that man is!" remarked the other to his partner. "His soul is in Downing Street; his neckcloth is foolscap; his hair is sand; his legs are rulers; his vitals are tape and sealing-wax; he was a prig in his cradle; and never laughed since he was born, except three times at the same joke of his chief. I have the same liking for that man, Miss Amory, as I have for that cold boiled veal."

Upon which Blanche, of course, remarked that Mr. Pendennis was wicked, mechant, and perfectly abominable, wondering what he would say when her back was turned.

"Say!—Say that you have the most beautiful figure, and the slimmest waist in the world, Blanche—Miss Amory, I mean. I beg your pardon. Another turn; this music would make an alderman dance."

"And you have left off tumbling when you waltz now?" Blanche asked, archly looking up at her partner's face.

"One falls and one gets up again in life, Blanche; you know I used to call you so in old times, and it is the prettiest name in the world. Besides, I have practised since then."

"And with a great number of partners, I'm afraid," Blanche said, with a little sham sigh and a shrug of the shoulders. And so in truth Mr. Pen had practised a good deal in this life; and had undoubtedly arrived at being able to dance better.

If Pendennis was impertinent in his talk, Foker, on the other hand, so bland and communicative on most occasions, was entirely mum and melancholy when he danced with Miss Amory. To clasp her slender waist was a rapture; to whirl round the room with her was a delirium; but to speak to her, what could he say that was worthy of her? What pearl of conversation could he bring fit for the acceptance of such a Queen of love and wit as Blanche? It was she who made the talk when she was in the company of this love-stricken partner. It was she who asked him how that dear little pony was, and looked at him and thanked him with such a tender kindness and regret, and refused the dear little pony with such a delicate sigh when he offered it. "I have nobody to ride with in London," she said. "Mamma is timid, and her figure is not pretty on horseback. Sir Francis never goes out with me. He loves me like—like a stepdaughter. Oh, how delightful it must be to have a father—a father, Mr. Foker!"

"Oh, uncommon," said Mr. Harry, who enjoyed that blessing very calmly. Upon which, and forgetting the sentimental air which she had just before assumed, Blanche's grey eyes gazed at Foker with such an arch twinkle that both of them burst out laughing, and Harry, enraptured and at his ease, began to entertain her with a variety of innocent prattle—good kind simple Foker talk, flavoured with many expressions by no means to be discovered in dictionaries, and relating to the personal history of himself or horses, or other things dear and important to him, or to persons in the ballroom then passing before them, and about whose appearance or character Mr. Harry spoke with artless freedom, and a considerable dash of humour.

And it was Blanche who, when the conversation flagged, and the youth's modesty came rushing back and overpowering him, knew how to reanimate her companion: asking him questions about Logwood, and whether it was a pretty place? Whether he was a hunting man, and whether he liked women to hunt? (in which case she was prepared to say that she adored hunting)—but Mr. Foker expressing his opinion against sporting females, and pointing out Lady Bullfinch, who happened to pass by, as a horse-godmother, whom he had seen at cover with a cigar in her face, Blanche too expressed her detestation of the sports of the field, and said it would make her shudder to think of a dear sweet little fox being killed, on which Foker laughed and waltzed with renewed vigour and grace.

And at the end of the waltz,—the last waltz they had on that night,—Blanche asked him about Drummington, and whether it was a fine house. His cousins, she had heard, were very accomplished: Lord Erith she had met, and which of his cousins was his favourite? Was it not Lady Ann? Yes, she was sure it was she; sure by his looks and his blushes. She was tired of dancing; it was getting very late; she must go to mamma;—and, without another word, she sprang away from Harry Foker's arm, and seized upon Pen's, who was swaggering about the dancing-room, and again said, "Mamma, mamma!—take me to mamma, dear, Mr. Pendennis!" transfixing Harry with a Parthian shot, as she fled from him.

My Lord Steyne, with garter and ribbon, with a bald head and shining eyes, and a collar of red whiskers round his face, always looked grand upon an occasion of state; and made a great effect upon Lady Clavering, when he introduced himself to her at the request of the obsequious Major Pendennis. With his own white and royal hand, he handed to her ladyship a glass of wine, said he had heard of her charming daughter, and begged to be presented to her; and, at this very juncture, Mr. Arthur Pendennis came up with the young lady on his arm.

The peer made a profound bow, and Blanche the deepest curtsy that ever was seen. His lordship gave Mr. Arthur Pendennis his hand to shake; said he had read his book, which was very wicked and clever; asked Miss Blanche if she had read it,—at which Pen blushed and winced. Why, Blanche was one of the heroines of the novel. Blanche, in black ringlets and a little altered, was the Neaera of 'Walter Lorraine.'

Blanche had read it: the language of the eyes expressed her admiration and rapture at the performance. This little play being achieved, the Marquis of Steyne made other two profound bows to Lady Clavering and her daughter, and passed on to some other of his guests at the splendid entertainment.

Mamma and daughter were loud in their expressions of admiration of the noble Marquis so soon as his broad back was turned upon them. "He said they make a very nice couple," whispered Major Pendennis to Lady Clavering. Did he now, really? Mamma thought they would; Mamma was so flustered with the honour which had just been shown to her, and with other intoxicating events of the evening, that her good-humour knew no bounds. She laughed, she winked, and nodded knowingly at Pen; she tapped him on the arm with her fan; she tapped Blanche; she tapped the Major;—her contentment was boundless, and her method of showing her joy equally expansive.

As the party went down the great staircase of Gaunt House, the morning had risen stark and clear over the black trees of the square; the skies were tinged with pink; and the cheeks of some of the people at the ball,—ah, how ghastly they looked! That admirable and devoted Major above all,—who had been for hours by Lady Clavering's side, ministering to her and feeding her body with everything that was nice, and her ear with everything that was sweet and flattering,—oh! what an object he was! The rings round his eyes were of the colour of bistre; those orbs themselves were like the plovers' eggs whereof Lady Clavering and Blanche had each tasted; the wrinkles in his old face were furrowed in deep gashes; and a silver stubble, like an elderly morning dew, was glittering on his chin, and alongside the dyed whiskers now limp and out of curl.

There he stood, with admirable patience, enduring, uncomplainingly, a silent agony; knowing that people could see the state of his face (for could he not himself perceive the condition of others, males and females, of his own age?)—longing to go to rest for hours past; aware that suppers disagreed with him, and yet having eaten a little so as to keep his friend, Lady Clavering, in good-humour; with twinges of rheumatism in the back and knees; with weary feet burning in his varnished boots,—so tired, oh, so tired and longing for bed! If a man, struggling with hardship and bravely overcoming it, is an object of admiration for the gods, that Power in whose chapels the old Major was a faithful worshipper must have looked upwards approvingly upon the constancy of Pendennis's martyrdom. There are sufferers in that cause as in the other: the negroes in the service of Mumbo Jumbo tattoo and drill themselves with burning skewers with great fortitude; and we read that the priests in the service of Baal gashed themselves and bled freely. You who can smash the idols, do so with a good courage; but do not be too fierce with the idolaters,—they worship the best thing they know.

The Pendennises, the elder and the younger, waited with Lady Clavering and her daughter until her ladyship's carriage was announced, when the elder's martyrdom may be said to have come to an end, for the good-natured Begum insisted upon
