The exertions of the previous night at Gaunt House had nearly broken Major Pendennis. As soon as his weary frame could move with safety, he groaned his way to Buxton, seeking relief in the healing waters. Parliament had adjourned, Sir Francis Clavering and his family had departed, and the specific affairs we have tracked had stalled in the brief interlude between chapters. The town itself had emptied out.

The season was concluding. Pen's lawyer neighbors had vanished upon circuit; his fashionable friends had secured passports for the Continent or fled to the Scotch moors for health and excitement. The bow-windows of the Clubs were deserted, the Pall Mall pavement solitary. The red coats had vanished from before the Palace gate; the tradesmen of St. James's were abroad enjoying themselves; the tailors had grown mustaches and headed up the Rhine; the bootmakers were at Ems or Baden, blushing when meeting customers or punting beside creditors at gambling tables. The clergy of St. James's preached to half a congregation containing no distinguished sinners. The band in Kensington Gardens had packed away their brass and silver trumpets. Only two or three old fly-carts crawled by the Serpentine banks. Clarence Bulbul, retained in town by his arduous duties as a Treasury clerk, compared the loneliness of Rotten Row to the vastness of the Arabian desert, likening himself to a Bedouin wending his way through dusty solitude. Warrington had stowed a quantity of Cavendish tobacco in his carpet-bag and retreated to his brother's house in Norfolk. Pen was left alone in his chambers for a while, for this man of fashion could not quit the metropolis when he chose, currently detained by the affairs of his newspaper, the *Pall Mall Gazette*, of which he acted as editor and *chargé d'affaires* during the temporary absence of the chief, Captain Shandon, who was with his family at the salutary watering-place of Boulogne-sur-Mer.

Although Mr. Pen had pronounced himself for years past to be a man perfectly blasé and wearied of life, the truth was that he was an exceedingly healthy young fellow still. He possessed a fine appetite, which he satisfied with the greatest relish at least once a day, and a constant desire for society that showed him to be anything but misanthropical. If he could not get a good dinner, he sat down to a bad one with perfect contentment; if he could not procure the company of witty or great or beautiful persons, he put up with any society that came to hand. He was perfectly satisfied in a tavern-parlour, on board a Greenwich steamboat, in a jaunt to Hampstead with Mr. Finucane, his colleague at the *Gazette*, or in a visit to the summer theatres across the river. He was also friendly with the great Simpson at the Royal Gardens of Vauxhall, where he shook the principal comic singer of the lovely equestrian of the arena by the hand. While he could watch the grimaces or graces of these performers with a satiric humor not deprived of sympathy, he could look on with an eye of kindness at the lookers-on too: at the roystering youth bent upon enjoyment, at the honest parents with delighted children laughing and clapping, at the poor outcasts whose laughter was less innocent though perhaps louder, bringing their shame and youth there to dance and be merry till dawn to get bread and drown care. Of this sympathy with all conditions of men, Arthur often boasted, saying he was pleased to possess it and hoped to retain it to the last. As another man has an ardour for art or music, Mr. Pen said that anthropology was his favorite pursuit; his eyes were always eagerly open to its infinite varieties and beauties, contemplating with unfailing delight all specimens in all places to which he resorted, whether it was the coquetting of a wrinkled dowager in a ballroom or a high-bred young beauty blushing in her prime; whether it was a hulking guardsman coaxing a servant-girl in the Park, or innocent little Tommy feeding the ducks whilst the nurse listened. Indeed, a man whose heart is pretty clean can indulge in this pursuit with an enjoyment that never ceases, only perhaps the more keen because it is secret and has a touch of sadness in it, because he is of his mood and humour lonely, and apart although not alone.

Yes, Pen used to brag and talk in his impetuous way to Warrington. "I was in love so fiercely in my youth," he declared, "that I have burned out that flame forever, I think, and if ever I marry, it will be a marriage of reason that I will make, with a well-bred, good-tempered, good-looking person who has a little money, and so forth, that will cushion our carriage in its course through life. As for romance, it is all done; I have spent that out, and am old before my time—I'm proud of it."

"Stuff!" growled the other. "You fancied you were getting bald the other day, and bragged about it as you do about everything. But you began to use the bear's-grease pot directly the hairdresser told you; and are scented like a barber ever since."

"You are Diogenes," the other answered, "and you want every man to live in a tub like yourself. Violets smell better than stale tobacco, you grizzly old cynic." But Mr. Pen was blushing whilst he made this reply to his unromantic friend, and indeed cared a great deal more about himself still than such a philosopher perhaps should have done. Indeed, considering that he was careless about the world, Mr. Pen ornamented his person with no small pains in order to make himself agreeable to it, and for a weary pilgrim as he was, wore very tight boots and bright varnish.

It was in this dull season of the year, then, on a shining Friday night in autumn, that Mr. Pendennis, having completed at his newspaper office a brilliant leading article—such as Captain Shandon himself might have written, had the Captain been in good-humour and inclined to work, which he never would do except under compulsion—that Mr. Arthur Pendennis having written his article, and reviewed it approvingly as it lay before him in its wet proof-sheet at the office of the paper, bethought him that he would cross the water and regale himself with the fireworks and other amusements of Vauxhall. So he affably put in his pocket the order which admitted "Editor of Pall Mall Gazette and friend" to that place of recreation, and paid with the coin of the realm a sufficient sum to enable him to cross Waterloo Bridge. The walk thence to the Gardens was pleasant; the stars were shining in the skies above, looking down upon the royal property, whence the rockets and Roman candles had not yet ascended to outshine the stars.

Before you enter the enchanted ground, where twenty thousand additional lamps are burned every night as usual, most of us have passed through the black and dreary passage and wickets which hide the splendours of Vauxhall from uninitiated men. In the walls of this passage are two holes strongly illuminated, in the midst of which you see two gentlemen at desks, where they will take either your money as a private individual, or your order of admission if you are provided with that passport to the Gardens. Pen went to exhibit his ticket at the last-named orifice, where, however, a gentleman and two ladies were already in parley before him.

The gentleman, whose hat was very much on one side, and who wore a short and shabby cloak in an excessively smart manner, was crying out in a voice which Pen at once recognized.

"Bedad, sir, if ye doubt me honour, will ye obleege me by stipping out of that box, and——"

"Lor, Capting!" cried the elder lady.

"Don't bother me," said the man in the box.

"And ask Mr. Hodgen himself, who's in the gyardens, to let these leedies pass. Don't be froightened, me dear madam, I'm not going to quarl with this gintleman, at anyreet before leedies. Will ye go, sir, and desoire Mr. Hodgen (whose orther I keem in with, and he's me most intemate friend, and I know he's goan to sing the 'Body Snatcher' here to-noight), with Captain Costigan's compliments, to stip out and let in the leedies—for meself, sir, I've seen Vauxhall, and I scawrun any interfayrance on moi account: but for these leedies, one of them has never been there, and of should think ye'd harly take advantage of me misfartune in losing the ticket, to deproive her of her pleasure."

"It ain't no use, Captain. I can't go about your business," the check-taker said; on which the Captain swore an oath, and the elder lady said, "Lor, ow provokin!"

As for the young one, she looked up at the Captain and said, "Never mind, Captain Costigan, I'm sure I don't want to go at all. Come away, mamma." And with this, although she did not want to go at all, her feelings overcame her, and she began to cry.

"Me poor child!" the Captain said. "Can ye see that, sir, and will ye not let this innocent creature in?"

"It ain't my business," cried the doorkeeper, peevishly, out of the illuminated box. And at this minute Arthur came up, and recognizing Costigan, said, "Don't you know me, Captain? Pendennis!" And he took off his hat and made a bow to the two ladies. "Me dear boy! Me dear friend!" cried the Captain, extending towards Pendennis the grasp of friendship; and he rapidly explained to the other what he called "a most unluckee conthratong." He had an order for Vauxhall, admitting two, from Mr. Hodgen, then within the Gardens, and singing (as he did at the Back Kitchen and the nobility's concerts, the 'Body Snatcher,' the 'Death of General Wolfe,' the 'Banner of Blood,' and other favourite melodies); and, having this order for the admission of two persons, he thought that it would admit three, and had come accordingly to the Gardens with his friends. But, on his way, Captain Costigan had lost the paper of admission—it was not forthcoming at all; and the leedies must go back again, to the great disappointment of one of them, as Pendennis saw.

Arthur had a great deal of good-nature for everybody, and sympathized with the misfortunes of all sorts of people: how could he refuse his sympathy in such a case as this? He had seen the innocent face as it looked up to the Captain, the appealing look of the girl, the piteous quiver of the mouth, and the final outburst of tears. If it had been his last guinea in the world, he must have paid it to have given the poor little thing pleasure. She turned the sad imploring eyes away directly they lighted upon a stranger, and began to wipe them with her handkerchief. Arthur looked very handsome and kind as he stood before the women, with his hat off, blushing, bowing, generous, a gentleman. "Who are they?" he asked of himself. He thought he had seen the elder lady before.

"If I can be of any service to you, Captain Costigan," the young man said, "I hope you will command me; is there any difficulty about taking these ladies into the garden? Will you kindly make use of my purse? And—and I have a ticket myself which will admit two—I hope, ma'am, you will permit me?"

The first impulse of the Prince of Fairoaks was to pay for the whole party, and to make away with his newspaper order as poor Costigan had done with his own ticket. But his instinct, and the appearance of the two women, told him that they would be better pleased if he did not give himself the airs of a grand seigneur, and he handed his purse to Costigan, and laughingly pulled out his ticket with one hand, as he offered the other to the elder of the ladies—ladies was not the word—they had bonnets and shawls, and collars and ribbons, and the youngest showed a pretty little foot and boot under her modest grey gown, but his Highness of Fairoaks was courteous to every person who wore a petticoat whatever its texture was, and the humbler the wearer, only the more stately and polite in his demeanour.

"Fanny, take the gentleman's arm," the elder said; "Since you will be so very kind—I've seen you often come in at our gate, sir, and go in to Captain Strong's at No. 3."

Fanny made a little curtsey, and put her hand under Arthur's arm. It had on a shabby little glove, but it was pretty and small. She was not a child, but she was scarcely a woman as yet; her tears had dried up, and her cheek mantled with youthful blushes, and her eyes glistened with pleasure and gratitude, as she looked up into Arthur's kind face.

Arthur, in a protecting way, put his other hand upon the little one resting on his arm. "Fanny's a very pretty little name," he said, "and so you know me, do you?"

"We keep the lodge, sir, at Shepherd's Inn," Fanny said with a curtsey; "and I've never been at Vauxhall, sir, and Papa didn't like me to go—and—and—O—O—law, how beautiful!" She shrank back as she spoke, starting with wonder and delight as she saw the Royal Gardens blaze before her with a hundred million of lamps, with a splendour such as the finest fairy tale, the finest pantomime she had ever witnessed at the theatre, had never realized. Pen was pleased with her pleasure, and pressed to his side the little hand which clung so kindly to him. "What would I not give for a little of this pleasure?" said the blasé young man.

"Your purse, Pendennis, me dear boy," said the Captain's voice behind him
