In or near the Temple Garden

Fashion had long since abandoned the green and pretty Temple Garden. In Shakespeare's time, it was the stage for York and Lancaster plucking the innocent white and red roses that would later stain their bloody wars; and the learned author of the *Handbook of London* noted that "the commonest and hardiest kind of rose has long ceased to put forth a bud" in that smoky air. Few of the current occupants of the surrounding buildings cared whether roses still grew there, passing the old gate only on their way to chambers. Attorneys' clerks did not carry flowers in their bags or posies under their arms as they dashed to counsel's offices; the few lawyers who took constitutional walks thought little of York and Lancaster, especially since the railroad business was over. Only antiquarians and literary amateurs cared to look at the gardens with interest, imagining Sir Roger de Coverley and Mr. Spectator pacing the road, or Oliver Goldsmith in the summer-house, perhaps meditating on his next 'Citizen of the World,' his new suit from Mr. Filby, or the dunning letter from Mr. Newbery.

Treading heavily on the gravel, rolling majestically in a snuff-coloured suit and a wig sadly lacking the barber's powder and irons, one might see the Great Doctor step up to him, his Scotch lackey trailing at his heels, a little worse for the port wine they'd shared at the Mitre. Mr. Johnson would invite Goldsmith home for tea with Miss Williams. Kind faith of Fancy! Sir Roger and Mr. Spectator were as real to us now as the two doctors and the boozy, faithful Scotchman. The poetical figures lived in our memory just as much as the real personages. And since Mr. Arthur Pendennis was of a romantic and literary turn, by no means addicted to the legal pursuits common in the neighbourhood, we may presume he was cherishing such reflections when, upon the evening after the events of the last chapter, the young gentleman chose the Temple Gardens for exercise and meditation.

On Sunday evenings, the Temple is commonly calm. The chambers are mostly vacant; the great lawyers are hosting grand dinner-parties in the Belgravian or Tyburnian districts; the agreeable young barristers are absent, paying respects to Mr. Kewsy's excellent claret or Mr. Justice Ermine's accomplished daughters. The uninvited entertain themselves in the Club-room with Circuit jokes and points of law. Nobody is in chambers except poor Mr. Cockle, ill and being fed gruel by his laundress; Mr. Toodle, an amateur flutist, piping solitarily from his second-floor window; or young Tiger, the student, whose open windows gush with cigar smoke and whose door is piled with dishes bearing the insignia of Dicks' or the Cock. But stop! Whither does Fancy lead us? It is vacation time, and with the exception of Pendennis, nobody is in Chambers at all.

Perhaps it was solitude that drove Pen into the garden. Although he had never before passed the gate, looking rather carelessly at the flower-beds and groups of citizens on the trim lawn, this evening, as he returned home to his chambers after dining alone at a nearby tavern, he took a fancy to walk in the gardens and enjoy the fresh air and the sight of the shining Thames. After walking briefly, looking at the peaceful groups around him, he grew tired and seated himself modestly in one of the summer-houses flanking the main walk.

What were his cogitations? The evening was delightfully bright and calm; the sky was cloudless; the chimneys on the opposite bank were not smoking; the wharf warehouses looked rosy in the sunshine, clear as if washed for the holiday. Steamers rushed rapidly up and down the stream, laden with holiday passengers. The bells of the multitudinous city churches rang to evening prayers—such peaceful Sabbath evenings as Pen might have remembered in his early days, pacing with his arm round his mother's waist on the terrace before the lawn at home. The sun lit up the little Brawl as well as the broad Thames, sinking majestically behind the Clavering elms and the tower of the familiar village church. Was it thoughts of these, or the sunset merely, that caused the blush in the young man's face? He beat time on the bench to the chorus of the bells, flicked dust from his shining boots with his pocket-handkerchief, started up, stamped his foot, and declared, "No, by Jove, I'll go home." With this resolution, indicating a struggle regarding the propriety of staying or leaving, he stepped out of the summer-house.

He nearly knocked down two little children, who did not reach much higher than his knee, trotting along the gravel-walk with long blue shadows slanting toward the east. One cried out "Oh!" the other began to laugh, saying with a knowing infantile chuckle, "Missa Pendennis!" Arthur looked down and saw his two little friends of the day before, Mesdemoiselles Ameliar-Ann and Betsy-Jane. He blushed furiously, seized the one he had nearly upset, jumped her into the air, and kissed her. At this sudden assault, Ameliar-Ann began to cry in great alarm.

This cry instantly summoned two ladies in clean collars, new ribbons, and grand shawls: Mrs. Bolton in a rich scarlet Caledonian Cashmere and black silk dress, and Miss F. Bolton with a yellow scarf, sweet sprigged muslin, and a parasol—quite the lady. Fanny did not say a word; her eyes flashed a welcome, shining as brightly as the most blazing windows in Paper Buildings. Mrs. Bolton, after admonishing Betsy-Jane, exclaimed, "Lor sir—how very odd that we should meet you year! I ope you ave your ealth well, sir.—Ain't it odd, Fanny, that we should meet Mr. Pendennis?"

"What do you mean by sniggering, Mesdames?" Arthur retorted. "When young Croesus has been staying at a country-house, have you never, by any singular coincidence, been walking with your Fanny in the shrubberies? Have you and your Fanny never happened to be listening to the band of the Heavies at Brighton, when young De Boots and Captain Padmore came clinking down the Pier? Have you and your darling Frances never chanced to be visiting old widow Wheezy at the cottage on the common, when the young curate has stepped in with a tract adapted to the rheumatism? Do you suppose that, if singular coincidences occur at the Hall, they don't also happen at the Lodge?"

It was a coincidence, no doubt: that was all. On the previous day, Mr. Pendennis had simply replied to Miss Bolton's question that while some courts were gloomy, parts of the Temple were cheerful, especially the chambers looking on the river and around the gardens, and that the gardens were a pleasant Sunday walk frequented by many people. Here, by mere chance, all their acquaintances met together, just like so many people in genteel life. What could be more artless, good-natured, or natural?

Pen looked very grave, pompous, and dandified. He was unusually smart and brilliant in his costume: white duck trousers, white hat, multi-colored neckcloth, light waistcoat, gold chains, and shirt-studs gave him the air of a prince of the blood. How his splendour became his figure! Was anybody ever like him? someone thought. He blushed—how his blushes became him! The same individual said to herself. The children, seeing him the day before, had been so struck that after he left, they played at him. Ameliar-Ann, sticking her little chubby fingers into the arm-holes of her pinafore as Pen did with his waistcoat, had said, "Now, Bessy-Jane, I'll be Missa Pendennis." Fanny had laughed till she cried, smothering her sister with kisses for that feat. How happy she was to see Arthur embrace the child!

If Arthur was red, Fanny, on the contrary, was very worn and pale. Arthur remarked it, asking kindly why she looked so fatigued.

"I was awake all night," said Fanny, beginning to blush.

"I put out her candle, and hordered her to go to sleep and leave off readin'," interposed the fond mother.

"You were reading! And what was it that interested you so?" asked Pen, amused.

"Oh, it's so beautiful!" Fanny sighed. "'Walter Lorraine.' How I do hate that Neaera—Neaera—I don't know the pronunciation. And I love Leonora, and Walter, oh, how dear he is!"

How had Fanny discovered the novel of 'Walter Lorraine' and that Pen was the author? This little person remembered every word Mr. Pendennis had spoken the night before, noting how he wrote in books and newspapers. What books? She was so eager to know she almost considered being civil to old Bows, who was suffering under her displeasure since yesterday, but decided first to apply to Costigan. She began by coaxing the Captain, smiling in her most winning way as she arranged his dinner and set his humble apartment in order. She was sure his linen wanted mending (and indeed the Captain's linen-closet contained curious specimens of manufactured flax and cotton). She would mend his shirts—all his shirts. What horrid holes—what funny holes! She put her little face through one of them, laughing at the old warrior in the most winning manner. She would have made a funny little picture looking through the holes. Then she daintily removed Costigan's dinner things, tripping about the room as dancers do at the play; she danced to the Captain's cupboard, produced his whisky-bottle, mixed a tumbler, and must taste a drop—a little drop; and the Captain must sing her one of his songs, his dear songs, and teach it to her. When he sang an Irish melody in his rich quavering voice, fancying it was he who fascinated the little siren, she put her little question about Arthur Pendennis and his novel. Having got an answer, she cared for nothing more, left the Captain at the piano about to sing another song, the dinner-tray on the passage, and the shirts on the chair, and ran downstairs quickening her pace.

Captain Costigan, as he said, was not a literary character, nor had he yet found time to peruse his young friend's elegant performance, though he intended to take an early opportunity of purchasing a copy of his work. But he knew the name of Pen's novel from the fact that Messrs. Finucane, Bludyer, and other frequenters of the Back Kitchen spoke of Mr. Pendennis (and not all with great friendship; for Bludyer called him a confounded coxcomb, and Hoolan wondered that Doolan did not kick him etc.) by the sobriquet of Walter Lorraine. Hence he was able to give Fanny the information she required.

"And she went and ast for it at the libery," Mrs. Bolton said, "—several liberies—and some ad it and it was bout, and some adn't it. And one of the liberies as ad it wouldn't let er ave it without a sovering: and she adn't one, and she came back a-cryin to me—didn't you, Fanny?—and I gave her a sovering."

"And, oh, I was in such a fright lest any one should have come to the libery and took it while I was away," Fanny said, her cheeks and eyes glowing. "And, oh, I do like it so!"

Arthur was touched by this artless sympathy, immensely flattered and moved. "Do you like it?" he said. "If you will come up to my chambers I will—No, I will bring you one—no, I will send you one. Good night. Thank you, Fanny. God bless you. I mustn't stay with you. Good-bye, good-bye." Pressing her hand once, and nodding to her mother and the other children, he strode out of the gardens.

He quickened his pace as he went from them, running out of the gate talking to himself. "Dear, dear little thing," he said, "darling little Fanny! You are worth them all. I wish to heaven Shandon was back. I'd go home to my mother. I mustn't see her. I won't. I won't, so help me——"

As he talked thus and ran, passers-by turning to look at him, he ran against a little old man and perceived it was Mr. Bows.

"Your very umble servant, sir," said Mr. Bows, making a sarcastic bow and lifting his old hat from his forehead.

"I wish you a good day," Arthur answered sulkily. "Don't let me detain you, or give you the trouble to follow me again. I am in a hurry, sir. Good evening."

Bows thought Pen had some reason for hurrying to his rooms. "Where are they?" exclaimed the old gentleman. "You know whom I mean. They're not in your rooms, sir, are they? They told Bolton they were going to church at the Temple, they weren't there. They are in your chambers: they mustn't stay in your chambers, Mr. Pendennis."

"Damn it, sir!" cried out Pendennis, fiercely. "Come and see if they are in my chambers: here's the court and the door—come in and see." And Bows, taking off his hat and bowing first, followed the young man.

They were not in Pen's chambers, as we know. But when the gardens were closed, the two women, who had had but a melancholy evening's amusement, walked away sadly with the children. They entered Lamb Court and stood under the lamp-post which cheerfully ornamented the centre of that quadrangle, looking up to the third floor of the house where Pendennis's chambers were, where they saw a light presently kindled. Then this couple of fools went away, the children dragging wearily after them, and returned to Mr. Bolton, who was immersed in rum-and-water at his lodge in Shepherd's Inn.

Mr. Bows looked
