Our good-natured Begum, Lady Clavering, was initially so incensed by her husband's latest display of duplicity and financial folly that she flatly refused to assist Sir Francis Clavering in meeting his debts of honor. She declared her intention to separate from him, leaving him to face the dire consequences of his incorrigible weakness and wastefulness. Following the disastrous transactions at the Derby, the unlucky gambler found himself in such a state of mind that he wished to avoid everyone. This included his turf associates, whom he owed money to and feared he could not pay, and his wife, his long-suffering banker, whom he now doubted would allow him to draw further funds.

The next morning, when Lady Clavering inquired if Sir Francis was home, she was informed that he had not returned. Instead, he had sent a messenger to his valet, ordering him to forward clothes and letters by the bearer. Strong knew that he would receive a visit or message from his principal within the day. Accordingly, he drafted a note beseeching him to call upon his "distracted friend" F.C. at Short Hotel, Blackfriars, and ask for Mr. Francis. The Baronet possessed a peculiar mental trait: he would rather tell a lie than admit the truth, and he invariably began a contest with fortune by running away and hiding himself.

The Boots of Mr. Short's establishment, who carried Clavering's message to Grosvenor Place and returned with his carpet-bag, instantly recognized the owner. He whispered this intelligence to the footman setting the breakfast table, who carried the news to the servants' hall, which reached Mrs. Bonner, the housekeeper and confidential maid, who finally delivered it to my lady. Thus, every single person in the Grosvenor Place establishment knew that Sir Francis was in hiding, under the alias of Francis, at an inn in the Blackfriars Road. Furthermore, Sir Francis's coachman shared the news with other gentlemen's coachmen, who spread it to their masters and to the neighboring Tattersall's, where gloomy anticipations arose that Sir Francis Clavering was about to embark on a tour of the Levant.

That day, the number of letters addressed to Sir Francis Clavering, Bart., which found their way to his hall-table, was quite remarkable. The French cook submitted his account to my lady; tradesmen supplying her table, Messrs. Finer and Gimcrack (the mercers and ornamental dealers), and Madame Crinoline (the eminent milliner) forwarded their bills in company with Miss Amory's private, and by no means inconsiderable, accounts from each establishment.

In the afternoon of the day after the Derby, Strong, after a colloquy with his principal at Short's Hotel (whom he found crying and drinking Curacoa), called to transact business at Grosvenor Place. He found all these suspicious documents ranged in the Baronet's study and began to open them with a rueful countenance.

Mrs. Bonner, my lady's maid and housekeeper, descended upon him while he was occupied. Mrs. Bonner, a part of the family as necessary to her mistress as the Chevalier was to Sir Francis, was naturally on Lady Clavering's side in the dispute and, bound by duty, even angrier than her ladyship herself.

"She won't pay if she takes my advice," Mrs. Bonner declared. "You'll please to go back to Sir Francis, Captain—and he's lurking about in a low public-house and doesn't dare to face his wife like a man!—and say that we won't pay his debts no longer. We made a man of him; we took him out of gaol (and other folks too, perhaps); we've paid his debts over and over again; we set him up in Parliament, gave him a house in town and country. Where he doesn't dare show his face, the shabby sneak! We've given him the horse he rides, the dinner he eats, and the very clothes he has on his back; and we will give him no more. Our fortune, such as is left of it, is left to ourselves, and we won't waste any more of it on this ungrateful man. We'll give him enough to live upon and leave him, that's what we'll do: and that's what you may tell him from Susan Bonner."

Susan Bonner's mistress, hearing of Strong's arrival, sent for him immediately. The Chevalier went up to her ladyship not without hopes that he would find her more tractable than her factotum, Mrs. Bonner. Many times before he had pleaded his client's cause with Lady Clavering and caused her good nature to relent. He tried once more, painting in dismal colors the situation in which he had found Sir Francis and refusing to guarantee any consequences if he could not find means to meet his engagements.

"Kill hisself," laughed Mrs. Bonner. "Kill hisself, will he? Dying's the best thing he could do." Strong vowed that he had found him with razors on the table; but at this, in her turn, Lady Clavering laughed bitterly. "He'll do himself no harm as long as there's a shilling left of which he can rob a poor woman. His life's quite safe, Captain: you may depend upon that. Ah! it was a bad day that ever I set eyes on him."

"He's worse than the first man," cried out my lady's aide-de-camp. "He was a man, he was—a wild devil, but he had the courage of a man—whereas this fellow... what's the use of my lady paying his bills, selling her diamonds, and forgiving him? He'll be as bad again next year. The very next chance he has he'll be cheating her and robbing her; and her money will go to keep a pack of rogues and swindlers—I don't mean you, Captain—you've been a good friend to us enough, bating we wish we'd never set eyes on you."

The Chevalier saw from the words Mrs. Bonner had let slip regarding the diamonds that the kind Begum was disposed to relent once more, and that there were still hopes for his principal.

"Upon my word, ma'am," he said, with a real feeling of sympathy for Lady Clavering's troubles and admiration for her untiring good nature, along with a show of enthusiasm that advanced his graceless patron's cause—"anything you say against Clavering, or Mrs. Bonner here cries out against me, is no better than we deserve, both of us, and it was an unlucky day for you when you saw either. He has behaved cruelly to you, and if you were not the most generous and forgiving woman in the world, I know there would be no chance for him. But you can't let the father of your son be a disgraced man and send little Frank into the world with such a stain upon him. Tie him down; bind him by any promises you like: I vouch for him that he will subscribe them."

"And break 'em," said Mrs. Bonner.

"And keep 'em this time," cried out Strong. "He must keep them. If you could have seen how he wept, ma'am! 'Oh, Strong,' he said to me, 'it's not for myself I feel now: it's for my boy—it's for the best woman in England, whom I have treated basely—I know I have.' He didn't intend to bet upon this race, ma'am—indeed he didn't. He was cheated into it: all the ring was taken in. He thought he might make the bet quite safely, without the least risk. And it will be a lesson to him for all his life long. To see a man cry—oh, it's dreadful."

"He don't think much of making my dear missus cry," said Mrs. Bonner—"poor dear soul!—look if he does, Captain."

"If you've the soul of a man, Clavering," Strong said to his principal when he recounted this scene to him, "you'll keep your promise this time: and, so help me Heaven! if you break word with her, I'll turn against you, and tell all."

"What all?" cried Mr. Francis, to whom his ambassador brought the news back at Short's Hotel, where Strong found the Baronet crying and drinking curacoa.

"Psha! Do you suppose I am a fool?" burst out Strong. "Do you suppose I could have lived so long in the world, Frank Clavering, without having my eyes about me? You know I have but to speak and you are a beggar tomorrow. And I am not the only man who knows your secret."

"Who else does?" gasped Clavering.

"Old Pendennis does, or I am very much mistaken. He recognised the man the first night he saw him, when he came drunk into your house."

"He knows it, does he?" shrieked out Clavering. "Damn him—kill him."

"You'd like to kill us all, wouldn't you, old boy?" said Strong, with a sneer, puffing his cigar.

The Baronet dashed his weak hand against his forehead; perhaps the other had interpreted his wish rightly. "Oh, Strong!" he cried, "if I dared, I'd put an end to myself, for I'm the d——est miserable dog in all England. It's that that makes me so wild and reckless. It's that which makes me take to drink" (and he drank, with a trembling hand, a bumper of his fortifier—the curacoa), "and to live about with these thieves. I know they're thieves, every one of 'em, d——d thieves. And—and how can I help it?—and I didn't know it, you know—and, by Gad, I'm innocent—and until I saw the d——d scoundrel first, I knew no more about it than the dead—and I'll fly, and I'll go abroad out of the reach of the confounded hells, and I'll bury myself in a forest, by Gad! and hang myself up to a tree—and, oh—I'm the most miserable beggar in all England!" And so, with more tears, shrieks, and curses, the impotent wretch vented his grief and deplored his unhappy fate; and, in the midst of groans and despair and blasphemy, vowed his miserable repentance.

The honored proverb which declares that to be an ill wind which blows good to nobody was verified in the case of Sir Francis Clavering, and another of the occupants of Mr. Strong's chambers in Shepherd's Inn. The man was "good," by a lucky hap, with whom Colonel Altamont made his bet; and on the settling day of the Derby—as Captain Clinker, who was appointed to settle Sir Francis Clavering's book for him (for Lady Clavering, by the advice of Major Pendennis, would not allow the Baronet to liquidate his own money transactions), paid over the notes to the Baronet's many creditors—Colonel Altamont had the satisfaction of receiving the odds of thirty to one in fifties, which he had taken against the winning horse of the day.

Numbers of the Colonel's friends were present on the occasion to congratulate him on his luck—all Altamont's own set, and the gents who met in the private parlour of the convivial Wheeler, my host of the Harlequin's Head, came to witness their comrade's good fortune and would have liked, with a generous sympathy for success, to share in it. "Now was the time," Tom Driver had suggested to the Colonel, "to have up the specie ship that was sunk in the Gulf of Mexico, with the three hundred and eighty thousand dollars on board, besides bars and doubloons." "The Tredyddlums were very low—to be bought for an old song—never was such an opportunity for buying shares," Mr. Keightley insinuated; and Jack Holt pressed forward his tobacco-smuggling scheme, the audacity of which pleased the Colonel more than any other of the speculations proposed to him. Then of the Harlequin's Head boys: there was Jack Rackstraw, who knew of a pair of horses the Colonel must buy; Tom Fleet, whose satirical paper, *The Swell*, wanted but two hundred pounds of capital to be worth a thousand a year to any man—"with such a power and influence, Colonel, you rogue, and the entrée of the green-rooms in London," Tom urged; whilst little Moss Abrams entreated the Colonel not to listen to these absurd fellows with their humbugging speculations, but to invest his money in some good bills which Moss could get for him, and which would return him fifty per cent as safe as the Bank of England.

Each and all of these worthies came round the Colonel with their various blandishments; but he had courage enough to resist them, and to button up his notes in the pocket of his coat, and go home to Strong, and "sport" the outer door of the chambers. Honest Strong had given his fellow-lodger good advice about all his acquaintances; and though, when pressed, he did not mind frankly taking twenty pounds himself out of the Colonel's winnings, Strong was a great deal too upright to let others cheat him.

He was not a bad fellow when in good fortune, this Altamont. He ordered a smart livery for Grady, and made poor old Costigan shed tears of quickly dried gratitude by giving him a five-pound note after a snug dinner at the Back Kitchen, and he bought a green shawl for Mrs. Bolton, and a yellow one for Fanny: the most brilliant "sacrifices" of a Regent Street haberdasher's window. And a short time after this, upon her birthday, which happened in the month of June, Miss Amory received from "a friend" a parcel containing an enormous brass inlaid writing-desk, in which there was a set of amethysts, the most hideous eyes ever looked upon,—a musical snuff-box, and two Keepsakes of the year before last, and accompanied with a couple of gown pieces of the most astounding colours, the receipt of which goods made the Sylphide laugh and wonder immoderately. Now it is a fact that Colonel Altamont had made a purchase of cigars
