In Which Pen Begins His Canvass

The great house at Clavering Park, once a monument to melancholy when its bankrupt master fled to foreign shores, had not become significantly cheerier under the tenure of Sir Francis Clavering. The mansion remained largely shuttered, a skeleton of a home where the Baronet occupied only a few ground-floor rooms. Here, his housekeeper and her lodge-gate assistant waited upon the unfortunate gentleman during his forced retreat, cooking portions of the game he spent his dreary mornings shooting. Lightfoot, his former man, had defected to Lady Clavering's service. As Pen learned from a letter from Mr. Smirke—who had officiated at the ceremony—the Baronet had wisely married Mrs. Bonner, Lady Clavering's maid. In her mature years, she was struck by the charms of the youth, endowing him with her savings and her substantial person.

To be both landlord and landlady of the Clavering Arms was the shared ambition of the pair. They agreed to remain in Lady Clavering's employ until quarter-day, when they would take possession of their hotel. Pen graciously promised to hold his election dinner there once the Baronet vacated his seat in the young man's favor. True to his word, Arthur descended upon Clavering Park in September on a visit. The owner, glad to have a companion to relieve his loneliness and perhaps a lender of ready cash, welcomed him warmly.

Pen furnished his host with these desirable supplies two days after Arthur's arrival. No sooner were the small funds in Sir Francis's pocket than the latter found he had business at Chatteris and the neighboring watering-places—of which Shire boasts many—and promptly departed to attend to his affairs, which were transacted, as might be expected, at county race-grounds and billiard-rooms. Arthur could live alone well enough; possessing many mental resources and amusements that did not require company, he walked with the gamekeeper in the mornings and spent evenings with books and cigars, a pastime suitable for a literary genius like Mr. Arthur. In truth, within two or three days, he found Sir Francis Clavering's society perfectly intolerable. With mischievous eagerness and satisfaction, he offered the pecuniary aid the latter customarily solicited, supplying him with the means to flee his own house.

Furthermore, our ingenious friend had to ingratiate himself with the townspeople of Clavering and the voters of the borough he hoped to represent. He set about this task with renewed vigor, remembering how unpopular he had previously been and determined to vanquish the odium he had inspired among the simple folk. His sense of humor delighted him in this endeavor. Naturally reserved and silent in public, he suddenly became as frank, easy, and jovial as Captain Strong. He laughed with everyone willing to exchange a laugh, shook hands with dexterous cordiality, appeared at market-days and farmers' ordinaries, and acted like a consummate hypocrite. Just as gentlemen of the highest birth and most spotless integrity act when wishing to please their constituents for some gain, so did Pen. How is it that we allow ourselves not to be deceived, but are so readily ingratiated by a glib tongue, a ready laugh, and a frank manner? We know, for the most part, that it is false coin, yet we take it; we know it is flattery, costing nothing to distribute to everyone, and we would rather have it than be without it. Friend Pen moved through Clavering, laboriously simple and adroitly pleased, quite a different being from the scornful, sulky young dandy the inhabitants remembered ten years prior.

The Rectory was shut up. Doctor Portman had gone, with his gout and family, to Harrogate—an event Pen deplored deeply in a letter to the Doctor, expressing regret at not seeing his old friend whose advice he needed and whose aid he might require someday. Yet, Pen consoled himself for the Doctor's absence by making acquaintances with Mr. Simcoe, the opposition preacher, and the two partners of the cloth-factory at Chatteris, as well as the Independent preacher there. He met them all at the Clavering Athenaeum, which the Liberal party had established in accordance with the advanced spirit of the age, perhaps in opposition to the aristocratic old reading-room into which the *Edinburgh Review* had scarcely gained admission, and where no tradesmen were allowed entry. He propitiated the younger partner of the cloth-factory by inviting him to dine at the Park; he complimented the Honorable Mrs. Simcoe with hares and partridges from the same quarter and a request to read her husband's last sermon; and when feeling unwell one day, the rascal took advantage of the circumstance to show his tongue to Mr. Huxter, who sent him medicines and called the next morning. How delighted old Pendennis would have been with his pupil! Pen himself was amused by the sport in which he was engaged, and his success inspired him with a wicked good-humor.

Yet, as he walked out of Clavering at night, after "presiding" at an Athenaeum meeting or working through an evening with Mrs. Simcoe—who, along with her husband, was awed by the young Londoner's reputation and had heard of his social successes—as he passed over the old familiar bridge of the rushing Brawl and heard that well-remembered sound of waters beneath, and saw his own cottage of Fairoaks among the trees, their dark outlines clear against the starlit sky, different thoughts undoubtedly came to the young man's mind, awakening pangs of grief and shame. There still used to be a light in the windows of the room he remembered so well, where the Saint who loved him had passed so many hours of care, yearning, and prayer. He turned his gaze away from the faint light which seemed to pursue him with a wan, reproachful stare, as though it was his mother's spirit watching and warning. How clear the night was! How keen the stars shone! How ceaseless the rush of the flowing waters! The old home trees whispered and waved gently their dark heads and branches over the cottage roof. Yonder, in the faint starlight glimmer, was the terrace where, as a boy, he had walked on summer evenings, ardent and trustful, unspotted, untried, ignorant of doubts or passions; sheltered as yet from the world's contamination in the pure and anxious bosom of love. The clock of the near town tolling midnight with a clang disturbed our wanderer's reverie, sending him onward toward his night's resting-place, through the lodge into Clavering Avenue, and under the dark arcades of the rustling limes.

When he saw the cottage the next time, it was smiling in the sunset; those bedroom windows were open where the light had burned the night before. Pen's tenant, Captain Stokes of the Bombay Artillery (whose mother, old Mrs. Stokes, lived in Clavering), received his landlord's visit with great cordiality. He showed him over the grounds and the new pond he had made in the back garden from the stables, talked confidentially about the roof and chimneys, and begged Mr. Pendennis to name a day when he would do himself and Mrs. Stokes the pleasure of visiting. Pen, who had been in the country for a fortnight, excused himself for not calling sooner by frankly admitting he had not the heart to do it. "I understand you, sir," the Captain said. Mrs. Stokes, who had slipped away at the ring of the bell (how odd it seemed to Pen to ring a bell!), came down in her best gown, surrounded by her children. The young ones clambered about Stokes; the boy jumped into an armchair. It was Pen's father's armchair, and Arthur remembered the days when he would as soon have thought of mounting the king's throne as of seating himself in that armchair. He asked if Miss Stokes—she was the very image of her mother—could play? He should like to hear a tune on that piano. She played. He heard the notes of the old piano once more, enfeebled by age, but he did not listen to the player. He was listening to Laura singing as in the days of their youth, and saw his mother bending and beating time over the shoulder of the girl.

The dinner at Fairoaks, given in Pen's honor by his tenant, and attended by old Mrs. Stokes, Captain Glanders, Squire Hobnel, and the clergyman and his lady from Tinckleton, was very stupid and melancholy for Pen. This changed when the waiter from Clavering (who aided the captain's stable-boy and Mrs. Stokes's butler), whom Pen remembered as a street boy and who was now indeed a barber in that place, dropped a plate over Pen's shoulder. Mr. Hobnel, who also employed him, remarked, "I suppose, Hodson, your hands are slippery with bear's-grease. He's always dropping the crockery about, that Hodson is—haw, haw!" On which Hodson blushed and looked so disconcerted that Pen burst out laughing; good-humor and hilarity became the order of the evening. For the second course, there was a hare and partridges, top and bottom. When, after the withdrawal of the servants, Pen said to the Vicar of Tinckleton, "I think, Mr. Stooks, you should have asked Hodson to cut the hare," the joke was taken instantly by the clergyman, who was followed in a few minutes by Captains Stokes and Glanders, and by Mr. Hobnell, who arrived rather late but with an immense guffaw.

While Mr. Pen was engaged in the country with these schemes, it happened that the lady of his choice, if not of his affections, came up to London from the Tunbridge villa bound upon shopping expeditions or important business, accompanied by old Mrs. Bonner, her mother's maid. Mrs. Bonner had lived and quarreled with Blanche many times since she was an infant, and now, being about to quit Lady Clavering's service for the hymeneal state, was anxious like a good soul to bestow some token of respectful kindness upon her old and young mistress before she quitted them altogether to take her post as the wife of Lightfoot and landlady of the Clavering Arms.

The honest woman took the benefit of Miss Amory's taste to make the purchase she intended to offer her ladyship, requesting the fair Blanche to choose something for herself that should be to her liking and remind her of her old nurse who had attended her through many wakeful nights, eventful teething, and childish fevers, and who loved her like a child of her own almost. These purchases were made. As the nurse insisted on buying an immense Bible for Blanche, the young lady suggested that Bonner should purchase a large Johnson's Dictionary for her mother. Each of the two women might certainly profit by the present made to her.

Then Mrs. Bonner invested money in some bargains in linen-drapery, which might be useful at the Clavering Arms, and bought a red and yellow neck-handkerchief, which Blanche could see at once was intended for Mr. Lightfoot. Younger than herself by at least twenty-five years, Mrs. Bonner regarded that youth with a fondness at once parental and conjugal, loving to lavish ornaments on his person, which already glittered with pins, rings, shirt-studs, chains, and seals, purchased at the good creature's expense.

It was in the Strand that Mrs. Bonner made her purchases, aided by Miss Blanche, who liked the fun very well. When the old lady had bought everything she desired and was leaving the shop, Blanche, with a smiling face and a sweet bow to one of the shopmen, said, "Pray, sir, will you have the kindness to show us the way to Shepherd's Inn?"

Shepherd's Inn was but a few score of yards off; Old Castle Street was close by. The elegant young shopman pointed out the turning the young lady was to take, and she and her companion walked off together.

"Shepherd's Inn! What can you want in Shepherd's Inn, Miss Blanche?" Bonner inquired. "Mr. Strong lives there. Do you want to go and see the Captain?"

"I should like to see the Captain very well. I like the Captain; but it is not him I want. I want to see a dear little good girl who was very kind to—to Mr. Arthur when he was so ill last year, and saved his life almost; and I want to thank her and ask her if she would like anything. I looked out several of my dresses on purpose this morning, Bonner!" she said, looking at Bonner as if she had a right to admiration and had performed an act of remarkable virtue. Blanche, indeed, was very fond of sugar-plums; she would have fed the poor upon them when she had had enough, and given a country girl a ball-dress when she had worn it and was tired of it.

"Pretty girl—pretty young woman!" mumbled Mrs. Bonner. "I know I want no pretty young women to come about Lightfoot," and in imagination she peopled the Clavering Arms with a harem of the most hideous chambermaids and barmaids.

Blanche, with pink and blue, feathers, flowers, and trinkets (that wondrous invention, a chatelaine, was not extant yet, or she would have had one, we may be sure), a shot-silk dress, a wonderful mantle, and a charming parasol, presented a vision of elegance and beauty such as bewildered the eyes of Mrs. Bolton, who was scrubbing the lodge-floor of Shepherd's Inn and caused Betsy-Jane and Ameliar-Ann to look with delight.

Blanche looked on them with a smile of ineffable sweetness and protection; like Rowena going to see Rebecca; like Marie Antoinette visiting the poor in the famine; like the Marchioness of Carabas alighting from her carriage-and-four at a pauper-tenant's door and taking from John No II. the packet of Epsom salts for the invalid's benefit, carrying it with her own imperial hand into the sick-room—Blanche felt a queen stepping down from her throne to visit a subject, and enjoyed all the bland consciousness of doing a good action.

"My good woman!
