Upon the platform at Tunbridge, Pen fumed and fretted until the evening train finally lumbered into London, a journey that stretched in his agitated mind from a mere half-hour into six agonizing hours. Yet, even this immense interval dissolved as the train sped on, the London lights blurring into view. A gentleman who had forgotten his carpet-bag in the carriage rushed out, hailed a cab, and barked, "Drive as hard as you can to Jermyn Street!" The cabman, though a hansom driver, accepted the gratuity with a cheerful grin. Pen sprinted up the hotel stairs to Lady Rockminster's apartments.

Laura sat alone in the drawing-room, reading by the lamp with a pale, anxious face. She looked up as Pen burst through the door. *May we follow him?* The great moments of life are often decided in seconds. A single look, a pressure of the hand, or a quiver of the lip can seal one's fate.

Lady Rockminster, having just risen from her after-dinner nap, entered the sitting-room. "Upon my word, young people!" she exclaimed, her attendant casting wondering eyes over her shoulder. The young people were indeed in an attitude; Pen stood in a position every young lady who reads this has heard tell of, or seen, or hoped to see.

Directly he entered, Pen rushed to Laura, whose pale face hadn't yet registered the question, *What, back so soon?* Seizing her outstretched, trembling hand just as she rose from her chair, he fell to his knees before her and cried, "I have seen her. She has engaged herself to Harry Foker—and—and Now, Laura?"

The hand gave a pressure; the eyes beamed a reply; the quivering lips answered, though speechless. Pen's head sank into the girl's lap as he sobbed, "Come and bless us, dear mother," and arms as tender as Helen's once more enfolded him.

It was in this dramatic juncture that Lady Rockminster appeared, saying, "Upon my word, young people! Beck! leave the room. What do you want poking your nose in here?"

Pen sprang up with looks of triumph, still clutching Laura's hand. "She is consoling me for my misfortune, ma'am," he declared.

"What do you mean by kissing her hand? I don't know what you will be next doing."

Pen kissed her Ladyship's hand. "I have been to Tunbridge," he said, adopting a tragic air, "and seen Miss Amory; and find on my arrival that—that a villain has transplanted me in her affections."

"Is that all? Is that what you were whimpering on your knees about?" the old lady asked, growing angry. "You might have kept the news till tomorrow."

"Yes—another has superseded me," Pen continued. "But why call him a villain? He is brave, he is constant, he is young, he is wealthy, he is beautiful."

"What stuff are you talking, sir?" cried the old lady. "What has happened?"

"Miss Amory has jilted me, and accepted Henry Foker, Esq. I found her warbling ditties to him as he lay at her feet; presents had been accepted, vows exchanged, these ten days. Harry was old Mrs. Planter's rheumatism, which kept dearest Laura out of the house. He is the most constant and generous of men. He has promised the living of Logwood to Lady Ann's husband, and given her a splendid present on her marriage; and he rushed to fling himself at Blanche's feet the instant he found he was free."

"And so, as you can't get Blanche, you put up with Laura; is that it, sir?" asked the old lady.

"He acted nobly," Laura said softly.

"I acted as she bade me," Pen replied. "Never mind how, Lady Rockminster; but to the best of my knowledge and power. And if you mean that I am not worthy of Laura, I know it, and pray Heaven to better me; and if the love and company of the best and purest creature in the world can do so, at least I shall have these to help me."

"Hm, hm," replied the old lady, looking with a rather appeased air at the young people. "It is all very well; but I should have preferred Bluebeard."

To divert the conversation from a theme growing painful to some, Pen bethought himself of his interview with Huxter in the morning and Fanny Bolton's affairs, which he had forgotten under the immediate pressure of his own excitement. He told the ladies how Huxter had elevated Fanny to the rank of wife and the terrors he faced regarding his father's arrival. He described the scene with considerable humor, dwelling especially on Fanny's coquetry and irrepressible desire to captivate mankind. His meaning was clear: *You see, Laura, I was not so guilty in that little affair; it was the girl who made love to me, and I who resisted. As I am no longer present, the little siren practices her arts upon others. Let that transaction be forgotten in your mind, if you please; or visit me with a very gentle punishment for my error.*

Laura understood his meaning under the eagerness of his explanations. "If you did any wrong, you repented, dear Pen," she said. "And you know," she added, with meaning eyes and blushes, "that I have no right to reproach you."

"Hm!" grumbled the old lady. "I should have preferred Bluebeard."

"The past is broken away. The morrow is before us. I will do my best to make your morrow happy, dear Laura," Pen said. His heart was humbled by the prospect of his happiness; it stood awestruck in the contemplation of her sweet goodness and purity. He liked his wife better that she had owned to that passing feeling for Warrington and laid bare her generous heart to him. And she—very likely thinking, *How strange it is that I ever should have cared for another! I am vexed almost to think I care for him so little, am so little sorry that he is gone away. Oh, in these past two months how I have learned to love Arthur! I care about nothing but Arthur: my waking and sleeping thoughts are about him; he is never absent from me. And to think that he is to be mine, mine! and that I am to marry him, and not to be his servant as I expected to be only this morning; for I would have gone down on my knees to Blanche to beg her to let me live with him. And now—Oh, it is too much. Oh, mother! mother, that you were here!* Indeed, she felt as if Helen were there—by her actually, though invisibly. A halo of happiness beamed from her.

She moved with a different step and bloomed with a new beauty. Arthur saw the change; and the old Lady Rockminster remarked it with her shrewd eyes.

"What a sly demure little wretch you have been," she whispered to Laura—while Pen, in great spirits, was laughing and telling his story about Huxter—"and how you have kept your secret!"

"How are we to help the young couple?" said Laura. Of course Miss Laura felt an interest in all young couples, as generous lovers always love other lovers.

"We must go and see them," said Pen.

"Of course we must go and see them," said Laura. "I intend to be very fond of Fanny. Let us go this instant. Lady Rockminster, may I have the carriage?"

"Go now!—why, you stupid creature, it is eleven o'clock at night. Mr. and Mrs. Huxter have got their nightcaps on, I dare say. And it is time for you to go now. Good night, Mr. Pendennis."

Arthur and Laura begged for ten minutes more.

"We will go to-morrow morning, then. I will come and fetch you with Martha."

"An earl's coronet," said Pen, who, no doubt, was pleased himself, "will have a great effect in Lamb Court and Smithfield. Stay—Lady Rockminster, will you join us in a little conspiracy?"

"How do you mean conspiracy, young man?"

"Will you please to be a little ill to-morrow; and when old Mr. Huxter arrives, will you let me call him in? If he is put into a good humour at the notion of attending a baronet in the country, what influence won't a countess have on him? When he is softened—when he is quite ripe, we will break the secret upon him; bring in the young people, extort the paternal benediction, and finish the comedy."

"A parcel of stuff," said the old lady. "Take your hat, sir. Come away, miss. There—my head is turned another way. Good night, young people." And who knows but the old lady thought of her own early days as she went away on Laura's arm, nodding her head and humming to herself?

With the early morning came Laura and Martha according to appointment; and the desired sensation was, let us hope, effected in Lamb Court, whence the three proceeded to wait upon Mr. and Mrs. Samuel Huxter, at their residence in Charterhouse Lane.

The two ladies looked at each other with great interest, and not a little emotion on Fanny's part. She had not seen her "guardian," as she was pleased to call Pen in consequence of his bequest, since the event had occurred which had united her to Mr. Huxter.

"Samuel told me how kind you had been," she said. "You were always very kind, Mr. Pendennis. And—and I hope your friend is better, who was took ill in Shepherd's Inn, ma'am."

"My name is Laura," said the other, with a blush. "I am—that is, I was—that is, I am Arthur's sister; and we shall always love you for being so good to him when he was ill. And when we live in the country, I hope we shall see each other. And I shall be always happy to hear of your happiness, Fanny."

"We are going to do what you and Huxter have done, Fanny.—Where is Huxter? What nice, snug lodgings you've got! What a pretty cat!"

While Fanny answered these questions in reply to Pen, Laura said to herself—*Well, now really! is this the creature about whom we were all so frightened? What could he see in her? She's a homely little thing, but such manners! Well, she was very kind to him,—bless her for that.*

Mr. Samuel had gone out to meet his Pa. Mrs. Huxter said that the old gentleman was to arrive that day at the Somerset Coffee-house, in the Strand; and Fanny confessed that she was in a sad tremor about the meeting. "If his parent casts him off, what are we to do?" she said. "I shall never pardon myself for bringing ruin on my husband's head. You must intercede for us, Mr. Arthur. If mortal man can, you can bend and influence Mr. Huxter senior." Fanny still regarded Pen in the light of a superior being, that was evident. No doubt Arthur thought of the past, as he marked the solemn little tragedy-airs and looks, the little ways, the little trepidations, vanities, of the little bride.

As soon as the interview was over, entered Messrs. Linton and Blades, who came, of course, to visit Huxter, and brought with them a fine fragrance of tobacco. They had watched the carriage at the baker's door and remarked the coronet with awe. They asked of Fanny who was that uncommonly heavy swell who had just driven off? and pronounced the countess was of the right sort. And when they heard that it was Mr. Pendennis and his sister, they remarked that Pen's father was only a sawbones; and that he gave himself confounded airs; they had been in Huxter's company on the night of his little altercation with Pen in the Back Kitchen.

Returning homewards through Fleet Street, and as Laura was just stating to Pen's infinite amusement that Fanny was very well, but that really there was no beauty in her,—there might be, but she could not see it,—as they were locked near Temple Bar, they saw young Huxter returning to his bride. "The governor had arrived; was at the Somerset Coffee-house—was in tolerable good-humour—something about the railway: but he had been afraid to speak about—about that business. Would Mr. Pendennis try it on?"

Pen said he would go and call at that moment upon Mr. Huxter, and see what might be done. Huxter junior would lurk outside whilst that awful interview took place. The coronet on the carriage inspired his soul also with wonder; and old Mr. Huxter himself beheld it with delight, as he looked from the coffee-house window on that Strand which it was always a treat to him to survey.

"And I can afford to give myself a lark, sir," said Mr. Huxter, shaking hands with Pen. "Of course you know the news? we have got our bill, sir. We shall have our branch line—our shares are up, sir—and we buy your three fields along the Brawl, and put a pretty penny into your pocket, Mr. Pendennis."

"Indeed!—that was good news." Pen remembered that there was a letter from Mr. Tatham, at Chambers, these three days; but he had not opened the communication, being interested with other affairs.

"I hope you don't intend to grow rich, and give up practice," said Pen. "We can't lose you at Clavering, Mr. Huxter; though I hear very good accounts of your son. My friend, Dr. Goodenough speaks most highly of his talents. It is hard that a man of your eminence, though, should be kept in a country town."

"The metropolis would have been my sphere of action, sir," said Mr. Huxter, surveying the Strand. "But a man takes
