CHAPTER LXXVIII. Pyramus and Thisbe


In examining the old papers at home, years afterwards, I found, docketed
and labelled with my mother's well-known neat handwriting, “From London,
April, 1760. My son's dreadful letter.” When it came to be mine I
burnt the document, not choosing that that story of domestic grief and
disunion should remain amongst our family annals for future Warringtons
to gaze on, mayhap, and disobedient sons to hold up as examples of
foregone domestic rebellions. For similar reasons, I have destroyed the
paper which my mother despatched to me at this time of tyranny, revolt,
annoyance, and irritation.

Maddened by the pangs of separation from my mistress, and not unrightly
considering that Mrs. Esmond was the prime cause of the greatest grief
and misery which had ever befallen me in the world, I wrote home to
Virginia a letter, which might have been more temperate, it is true, but
in which I endeavoured to maintain the extremest respect and reticence.
I said I did not know by what motives she had been influenced, but that
I held her answerable for the misery of my future life, which she
had chosen wilfully to mar and render wretched. She had occasioned a
separation between me and a virtuous and innocent young creature,
whose own hopes, health, and happiness were cast down for ever by Mrs.
Esmond's interference. The deed was done, as I feared, and I would offer
no comment upon the conduct of the perpetrator, who was answerable to
God alone; but I did not disguise from my mother that the injury which
she had done me was so dreadful and mortal, that her life or mine could
never repair it; that the tie of my allegiance was broken towards her,
and that I never could be, as heretofore, her dutiful and respectful
son.

Madam Esmond replied to me in a letter of very great dignity (her style
and correspondence were extraordinarily elegant and fine). She uttered
not a single reproach or hard word, but coldly gave me to understand
that it was before that awful tribunal of God she had referred the case
between us, and asked for counsel; that, in respect of her own conduct,
as a mother, she was ready, in all humility, to face it. Might I, as a
son, be equally able to answer for myself, and to show, when the Great
Judge demanded the question of me, whether I had done my own duty, and
honoured my father and mother! O popoi! My grandfather has quoted in his
memoir a line of Homer, showing how in our troubles and griefs the
gods are always called in question. When our pride, our avarice, our
interest, our desire to domineer, are worked upon, are we not for
ever pestering Heaven to decide in their favour? In our great American
quarrel, did we not on both sides appeal to the skies as to the
justice of our causes, sing Te Deum for victory, and boldly express our
confidence that the right should prevail? Was America right because
she was victorious? Then I suppose Poland was wrong because she was
defeated?--How am I wandering into this digression about Poland,
America, and what not, and all the while thinking of a little woman now
no more, who appealed to Heaven and confronted it with a thousand texts
out of its own book, because her son wanted to make a marriage not of
her liking? We appeal, we imprecate, we go down on our knees, we demand
blessings, we shriek out for sentence according to law; the great course
of the great world moves on; we pant, and strive, and struggle; we hate;
we rage; we weep passionate tears; we reconcile; we race and win; we
race and lose; we pass away, and other little strugglers succeed; our
days are spent; our night comes, and another morning rises, which shines
on us no more.

My letter to Madam Esmond, announcing my revolt and disobedience
(perhaps I myself was a little proud of the composition of that
document), I showed in duplicate to Mr. Lambert, because I wished him
to understand what my relations to my mother were, and how I was
determined, whatever of threats or quarrels the future might bring,
never for my own part to consider my separation from Theo as other than
a forced one. Whenever I could see her again I would. My word given
to her was in secula seculorum, or binding at least as long as my life
should endure. I implied that the girl was similarly bound to me, and
her poor father knew indeed as much. He might separate us; as he might
give her a dose of poison, and the gentle, obedient creature would take
it and die; but the death or separation would be his doing: let him
answer them. Now he was tender about his children to weakness, and could
not have the heart to submit any one of them--this one especially--to
torture. We had tried to part: we could not. He had endeavoured to
separate us: it was more than was in his power. The bars were up, but
the young couple--the maid within and the knight without--were loving
each other all the same. The wall was built, but Pyramus and Thisbe were
whispering on either side. In the midst of all his grief and perplexity,
Uncle Lambert had plenty of humour, and could not but see that his role
was rather a sorry one. Light was beginning to show through that lime
and rough plaster of the wall: the lovers were getting their hands
through, then their heads through--indeed, it was wall's best business
to retire.

I forget what happened stage by stage and day by day; nor, for the
instruction of future ages, does it much matter. When my descendants
have love scrapes of their own, they will find their own means of
getting out of them. I believe I did not go back to Dean Street, but
that practice of driving in the open air was considered most healthful
for Miss Lambert. I got a fine horse, and rode by the side of her
carriage. The old woman at Tottenham Court came to know both of us quite
well, and nod and wink in the most friendly manner when we passed by.
I fancy the old goody was not unaccustomed to interest herself in young
couples, and has dispensed the hospitality of her roadside cottage to
more than one pair.

The doctor and the country air effected a prodigious cure upon Miss
Lambert. Hetty always attended as duenna, and sometimes of his holiday,
Master Charley rode my horse when I got into the carriage. What a deal
of love-making Miss Hetty heard!--with what exemplary patience she
listened to it! I do not say she went to hear the Methodist sermons any
more, but 'tis certain that when we had a closed carriage she would very
kindly and considerately look out of the window. Then, what heaps of
letters there were!--what running to and fro! Gumbo's bandy legs were
for ever on the trot from my quarters to Dean Street; and, on my account
or her own, Mrs. Molly, the girl's maid, was for ever bringing back
answers to Bloomsbury. By the time when the autumn leaves began to turn
pale, Miss Theo's roses were in full bloom again, and my good Doctor
Heberden's cure was pronounced to be complete. What else happened during
this blessed period? Mr. Warrington completed his great tragedy of
Pocahontas, which was not only accepted by Mr. Garrick this time (his
friend Dr. Johnson having spoken not unfavourably of the work), but my
friend and cousin, Hagan, was engaged by the manager to perform the part
of the hero, Captain Smith. Hagan's engagement was not made before it
was wanted. I had helped him and his family with means disproportioned,
perhaps, to my power, especially considering my feud with Madam Esmond,
whose answer to my angry missive of April came to me towards autumn,
and who wrote back from Virginia with war for war, controlment for
controlment. These menaces, however, frightened me little: my poor
mother's thunder could not reach me; and my conscience, or casuistry,
supplied me with other interpretations for her texts of Scripture, so
that her oracles had not the least weight with me in frightening me from
my purpose. How my new loves speeded I neither informed her, nor any
other members of my maternal or paternal family, who, on both sides, had
been bitter against my marriage. Of what use wrangling with them? It was
better to carpere diem and its sweet loves and pleasures, and to leave
the railers to grumble, or the seniors to advise, at their ease.

Besides Madam Esmond I had, it must be owned, in the frantic rage of my
temporary separation, addressed notes of wondrous sarcasm to my Uncle
Warrington, to my Aunt Madame de Bernstein, and to my Lord or Lady
of Castlewood (I forget to which individually), thanking them for the
trouble which they had taken in preventing the dearest happiness of my
life, and promising them a corresponding gratitude from their obliged
relative. Business brought the jovial Baronet and his family to London
somewhat earlier than usual, and Madame de Bernstein was never sorry
to get back to Clarges Street and her cards. I saw them. They found me
perfectly well. They concluded the match was broken off, and I did not
choose to undeceive them. The Baroness took heart at seeing how cheerful
I was, and made many sly jokes about my philosophy, and my prudent
behaviour as a man of the world. She was, as ever, bent upon finding a
rich match for me: and I fear I paid many compliments at her house to
a rich young soap-boiler's daughter from Mile End, whom the worthy
Baroness wished to place in my arms.

“You court her with infinite wit and esprit, my dear,” says my pleased
kinswoman, “but she does not understand half you say, and the other
half, I think, frightens her. This ton de persiflage is very well in our
society, but you must be sparing of it, my dear nephew, amongst these
roturiers.”

Miss Badge married a young gentleman of royal dignity, though shattered
fortunes, from a neighbouring island; and I trust Mrs. Mackshane has
ere this pardoned my levity. There was another person besides Miss at my
aunt's house, who did not understand my persiflage much better than Miss
herself; and that was a lady who had seen James the Second's reign, and
who was alive and as worldly as ever in King George's. I loved to be
with her: but that my little folks have access to this volume, I could
put down a hundred stories of the great old folks whom she had known in
the great old days--of George the First and his ladies, of St. John and
Marlborough, of his reigning Majesty and the late Prince of Wales, and
the causes of the quarrel between them--but my modest muse pipes for
boys and virgins. Son Miles does not care about court stories, or if he
doth, has a fresh budget from Carlton House, quite as bad as the worst
of our old Baroness. No, my dear wife, thou hast no need to shake thy
powdered locks at me! Papa is not going to scandalise his nursery with
old-world gossip, nor bring a blush over our chaste bread-and-butter.

But this piece of scandal I cannot help. My aunt used to tell it with
infinite gusto; for, to do her justice, she hated your would-be good
people, and sniggered over the faults of the self-styled righteous with
uncommon satisfaction. In her later days she had no hypocrisy, at least;
and in so far was better than some whitewashed... Well, to the story.
My Lady Warrington, one of the tallest and the most virtuous of her sex,
who had goodness for ever on her lips and “Heaven in her eye,” like the
woman in Mr. Addison's tedious tragedy (which has kept the stage, from
which some others, which shall be nameless, have disappeared), had the
world in her other eye, and an exceedingly shrewd desire of pushing
herself in it. What does she do, when my marriage with your ladyship
yonder was supposed to be broken off, but attempt to play off on me
those arts which she had tried on my poor Harry with such signal ill
success, and which failed with me likewise! It was not the Beauty--Miss
Flora was for my master--(and what a master! I protest I take off my hat
at the idea of such an illustrious connexion!)--it was Dora, the Muse,
was set upon me to languish at me and to pity me, and to read even my
godless tragedy, and applaud me and console me. Meanwhile, how was the
Beauty occupied? Will it be believed that my severe aunt gave a great
entertainment to my Lady Yarmouth, presented her boy to her, and placed
poor little Miles under her ladyship's august protection? That, so
far, is certain; but can it be that she sent her daughter to stay at my
lady's house, which our gracious lord and master daily visited, and with
the views which old Aunt Bernstein attributed to her? “But for that
fit of apoplexy, my dear,” Bernstein said, “that aunt of yours intended
there should have been a Countess in her own right in the Warrington
family!” [Compare Walpole's letters in Mr. Cunningham's excellent new
edition. See the story of the supper at N. House, to show what great
noblemen would do for a king's mistress, and the pleasant account of
the waiting for the Prince of Wales before Holland House.-EDITOR.] My
neighbour and kinswoman, my Lady Claypole, is dead and buried. Grow
white, ye daisies, upon Flora's tomb! I can see my pretty Miles, in a
gay little uniform of the Norfolk Militia, led up by his parent to the
lady whom the King delighted to honour, and the good-natured old Jezebel
laying her hand upon the boy's curly pate. I am accused of being but a
lukewarm royalist; but sure I can contrast those times with ours, and
acknowledge the difference between the late sovereign and the present,
who, born a Briton, has given to every family in the empire an example
of decorum and virtuous life. [The Warrington MS. is dated 1793.-ED.]

Thus my life sped in the pleasantest of all occupation; and, being so
happy myself, I could afford to be reconciled to those who, after all,
had done me no injury, but rather added to the zest of my happiness by
the brief obstacle which they had placed in my way. No specific plans
were formed, but Theo and I knew that a day would come when we need
say Farewell no more. Should the day befall a year hence--ten years
hence--we were ready to wait. Day after day we discussed our little
plans, with Hetty for our confidante. On our drives we spied out pretty
cottages that we thought might suit young people of small means; we
devised all sorts of delightful schemes and childish economies. We were
Strephon and Chloe to be sure. A cot and a brown loaf should content us!
Gumbo and Molly should wait upon us (as indeed they have done from that
day until this). At twenty, who is afraid of being poor? Our trials
would only confirm our attachment. The “sweet sorrow” of every day's
parting but made the morrow's meeting more delightful; and when we
separated we ran home and wrote each other those precious letters which
we and other young gentlemen and ladies write under such circumstances;
but though my wife has them all in a great tin sugar-box in the closet
in her bedroom, and, I own, I myself have looked at them once, and even
thought some of them pretty,--I hereby desire my heirs and executors
to burn them all, unread, at our demise; specially desiring my son the
Captain (to whom I know the perusal of MSS. is not pleasant) to perform
this duty. Those secrets whispered to the penny-post, or delivered
between Molly and Gumbo, were intended for us alone, and no ears of our
descendants shall overhear them.

We heard in successive brief letters how our dear Harry continued with
the army, as Mr. General Amherst's aide-de-camp, after the death of his
own glorious general. By the middle of October there came news of the
Capitulation of Montreal and the whole of Canada, and a brief postscript
in which Hal said he would ask for leave now, and must go and see the
old lady at home, who wrote as sulky as a bare, Captain Warrington
remarked. I could guess why, though the claws could not reach me. I had
written pretty fully to my brother how affairs were standing with me in
England.

Then, on the 25th October, comes the news that his Majesty has fallen
down dead at Kensington, and that George III. reigned over us. I fear we
grieved but little. What do those care for the Atridae whose hearts are
strung only to erota mounon? A modest, handsome, brave new Prince, we
gladly accept the common report that he is endowed with every virtue;
and we cry huzzay with the loyal crowd that hails his accession:
it could make little difference to us, as we thought, simple young
sweethearts, whispering our little love-stories in our corner.

But who can say how great events affect him? Did not our little Charley,
at the Chartreux, wish impiously for a new king immediately, because on
his gracious Majesty's accession Doctor Crusius gave his boys a holiday?
He and I, and Hetty, and Theo (Miss Theo was strong enough to walk
many a delightful mile now), heard the Heralds proclaim his new Majesty
before Savile House in Leicester Fields, and a pickpocket got the watch
and chain of a gentleman hard by us, and was caught and carried to
Bridewell, all on account of his Majesty's accession. Had the king not
died, the gentleman would not have been in the crowd; the chain would
not have been seized; the thief would not have been caught and soundly
whipped: in this way many of us, more or less remotely, were implicated
in the great change which ensued, and even we humble folks were affected
by it presently.

As thus. My Lord Wrotham was a great friend of the august family of
Savile House, who knew and esteemed his many virtues. Now, of all
living men, my Lord Wrotham knew and loved best his neighbour and old
fellow-soldier, Martin Lambert, declaring that the world contained few
better gentlemen. And my Lord Bute, being all potent, at first, with his
Majesty, and a nobleman, as I believe, very eager at the commencement of
his brief and luckless tenure of power, to patronise merit wherever he
could find it, was strongly prejudiced in Mr. Lambert's favour by the
latter's old and constant friend.

My (and Harry's) old friend Parson Sampson, who had been in and out
of gaol I don't know how many times of late years, and retained an
ever-enduring hatred for the Esmonds of Castlewood, and as lasting a
regard for me and my brother, was occupying poor Hal's vacant bed at
my lodgings at this time (being, in truth, hunted out of his own by
the bailiffs). I liked to have Sampson near me, for a more amusing
Jack-friar never walked in cassock; and, besides, he entered into all my
rhapsodies about Miss Theo; was never tired (so he vowed) of hearing
me talk of her; admired Pocahontas and Carpezan with, I do believe, an
honest enthusiasm; and could repeat whole passages of those tragedies
with an emphasis and effect that Barry or cousin Hagan himself could not
surpass. Sampson was the go-between between Lady Maria and such of her
relations as had not disowned her; and, always in debt himself, was
never more happy than in drinking a pot, or mingling his tears with his
friends in similar poverty. His acquaintance with pawnbrokers' shops was
prodigious. He could procure more money, he boasted, on an article than
any gentleman of his cloth. He never paid his own debts, to be sure,
but he was ready to forgive his debtors. Poor as he was, he always found
means to love and help his needy little sister, and a more prodigal,
kindly, amiable rogue never probably grinned behind bars. They say that
I love to have parasites about me. I own to have had a great liking for
Sampson, and to have esteemed him much better than probably much better
men.

When he heard how my Lord Bute was admitted into the cabinet, Sampson
vowed and declared that his lordship--a great lover of the drama, who
had been to see Carpezan, who had admired it, and who would act the part
of the king very finely in it--he vowed, by George! that my lord must
give me a place worthy of my birth and merits. He insisted upon it that
I should attend his lordship's levee. I wouldn't? The Esmonds were all
as proud as Lucifer; and, to be sure, my birth was as good as that of
any man in Europe. Demmy! Where was my lord himself when the Esmonds
were lords of great counties, warriors, and Crusaders? Where were they?
Beggarly Scotchmen, without a rag to their backs--by George! tearing
raw fish in their islands. But now the times were changed. The Scotchmen
were in luck. Mum's the word! “I don't envy him,” says Sampson, “but he
shall provide for you and my dearest, noblest, heroic captain! He SHALL,
by George!” would my worthy parson roar out. And when, in the month
after his accession, his Majesty ordered the play of Richard III. at
Drury Lane, my chaplain cursed, vowed, swore, but he would have him to
Covent Garden to see Carpezan too. And now, one morning, he bursts into
my apartment, where I happened to lie rather late, waving the newspaper
in his hand, and singing “Huzza!” with all his might.

“What is it, Sampson?” says I. “Has my brother got his promotion?”

“No, in truth: but some one else has. Huzzay! huzzay! His Majesty
has appointed Major-General Martin Lambert to be Governor and
Commander-in-Chief of the Island of Jamaica.”

I started up. Here was news, indeed! Mr. Lambert would go to his
government: and who would go with him? I had been supping with some
genteel young fellows at the Cocoa-Tree. The rascal Gumbo had a note for
me from my dear mistress on the night previous, conveying the same news
to me, and had delayed to deliver it. Theo begged me to see her at the
old place at midday the next day without fail. [In the Warrington
MS. there is not a word to say what the “old place” was. Perhaps some
obliging reader of Notes and Queries will be able to inform me, and who
Mrs. Goodison was.-ED.]

There was no little trepidation in our little council when we reached
our place of meeting. Papa had announced his acceptance of the
appointment, and his speedy departure. He would have a frigate given
him, and take his family with him. Merciful powers! and were we to be
parted? My Theo's old deathly paleness returned to her. Aunt Lambert
thought she would have swooned; one of Mrs. Goodison's girls had a
bottle of salts, and ran up with it from the workroom. “Going away?
Going away in a frigate, Aunt Lambert? Going to tear her away from me?
Great God! Aunt Lambert, I shall die!” She was better when mamma came
up from the workroom with the young lady's bottle of salts. You see the
women used to meet me: knowing dear Theo's delicate state, how could
they refrain from compassionating her! But the General was so busy
with his levees and his waiting on Ministers, and his outfit, and the
settlement of his affairs at home, that they never happened to tell him
about our little walks and meetings; and even when orders for the outfit
of the ladies were given, Mrs. Goodison, who had known and worked
for Miss Molly Benson as a schoolgirl (she remembered Miss Esmond of
Virginia perfectly, the worthy lady told me, and a dress she made for
the young lady to be presented at her Majesty's Ball)--“even when the
outfit was ordered for the three ladies,” says Mrs. Goodison, demurely,
“why, I thought I could do no harm in completing the order.”

Now I need not say in what perturbation of mind Mr. Warrington went home
in the evening to his lodgings, after the discussion with the ladies of
the above news. No, or at least a very few, more walks; no more rides to
dear, dear Hampstead or beloved Islington; no more fetching and carrying
of letters for Gumbo and Molly! The former blubbered so, that Mr.
Warrington was quite touched by his fidelity, and gave him a crown-piece
to go to supper with the poor girl, who turned out to be his sweetheart.
What, you too unhappy, Gumbo, and torn from the maid you love? I was
ready to mingle with him tear for tear.

What a solemn conference I had with Sampson that evening! He knew my
affairs, my expectations, my mother's anger. Psha! that was far off, and
he knew some excellent liberal people (of the order of Melchizedek)
who would discount the other. The General would not give his consent?
Sampson shrugged his broad shoulders and swore a great roaring oath. My
mother would not relent? What then? A man was a man, and to make his
own way in the world? he supposed. He is only a churl who won't play for
such a stake as that, and lose or win, by George! shouts the chaplain,
over a bottle of Burgundy at the Bedford Head, where he dined. I need
not put down our conversation. We were two of us, and I think there was
only one mind between us. Our talk was of a Saturday night....

I did not tell Theo, nor any relative of hers, what was being done.
But when the dear child faltered and talked, trembling, of the
coming departure, I bade her bear up, and vowed all would be well, so
confidently, that she, who ever has taken her alarms and joys from my
face (I wish, my dear, it were sometimes not so gloomy), could not but
feel confidence; and placed (with many fond words that need not here be
repeated) her entire trust in me--murmuring those sweet words of Ruth
that must have comforted myriads of tender hearts in my dearest maiden's
plight; that whither I would go she would go, and that my people should
be hers. At last, one day, the General's preparations being made, the
trunks encumbering the passages of the dear old Dean Street lodging,
which I shall love as long as I shall remember at all--one day, almost
the last of his stay, when the good man (his Excellency we called him
now) came home to his dinner--a comfortless meal enough it was in the
present condition of the family--he looked round the table at the place
where I had used to sit in happy old days, and sighed out: “I wish,
Molly, George was here.”

“Do you, Martin?” says Aunt Lambert, flinging into his arms.

“Yes, I do; but I don't wish you to choke me, Molly,” he says. “I love
him dearly. I may go away and never see him again, and take his foolish
little sweetheart along with me. I suppose you will write to each other,
children? I can't prevent that, you know; and until he changes his mind,
I suppose Miss Theo won't obey papa's orders, and get him out of her
foolish little head. Wilt thou, Theo?”

“No, dearest, dearest, best papa!”

“What! more embraces and kisses! What does all this mean?”

“It means that--that George is in the drawing-room,” says mamma.

“Is he! My dearest boy!” cries the General. “Come to me--come in!” And
when I entered he held me to his heart, and kissed me.

I confess at this I was so overcome that I fell down on my knees before
the dear, good man, and sobbed on his own.

“God bless you, my dearest boy!” he mutters hurriedly. “Always loved you
as a son--haven't I, Molly? Broke my heart nearly when I quarrelled with
you about this little--What!--odds marrowbones!--all down on your knees!
Mrs. Lambert, pray what is the meaning of all this?”

“Dearest, dearest papa! I will go with you all the same!” whimpers one
of the kneeling party. “And I will wait--oh!--as long as ever my dearest
father wants me!”

“In Heaven's name!” roars the General, “tell me what has happened?”

What had happened was, that George Esmond Warrington and Theodosia
Lambert had been married in Southwark that morning, their banns having
been duly called in the church of a certain friend of the Reverend Mr.
Sampson.
