CHAPTER LXXIX. Containing both Comedy and Tragedy


We, who had been active in the guilty scene of the morning, felt trebly
guilty when we saw the effect which our conduct had produced upon him,
who, of all others, we loved and respected. The shock to the good man
was strange, and pitiful to us to witness who had administered it. The
child of his heart had deceived and disobeyed him--I declare I think, my
dear, now, we would not or could not do it over again; his whole family
had entered into a league against him. Dear, kind friend and father!
We know thou hast pardoned our wrong--in the Heaven where thou dwellest
amongst purified spirits who learned on earth how to love and pardon! To
love and forgive were easy duties with that man. Beneficence was natural
to him, and a sweet, smiling humility; and to wound either was to be
savage and brutal, as to torture a child, or strike blows at a nursing
woman. The deed done, all we guilty ones grovelled in the earth, before
the man we had injured. I pass over the scenes of forgiveness, of
reconciliation, of common worship together, of final separation when the
good man departed to his government, and the ship sailed away before us,
leaving me and Theo on the shore. We stood there hand in hand, horribly
abashed, silent, and guilty. My wife did not come to me till her father
went: in the interval between the ceremony of our marriage and his
departure, she had remained at home, occupying her old place by her
father, and bed by her sister's side: he as kind as ever, but the women
almost speechless among themselves; Aunt Lambert, for once, unkind
and fretful in her temper; and little Hetty feverish and strange, and
saying, “I wish we were gone. I wish we were gone.” Though admitted to
the house, and forgiven, I slunk away during those last days, and only
saw my wife for a minute or two in the street, or with her family. She
was not mine till they were gone. We went to Winchester and Hampton
for what may be called our wedding. It was but a dismal business. For a
while we felt utterly lonely: and of our dear father as if we had buried
him, or drove him to the grave by our undutifulness.

I made Sampson announce our marriage in the papers. (My wife used to
hang down her head before the poor fellow afterwards.) I took Mrs.
Warrington back to my old lodgings in Bloomsbury, where there was plenty
of room for us, and our modest married life began. I wrote home a letter
to my mother in Virginia, informing her of no particulars, but only
that Mr. Lambert being about to depart for his government, I considered
myself bound in honour to fulfil my promise towards his dearest
daughter; and stated that I intended to carry out my intention of
completing my studies for the Bar, and qualifying myself for employment
at home, or in our own or any other colony. My good Mrs. Mountain
answered this letter, by desire of Madam Esmond, she said, who thought
that for the sake of peace my communications had best be conducted
that way. I found my relatives in a fury which was perfectly amusing
to witness. The butler's face, as he said, “Not at home,” at my uncle's
house in Hill Street, was a blank tragedy that might have been studied
by Garrick when he sees Banque. My poor little wife was on my arm, and
we were tripping away, laughing at the fellow's accueil, when we came
upon my lady in a street stoppage in her chair. I took off my hat and
made her the lowest possible bow. I affectionately asked after my dear
cousins. “I--I wonder you dare look me in the face!” Lady Warrington
gasped out. “Nay, don't deprive me of that precious privilege!” says I.
“Move on, Peter,” she screams to her chairman. “Your ladyship would not
impale your own husband's flesh and blood!” says I. She rattles up
the glass of her chair in a fury. I kiss my hand, take off my hat, and
perform another of my very finest bows.

Walking shortly afterwards in Hyde Park with my dearest companion, I
met my little cousin exercising on horseback with a groom behind him. As
soon as he sees us, he gallops up to us, the groom powdering afterwards
and bawling out, “Stop, Master Miles, stop!”

“I am not to speak to my cousin,” says Miles, “but telling you to send
my love to Harry is not speaking to you, is it? Is that my new
cousin? I'm not told not to speak to her. I'm Miles, cousin, Sir Miles
Warrington Baronet's son, and you are very pretty!” “Now, duee now,
Master Miles,” says the groom, touching his hat to us; and the boy
trots away laughing and looking at us over his shoulder. “You see how
my relations have determined to treat me,” I say to my partner. “As if
I married you for your relations!” says Theo, her eyes beaming joy
and love into mine. Ah, how happy we were! how brisk and pleasant the
winter! How snug the kettle by the fire (where the abashed Sampson
sometimes came and made the punch); how delightful the night at the
theatre, for which our friends brought us tickets of admission, and
where we daily expected our new play of Pocahontas would rival the
successes of all former tragedies.

The fickle old aunt of Clarges Street, who received me, on my first
coming to London with my wife, with a burst of scorn, mollified
presently, and as soon as she came to know Theo (who she had pronounced
to be an insignificant little country-faced chit), fell utterly in love
with her, and would have her to tea and supper every day when there was
no other company. “As for company, my dears,” she would say, “I don't
ask you. You are no longer du monde. Your marriage has put that entirely
out of the question.” So she would have had us come to amuse her, and go
in and out by the back-stairs. My wife was fine lady enough to feel only
amused at this reception; and, I must do the Baroness's domestics the
justice to say that, had we been duke and duchess, we could not have
been received with more respect. Madame de Bernstein was very much
tickled and amused with my story of Lady Warrington and the chair. I
acted it for her, and gave her anecdotes of the pious Baronet's lady and
her daughters, which pleased the mischievous, lively old woman.

The Dowager Countess of Castlewood, now established in her house at
Kensington, gave us that kind of welcome which genteel ladies extend to
their poorer relatives. We went once or twice to her ladyship's drums at
Kensington; but, losing more money at cards, and spending more money
in coach-hire than I liked to afford, we speedily gave up those
entertainments, and, I dare say, were no more missed or regretted than
other people in the fashionable world, who are carried by death, debt,
or other accident out of the polite sphere. My Theo did not in the
least regret this exclusion. She had made her appearance at one of these
drums, attired in some little ornaments which her mother left behind
her, and by which the good lady set some store; but I thought her own
white neck was a great deal prettier than these poor twinkling stones;
and there were dowagers, whose wrinkled old bones blazed with rubies
and diamonds, which, I am sure, they would gladly have exchanged for her
modest parure of beauty and freshness. Not a soul spoke to her--except,
to be sure, Beau Lothair, a friend of Mr. Will's, who prowled about
Bloomsbury afterwards, and even sent my wife a billet. I met him in
Covent Garden shortly after, and promised to break his ugly face if
ever I saw it in the neighbourhood of my lodgings, and Madam Theo was
molested no further.

The only one of our relatives who came to see us (Madame de Bernstein
never came; she sent her coach for us sometimes, or made inquiries
regarding us by her woman or her major-domo) was our poor Maria, who,
with her husband, Mr. Hagan, often took a share of our homely dinner.
Then we had friend Spencer from the Temple, who admired our Arcadian
felicity, and gently asked our sympathy for his less fortunate loves;
and twice or thrice the famous Doctor Johnson came in for a dish of
Theo's tea. A dish? a pailful! “And a pail the best thing to feed him,
sar!” says Mr. Gumbo, indignantly: for the Doctor's appearance was not
pleasant, nor his linen particularly white. He snorted, he grew red,
and sputtered in feeding; he flung his meat about, and bawled out in
contradicting people: and annoyed my Theo, whom he professed to admire
greatly, by saying, every time he saw her, “Madam, you do not love me;
I see by your manner you do not love me; though I admire you, and come
here for your sake. Here is my friend Mr. Reynolds that shall paint
you: he has no ceruse in his paint-box that is as brilliant as
your complexion.” And so Mr. Reynolds, a most perfect and agreeable
gentleman, would have painted my wife; but I knew what his price was,
and did not choose to incur that expense. I wish I had now, for the
sake of the children, that they might see what yonder face was like some
five-and-thirty years ago. To me, madam, 'tis the same now as ever; and
your ladyship is always young!

What annoyed Mrs. Warrington with Dr. Johnson more than his
contradictions, his sputterings, and his dirty nails, was, I think,
an unfavourable opinion which he formed of my new tragedy. Hagan once
proposed that he should read some scenes from it after tea.

“Nay, sir, conversation is better,” says the Doctor. “I can read for
myself, or hear you at the theatre. I had rather hear Mrs. Warrington's
artless prattle than your declamation of Mr. Warrington's decasyllables.
Tell us about your household affairs, madam, and whether his Excellency
your father is well, and whether you made the pudden and the butter
sauce. The butter sauce was delicious!” (He loved it so well that he had
kept a large quantity in the bosom of a very dingy shirt.) “You made it
as though you loved me. You helped me as though you loved me, though you
don't.”

“Faith, sir, you are taking some of the present away with you in your
waistcoat,” says Hagan, with much spirit.

“Sir, you are rude!” bawls the Doctor. “You are unacquainted with the
first principles of politeness, which is courtesy before ladies. Having
received an university education, I am surprised that you have not
learned the rudiments of politeness. I respect Mrs. Warrington. I should
never think of making personal remarks about her guests before her!”

“Then, sir,” says Hagan, fiercely, “why did you speak of my theatre?”

“Sir, you are saucy!” roars the Doctor.

“De te fabula,” says the actor. “I think it is your waistcoat that is
saucy. Madam, shall I make some punch in the way we make it in Ireland?”

The Doctor, puffing, and purple in the face, was wiping the dingy shirt
with a still more dubious pocket-handkerchief, which he then applied to
his forehead. After this exercise, he blew a hyperborean whistle, as
if to blow his wrath away. “It is de me, sir--though, as a young man,
perhaps you need not have told me so.”

“I drop my point, sir! If you have been wrong, I am sure I am bound to
ask your pardon for setting you so!” says Mr. Hagan, with a fine bow.

“Doesn't he look like a god?” says Maria, clutching my wife's hand: and
indeed Mr. Hagan did look like a handsome young gentleman. His colour
had risen; he had put his hand to his breast with a noble air: Chamont
or Castalio could not present himself better.

“Let me make you some lemonade, sir; my papa has sent us a box of fresh
limes. May we send you some to the Temple?”

“Madam, if they stay in your house, they will lose their quality and
turn sweet,” says the Doctor. “Mr. Hagan, you are a young sauce-box,
that's what you are! Ho! ho! It is I have been wrong.”

“Oh, my lord, my Polidore!” bleats Lady Maria, when she was alone in my
wife's drawing-room:

    “'Oh, I could hear thee talk for ever thus,
      Eternally admiring,--fix and gaze
      On those dear eyes, for every glance they send
      Darts through my soul, and fills my heart with rapture!'

“Thou knowest not, my Theo, what a pearl and paragon of a man my
Castalio is; my Chamont, my--oh, dear me, child, what a pity it is that
in your husband's tragedy he should have to take the horrid name of
Captain Smith!”

Upon this tragedy not only my literary hopes, but much of my financial
prospects were founded. My brother's debts discharged, my mother's
drafts from home duly honoured, my own expenses paid, which, though
moderate, were not inconsiderable,--pretty nearly the whole of my
patrimony had been spent, and this auspicious moment I must choose
for my marriage! I could raise money on my inheritance: that was not
impossible, though certainly costly. My mother could not leave her
eldest son without a maintenance, whatever our quarrels might be. I had
health, strength, good wits, some friends, and reputation--above all, my
famous tragedy, which the manager had promised to perform, and upon the
proceeds of this I counted for my present support. What becomes of the
arithmetic of youth? How do we then calculate that a hundred pounds is
a maintenance, and a thousand a fortune? How did I dare play against
Fortune with such odds? I succeeded, I remember, in convincing my dear
General, and he left home convinced that his son-in-law had for the
present necessity at least a score of hundred pounds at his command. He
and his dear Molly had begun life with less, and the ravens had somehow
always fed them. As for the women, the question of poverty was one of
pleasure to those sentimental souls, and Aunt Lambert, for her part,
declared it would be wicked and irreligious to doubt of a provision
being made for her children. Was the righteous ever forsaken? Did the
just man ever have to beg his bread? She knew better than that! “No, no,
my dears! I am not going to be afraid on that account, I warrant you!
Look at me and my General!”

Theo believed all I said and wished to believe myself. So we actually
began life upon a capital of Five Acts, and about three hundred pounds
of ready money in hand!

Well, the time of the appearance of the famous tragedy drew near, and my
friends canvassed the town to get a body of supporters for the opening
night. I am ill at asking favours from the great; but when my Lord
Wrotham came to London, I went, with Theo in my hand, to wait on his
lordship, who received us kindly, out of regard for his old friend,
her father--though he good-naturedly shook a finger at me (at which my
little wife hung down her head), for having stole a march on the good
General. However, he would do his best for her father's daughter; hoped
for a success; said he had heard great things of the piece; and engaged
a number of places for himself and his friends. But this patron secured,
I had no other. “Mon cher, at my age,” says the Baroness, “I should
bore myself to death at a tragedy: but I will do my best; and I will
certainly send my people to the boxes. Yes! Case in his best black looks
like a nobleman; and Brett in one of my gowns has a faux air de moi
which is quite distinguished. Put down my name for two in the front
boxes. Good-bye, my dear. Bonne chance!” The Dowager Countess presented
compliments (on the back of the nine of clubs), had a card-party that
night, and was quite sorry she and Fanny could not go to my tragedy. As
for my uncle and Lady Warrington, they were out of the question. After
the affair of the sedan-chair I might as well have asked Queen
Elizabeth to go to Drury Lane. These were all my friends--that host of
aristocratic connexions about whom poor Sampson had bragged; and on
the strength of whom, the manager, as he said, had given Mr. Hagan his
engagement! “Where was my Lord Bute? Had I not promised his lordship
should come?” he asks, snappishly, taking snuff (how different from
the brisk, and engaging, and obsequious little manager of six months
ago!)--“I promised Lord Bute should come?”

“Yes,” says Mr. Garrick, “and her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales,
and his Majesty too.”

Poor Sampson owned that he, buoyed up by vain hopes, had promised the
appearance of these august personages.

The next day, at rehearsal, matters were worse still, and the manager in
a fury.

“Great heavens, sir!” says he, “into what a pretty guet-a-pens have you
led me! Look at that letter, sir!--read that letter!” And he hands me
one:


“MY DEAR SIR” (said the letter)--“I have seen his lordship, and conveyed
to him Mr. Warrington's request that he would honour the tragedy of
Pocahontas by his presence. His lordship is a patron of the drama, and
a magnificent friend of all the liberal arts; but he desires me to
say that he cannot think of attending himself, much less of asking his
Gracious Master to witness the performance of a play, a principal part
in which is given to an actor who has made a clandestine marriage with
a daughter of one of his Majesty's nobility.--Your well-wisher, SAUNDERS
MCDUFF.”

“Mr. D. Garrick, at the Theatre Royal in Drury Lane.”


My poor Theo had a nice dinner waiting for me after the rehearsal. I
pleaded fatigue as the reason for looking so pale: I did not dare to
convey to her this dreadful news.
