CHAPTER LXXXIII. Troubles and Consolations


In our early days at home, when Harry and I used to be so undutiful to
our tutor, who would have thought that Mr. Esmond Warrington of Virginia
would turn Bearleader himself? My mother (when we came together again)
never could be got to speak directly of this period of my life; but
would allude to it as “that terrible time, my love, which I can't bear
to think of,” “those dreadful years when there was difference between
us,” and so forth; and though my pupil, a worthy and grateful man, sent
me out to Jamestown several barrels of that liquor by which his great
fortune was made, Madam Esmond spoke of him as “your friend in England,”
 “your wealthy Lambeth friend,” etc., but never by his name; nor did she
ever taste a drop of his beer. We brew our own too at Warrington Manor,
but our good Mr. Foker never fails to ship to Ipswich every year a
couple of butts of his entire. His son is a young sprig of fashion, and
has married an earl's daughter; the father is a very worthy and kind
gentleman, and it is to the luck of making his acquaintance that I owe
the receipt of some of the most welcome guineas that ever I received in
my life.

It was not so much the sum, as the occupation and hope given me by the
office of Governor, which I took on myself, which were then so precious
to me. Mr. F.'s Brewery (the site has since been changed) then stood
near to Pedlar's Acre in Lambeth and the surgeon who attended my wife in
her confinement, likewise took care of the wealthy brewer's family.
He was a Bavarian, originally named Voelker. Mr. Lance, the surgeon, I
suppose, made him acquainted with my name and history. The worthy doctor
would smoke many a pipe of Virginia in my garden, and had conceived an
attachment for me and my family. He brought his patron to my house; and
when Mr. F. found that I had a smattering of his language, and could
sing “Prinz Eugen the noble Ritter” (a song that my grandfather had
brought home from the Marlborough wars), the German conceived a great
friendship for me: his lady put her chair and her chariot at Mrs.
Warrington's service: his little daughter took a prodigious fancy to our
baby (and to do him justice, the Captain, who is as ugly a fellow now
as ever wore a queue, was beautiful as an infant) [The very image of the
Squire at 30, everybody says so. M. W. (Note in the MS.)]: and his son
and heir, Master Foker, being much maltreated at Westminster School
because of his father's profession of brewer, the parents asked if
I would take charge of him; and paid me a not insufficient sum for
superintending his education.

Mr. F. was a shrewd man of business, and as he and his family really
interested themselves in me and mine, I laid all my pecuniary affairs
pretty unreservedly before him; and my statement, he was pleased to say,
augmented the respect and regard which he felt for me. He laughed at
our stories of the aid which my noble relatives had given me--my
aunt's coverlid, my Lady Castlewood's mouldy jelly, Lady Warrington's
contemptuous treatment of us. But he wept many tears over the story of
little Miles's moidore; and as for Sampson and Hagan, “I wow,” says he,
“dey shall have so much beer als ever dey can drink.” He sent his wife
to call upon Lady Maria, and treated her with the utmost respect and
obsequiousness, whenever she came to visit him. It was with Mr. Foker
that Lady Maria stayed when Hagan went to Dublin to complete his college
terms; and the good brewer's purse also ministered to our friend's wants
and supplied his outfit.

When Mr. Foker came fully to know my own affairs and position, he was
pleased to speak of me with terms of enthusiasm, and as if my conduct
showed some extraordinary virtue. I have said how my mother saved money
for Harry, and how the two were in my debt. But when Harry spent money,
he spent it fancying it to be his; Madam Esmond never could be made to
understand she was dealing hardly with me--the money was paid and gone,
and there was an end of it. Now, at the end of '62, I remember Harry
sent over a considerable remittance for the purchase of his promotion,
begging me at the same time to remember that he was in my debt, and to
draw on his agents if I had any need. He did not know how great the need
was, or how my little capital had been swallowed.

Well, to take my brother's money would delay his promotion, and I
naturally did not draw on him, though I own I was tempted; nor, knowing
my dear General Lambert's small means, did I care to impoverish him by
asking for supplies. These simple acts of forbearance my worthy brewer
must choose to consider as instances of exalted virtue. And what does
my gentleman do but write privately to my brother in America, lauding me
and my wife as the most admirable of human beings, and call upon
Madame de Bernstein, who never told me of his visit indeed, but who,
I perceived, about this time treated us with singular respect and
gentleness, that surprised me in one whom I could not but consider as
selfish and worldly. In after days I remember asking him how he had
gained admission to the Baroness? He laughed: “De Baroness!” says he.
“I knew de Baron when he was a walet at Munich, and I was a
brewer-apprentice.” I think our family had best not be too curious about
our uncle the Baron.

Thus, the part of my life which ought to have been most melancholy was
in truth made pleasant by many friends, happy circumstances, and strokes
of lucky fortune. The bear I led was a docile little cub, and danced
to my piping very readily. Better to lead him about, than to hang round
booksellers' doors, or wait the pleasure or caprice of managers! My wife
and I, during our exile, as we may call it, spent very many pleasant
evenings with these kind friends and benefactors. Nor were we without
intellectual enjoyments; Mrs. Foker and Mrs. Warrington sang finely
together; and sometimes when I was in the mood, I read my own play of
Pocahontas, to this friendly audience, in a manner better than Hagan's
own, Mr. Foker was pleased to say.

After that little escapade of Miles Warrington, junior, I saw nothing
of him, and heard of my paternal relatives but rarely. Sir Miles was
assiduous at court (as I believe he would have been at Nero's), and
I laughed one day when Mr. Foker told me that he had heard on 'Change
“that they were going to make my uncle a Beer.”--“A Beer?” says I in
wonder. “Can't you understand de vort, ven I say it?” says the testy
old gentleman. “Vell, veil, a Lort!” Sir, Miles indeed was the obedient
humble servant of the Minister, whoever he might be. I am surprised he
did not speak English with a Scotch accent during the first favourite's
brief reign. I saw him and his wife coming from court, when Mrs.
Claypool was presented to her Majesty on her marriage. I had my little
boy on my shoulder. My uncle and aunt stared resolutely at me from their
gilt coach window. The footmen looked blank over their nosegays. Had I
worn the Fairy's cap and been invisible, my father's brother could not
have passed me with less notice.

We did not avail ourselves much, or often, of that queer invitation
of Lady Castlewood, to go and drink tea and sup with her ladyship
when there was no other company. Old Van den Bosch, however shrewd his
intellect, and great his skill in making a fortune, was not amusing
in conversation, except to his daughter, who talked household and City
matters, bulling and bearing, raising and selling farming-stock, and
so forth, quite as keenly and shrewdly as her father. Nor was my Lord
Castlewood often at home, or much missed by his wife when absent, or
very much at ease in the old father's company. The Countess told all
this to my wife in her simple way. “Guess,” says she, “my lord and
father don't pull well together nohow. Guess my lord is always wanting
money, and father keeps the key of the box and quite right, too. If he
could have the fingering of all our money, my lord would soon make
away with it, and then what's to become of our noble family? We pay
everything, my dear (except play-debts, and them we won't have nohow).
We pay cooks, horses, wine-merchants, tailors, and everybody--and lucky
for them too--reckon my lord wouldn't pay 'em! And we always take care
that he has a guinea in his pocket, and goes out like a real nobleman.
What that man do owe to us: what he did before we come--gracious
goodness only knows! Me and father does our best to make him
respectable: but it's no easy job, my dear. Law! he'd melt the plate,
only father keeps the key of the strong-room; and when we go to
Castlewood, my father travels with me, and papa is armed too, as well as
the people.”

“Gracious heavens!” cries my wife, “your ladyship does not mean to say
you suspect your own husband of a desire to----”

“To what?--Oh no, nothing, of course! And I would trust our brother Will
with untold money, wouldn't I? As much as I'd trust the cat with the
cream-pan! I tell you, my dear, it's not all pleasure being a woman of
rank and fashion: and if I have bought a countess's coronet, I have paid
a good price for it--that I have!”

And so had my Lord Castlewood paid a large price for having his estate
freed from incumbrances, his houses and stables furnished, and his
debts discharged. He was the slave of the little wife and her father.
No wonder the old man's society was not pleasant to the poor victim, and
that he gladly slunk away from his own fine house, to feast at the club
when he had money, or at least to any society save that which he found
at home. To lead a bear, as I did, was no very pleasant business, to
be sure: to wait in a bookseller's anteroom until it should please his
honour to finish his dinner and give me audience, was sometimes a hard
task for a man of my name and with my pride; but would I have exchanged
my poverty against Castlewood's ignominy, or preferred his miserable
dependence to my own? At least I earned my wage, such as it was; and no
man can say that I ever flattered my patrons, or was servile to them; or
indeed, in my dealings with them, was otherwise than sulky, overbearing,
and, in a word, intolerable.

Now there was a certain person with whom Fate had thrown me into a
life-partnership, who bore her poverty with such a smiling sweetness
and easy grace, that niggard Fortune relented before her, and, like
some savage Ogre in the fairy tales, melted at the constant goodness and
cheerfulness of that uncomplaining, artless, innocent creature. However
poor she was, all who knew her saw that here was a fine lady; and the
little tradesmen and humble folks round about us treated her with as
much respect as the richest of our neighbours. “I think, my dear,” says
good-natured Mrs. Foker, when they rode out in the latter's chariot,
“you look like the mistress of the carriage, and I only as your maid.”
 Our landladies adored her; the tradesfolk executed her little orders
as eagerly as if a duchess gave them, or they were to make a fortune
by waiting on her. I have thought often of the lady in Comus, and how,
through all the rout and rabble, she moves, entirely serene and pure.

Several times, as often as we chose indeed, the good-natured parents of
my young bear lent us their chariot to drive abroad or to call on the
few friends we had. If I must tell the truth, we drove once to the
Protestant Hero and had a syllabub in the garden there: and the
hostess would insist upon calling my wife her ladyship during the whole
afternoon. We also visited Mr. Johnson, and took tea with him (the
ingenious Mr. Goldsmith was of the company); the Doctor waited upon my
wife to her coach. But our most frequent visits were to Aunt Bernstein,
and I promise you I was not at all jealous because my aunt presently
professed to have a wonderful liking for Theo.

This liking grew so that she would have her most days in the week, or to
stay altogether with her, and thought that Theo's child and husband
were only plagues to be sure, and hated us in the most amusing way
for keeping her favourite from her. Not that my wife was unworthy
of anybody's favour; but her many forced absences, and the constant
difficulty of intercourse with her, raised my aunt's liking for a while
to a sort of passion. She poured in notes like love-letters; and her
people were ever about our kitchen. If my wife did not go to her, she
wrote heartrending appeals, and scolded me severely when I saw her; and,
the child being ill once (it hath pleased Fate to spare our Captain to
be a prodigious trouble to us, and a wholesome trial for our tempers),
Madame Bernstein came three days running to Lambeth; vowed there was
nothing the matter with the baby;--nothing at all;--and that we only
pretended his illness, in order to vex her.

The reigning Countess of Castlewood was just as easy and affable with
her old aunt, as with other folks great and small. “What air you all
about, scraping and bowing to that old woman, I can't tell, noways!” her
ladyship would say. “She a fine lady! Nonsense! She ain't no more fine
than any other lady: and I guess I'm as good as any of 'em with their
high heels and their grand airs! She a beauty once! Take away her wig,
and her rouge, and her teeth; and what becomes of your beauty, I'd like
to know? Guess you'd put it all in a bandbox, and there would be nothing
left but a shrivelled old woman!” And indeed the little homilist only
spoke too truly. All beauty must at last come to this complexion; and
decay, either underground or on the tree. Here was old age, I fear,
without reverence. Here were grey hairs, that were hidden or painted.
The world was still here, and she tottering on it, and clinging to it
with her crutch. For fourscore years she had moved on it, and eaten
of the tree, forbidden and permitted. She had had beauty, pleasure,
flattery: but what secret rages, disappointments, defeats, humiliations!
what thorns under the roses! what stinging bees in the fruit! “You are
not a beauty, my dear,” she would say to my wife: “and may thank your
stars that you are not.” (If she contradicted herself in her talk, I
suppose the rest of us occasionally do the like.) “Don't tell me that
your husband is pleased with your face, and you want no one else's
admiration! We all do. Every woman would rather be beautiful than be
anything else in the world--ever so rich, or ever so good, or have all
the gifts of the fairies! Look at that picture, though I know 'tis but a
bad one, and that stupid vapouring Kneller could not paint my eyes, nor
my hair, nor my complexion. What a shape I had then--and look at me now,
and this wrinkled old neck! Why have we such a short time of our beauty?
I remember Mademoiselle de l'Enclos at a much greater age than mine,
quite fresh and well-conserved. We can't hide our ages. They are wrote
in Mr. Collins's books for us. I was born in the last year of King
James's reign. I am not old yet. I am but seventy-six. But what a wreck,
my dear: and isn't it cruel that our time should be so short?”

Here my wife has to state the incontrovertible proposition, that the
time of all of us is short here below.

“Ha!” cries the Baroness. “Did not Adam live near a thousand years, and
was not Eve beautiful all the time? I used to perplex Mr. Tusher with
that--poor creature! What have we done since, that our lives are so much
lessened, I say?”

“Has your life been so happy that you would prolong it ever so much
more?” asks the Baroness's auditor. “Have you, who love wit, never read
Dean Swift's famous description of the deathless people in Gulliver? My
papa and my husband say 'tis one of the finest and most awful sermons
ever wrote. It were better not to live at all, than to live without
love; and I'm sure,” says my wife, putting her handkerchief to her eyes,
“should anything happen to my dearest George, I would wish to go to
Heaven that moment.”

“Who loves me in Heaven? I am quite alone, child--that is why I had
rather stay here,” says the Baroness, in a frightened and rather piteous
tone. “You are kind to me, God bless your sweet face! Though I scold,
and have a frightful temper, my servants will do anything to make me
comfortable, and get up at any hour of the night, and never say a cross
word in answer. I like my cards still. Indeed, life would be a blank
without 'em. Almost everything is gone except that. I can't eat my
dinner now, since I lost those last two teeth. Everything goes away from
us in old age. But I still have my cards--thank Heaven, I still have my
cards!” And here she would begin to doze: waking up, however, if my wife
stirred or rose, and imagining that Theo was about to leave her. “Don't
go away, I can't bear to be alone. I don't want you to talk. But I like
to see your face, my dear! It is much pleasanter than that horrid old
Brett's, that I have had scowling about my bedroom these ever so long
years.”

“Well, Baroness! still at your cribbage?” (We may fancy a noble Countess
interrupting a game at cards between Theo and Aunt Bernstein.) “Me and
my Lord Esmond have come to see you! Go and shake hands with grandaunt,
Esmond! and tell her ladyship that your lordship's a good boy!”

“My lordship's a good boy,” says the child. (Madam Theo used to act
these scenes for me in a very lively way.)

“And if he is, I guess he don't take after his father,” shrieks out Lady
Castlewood. She chose to fancy that Aunt Bernstein was deaf, and always
bawled at the old lady.

“Your ladyship chose my nephew for better or for worse,” says Aunt
Bernstein, who was now always very much flurried in the presence of the
young Countess.

“But he is a precious deal worse than ever I thought he was. I am
speaking of your Pa, Ezzy. If it wasn't for your mother, my son, Lord
knows what would become of you! We are a-going to see his little Royal
Highness. Sorry to see your ladyship not looking quite so well to-day.
We can't always remain young and law! how we do change as we grow old!
Go up and kiss that lady, Ezzy. She has got a little boy, too. Why,
bless us! have you got the child downstairs?” Indeed, Master Miles was
down below, for special reasons accompanying his mother on her visits to
Aunt Bernstein sometimes; and our aunt desired the mother's company so
much, that she was actually fain to put up with the child. “So you have
got the child here? Oh, you slyboots!” says the Countess. “Guess
you come after the old lady's money! Law bless you! Don't look so
frightened. She can't hear a single word I say. Come, Ezzy. Good-bye,
aunt!” And my lady Countess rustles out of the room.

Did Aunt Bernstein hear her or not? Where was the wit for which the old
lady had been long famous? and was that fire put out, as well as the
brilliancy of her eyes? With other people--she was still ready enough,
and unsparing of her sarcasms. When the Dowager of Castlewood and Lady
Fanny visited her (these exalted ladies treated my wife with perfect
indifference and charming good breeding),--the Baroness, in their
society, was stately, easy, and even commanding. She would mischievously
caress Mrs. Warrington before them; in her absence, vaunt my wife's good
breeding; say that her nephew had made a foolish match, perhaps, but
that I certainly had taken a charming wife. “In a word, I praise you so
to them, my dear,” says she, “that I think they would like to tear your
eyes out.” But, before the little American, 'tis certain that she was
uneasy and trembled. She was so afraid, that she actually did not dare
to deny her door; and, the Countess's back turned, did not even abuse
her. However much they might dislike her, my ladies did not tear out
Theo's eyes. Once--they drove to our cottage at Lambeth, where my wife
happened to be sitting at the open window, holding her child on her
knee, and in full view of her visitors. A gigantic footman strutted
through our little garden, and delivered their ladyships' visiting
tickets at our door. Their hatred hurt us no more than their visit
pleased us. When next we had the loan of our friend the Brewer's
carriage Mrs. Warrington drove to Kensington, and Gumbo handed over to
the giant our cards in return for those which his noble mistresses had
bestowed on us.

The Baroness had a coach, but seldom thought of giving it to us: and
would let Theo and her maid and baby start from Clarges Street in the
rain, with a faint excuse that she was afraid to ask her coachman
to take his horses out. But, twice on her return home, my wife was
frightened by rude fellows on the other side of Westminster Bridge; and
I fairly told my aunt that I should forbid Mrs. Warrington to go to her,
unless she could be brought home in safety; so grumbling Jehu had to
drive his horses through the darkness. He grumbled at my shillings: he
did not know how few I had. Our poverty wore a pretty decent face. My
relatives never thought of relieving it, nor I of complaining before
them. I don't know how Sampson got a windfall of guineas; but, I
remember, he brought me six once; and they were more welcome than any
money I ever had in my life. He had been looking into Mr. Miles's crib,
as the child lay asleep; and, when the parson went away, I found the
money in the baby's little rosy hand. Yes, Love is best of all. I
have many such benefactions registered in my heart--precious welcome
fountains springing up in desert places, kind, friendly lights cheering
our despondency and gloom.

This worthy divine was willing enough to give as much of his company as
she chose to Madame de Bernstein, whether for cards or theology. Having
known her ladyship for many years now, Sampson could see, and averred
to us, that she was breaking fast; and as he spoke of her evidently
increasing infirmities, and of the probability of their fatal
termination, Mr. S. would discourse to us in a very feeling manner of
the necessity for preparing for a future world; of the vanities of
this, and of the hope that in another there might be happiness for all
repentant sinners.

“I have been a sinner for one,” says the chaplain, bowing his head. “God
knoweth, and I pray Him to pardon me. I fear, sir, your aunt, the Lady
Baroness, is not in such a state of mind as will fit her very well
for the change which is imminent. I am but a poor weak wretch, and no
prisoner in Newgate could confess that more humbly and heartily. Once or
twice of late, I have sought to speak on this matter with her ladyship,
but she has received me very roughly. 'Parson,' says she, 'if you come
for cards, 'tis mighty well, but I will thank you to spare me your
sermons.' What can I do, sir? I have called more than once of late, and
Mr. Case hath told me his lady was unable to see me.” In fact Madame
Bernstein told my wife, whom she never refused, as I said, that the poor
chaplain's ton was unendurable, and as for his theology, “Haven't I been
a Bishop's wife?” says she, “and do I want this creature to teach me?”

The old lady was as impatient of doctors as of divines; pretending that
my wife was ailing, and that it was more convenient for our good Doctor
Heberden to visit her in Clarges Street than to travel all the way to
our Lambeth lodgings, we got Dr. H. to see Theo at our aunt's house, and
prayed him if possible to offer his advice to the Baroness: we made Mrs.
Brett, her woman, describe her ailments, and the doctor confirmed our
opinion that they were most serious, and might speedily end. She would
rally briskly enough of some evenings, and entertain a little company;
but of late she scarcely went abroad at all. A somnolence, which we had
remarked in her, was attributable in part to opiates which she was in
the habit of taking; and she used these narcotics to smother habitual
pain. One night, as we two sat with her (Mr. Miles was weaned by this
time, and his mother could leave him to the charge of our faithful
Molly), she fell asleep over her cards. We hushed the servants who came
to lay out the supper-table (she would always have this luxurious, nor
could any injunction of ours or the Doctor's teach her abstinence), and
we sat a while as we had often done before, waiting in silence till she
should arouse from her doze.

When she awoke, she looked fixedly at me for a while, fumbled with the
cards, and dropt them again in her lap, and said, “Henry, have I been
long asleep?” I thought at first that it was for my brother she mistook
me; but she went on quickly, and with eyes fixed as upon some very far
distant object, and said, “My dear, 'tis of no use, I am not good enough
for you. I love cards, and play, and court; and oh, Harry, you don't
know all!” Here her voice changed, and she flung her head up. “His
father married Anne Hyde, and sure the Esmond blood is as good as any
that's not royal. Mamma, you must please to treat me with more respect.
Vos sermons me fatiguent; entendez-vous?--faites place a mon Altesse
royale: mesdames, me connaissez-vous? je suis la----” Here she broke out
into frightful hysterical shrieks and laughter, and as we ran up to her,
alarmed, “Oui, Henri,” she says, “il a jure de m'epouser et les princes
tiennent parole--n'est-ce pas? O oui! ils tiennent parole; si non, tu le
tueras, cousin; tu le--ah! que je suis folle!” And the pitiful shrieks
and laughter recommenced. Ere her frightened people had come up to her
summons, the poor thing had passed out of this mood into another; but
always labouring under the same delusion--that I was the Henry of past
times, who had loved her and had been forsaken by her, whose bones were
lying far away by the banks of the Potomac.

My wife and the women put the poor lady to bed as I ran myself for
medical aid. She rambled, still talking wildly, through the night, with
her nurses and the surgeon sitting by her. Then she fell into a sleep,
brought on by more opiate. When she awoke, her mind did not actually
wander; but her speech was changed, and one arm and side were paralysed.

'Tis needless to relate the progress and termination of her malady, or
watch that expiring flame of life as it gasps and flickers. Her senses
would remain with her for a while (and then she was never satisfied
unless Theo was by her bedside), or again her mind would wander, and the
poor decrepit creature, lying upon her bed, would imagine herself young
again, and speak incoherently of the scenes and incidents of her early
days. Then she would address me as Henry again, and call upon me to
revenge some insult or slight, of which (whatever my suspicions might
be) the only record lay in her insane memory. “They have always been
so,” she would murmur: “they never loved man or woman but they forsook
them. Je me vengerai, O oui, je me vengerai! I know them all: I know
them all: and I will go to my Lord Stair with the list. Don't tell
me! His religion can't be the right one. I will go back to my mother's
though she does not love me. She never did. Why don't you, mother? Is
it because I am too wicked? Ah! Pitie, pitie. O mon pere! I will make
my confession”--and here the unhappy paralysed lady made as if she would
move in her bed.

Let us draw the curtain round it. I think with awe still, of those rapid
words, uttered in the shadow of the canopy, as my pallid wife sits by
her, her Prayer-book on her knee; as the attendants move to and fro
noiselessly; as the clock ticks without, and strikes the fleeting hours;
as the sun falls upon the Kneller picture of Beatrix in her beauty, with
the blushing cheeks, the smiling lips, the waving auburn tresses, and
the eyes which seem to look towards the dim figure moaning in the bed.
I could not for a while understand why our aunt's attendants were so
anxious that we should quit it. But towards evening, a servant stole
in, and whispered her woman; and then Brett, looking rather disturbed,
begged us to go downstairs, as the--as the Doctor was come to visit the
Baroness. I did not tell my wife, at the time, who “the Doctor” was; but
as the gentleman slid by us, and passed upstairs, I saw at once that he
was a Catholic ecclesiastic. When Theo next saw our poor lady, she
was speechless; she never recognised any one about her, and so passed
unconsciously out of life. During her illness her relatives had called
assiduously enough, though she would see none of them save us. But when
she was gone, and we descended to the lower rooms after all was over, we
found Castlewood with his white face, and my lady from Kensington, and
Mr. Will already assembled in the parlour. They looked greedily at us as
we appeared. They were hungry for the prey.

When our aunt's will was opened, we found it dated five years back, and
everything she had was left to her dear nephew, Henry Esmond Warrington,
of Castlewood, in Virginia, “in affectionate love and remembrance of the
name which he bore.” The property was not great. Her revenue had been
derived from pensions from the Crown as it appeared (for what services
I cannot say), but the pension of course died with her, and there were
only a few hundred pounds, besides jewels, trinkets, and the furniture
of the house in Clarges Street, of which all London came to the sale.
Mr. Walpole bid for her portrait, but I made free with Harry's money so
far as to buy the picture in: and it now hangs over the mantelpiece of
the chamber in which I write. What with jewels, laces, trinkets, and old
china which she had gathered--Harry became possessed of more than four
thousand pounds by his aunt's legacy. I made so free as to lay my hand
upon a hundred, which came, just as my stock was reduced to twenty
pounds; and I procured bills for the remainder, which I forwarded to
Captain Henry Esmond in Virginia. Nor should I have scrupled to take
more (for my brother was indebted to me in a much greater sum), but he
wrote me there was another wonderful opportunity for buying an estate
and negroes in our neighbourhood at home; and Theo and I were only
too glad to forgo our little claim, so as to establish our brother's
fortune. As to mine, poor Harry at this time did not know the state of
it. My mother had never informed him that she had ceased remitting to
me. She helped him with a considerable sum, the result of her savings,
for the purchase of his new estate; and Theo and I were most heartily
thankful at his prosperity.

And how strange ours was! By what curious good fortune, as our purse
was emptied, was it filled again! I had actually come to the end of our
stock, when poor Sampson brought me his six pieces--and with these I was
enabled to carry on, until my half-year's salary, as young Mr. Foker's
Governor, was due: then Harry's hundred, on which I laid main basse,
helped us over three months (we were behindhand with our rent, or the
money would have lasted six good weeks longer): and when this was pretty
near expended, what should arrive but a bill of exchange for a couple of
hundred pounds from Jamaica, with ten thousand blessings, from the dear
friends there, and fond scolding from the General that we had not
sooner told him of our necessity--of which he had only heard through our
friend, Mr. Foker, who spoke in such terms of Theo and myself as to make
our parents more than ever proud of their children. Was my quarrel with
my mother irreparable? Let me go to Jamaica. There was plenty there for
all, and employment which his Excellency as Governor would immediately
procure for me. “Come to us!” writes Hetty. “Come to us!” writes Aunt
Lambert. “Have my children been suffering poverty, and we rolling in
our Excellency's coach, with guards to turn out whenever we pass? Has
Charley been home to you for ever so many holidays, from the Chartreux,
and had ever so many of my poor George's half-crowns in his pocket,
I dare say?” (this was indeed the truth, for where was he to go for
holidays but to his sister? and was there any use in telling the child
how scarce half-crowns were with us?). “And you always treating him with
such goodness, as his letters tell me, which are brimful of love for
George and little Miles! Oh, how we long to see Miles!” wrote Hetty and
her mother; “and as for his godfather” (writes Het), “who has been good
to my dearest and her child, I promise him a kiss whenever I see him!”

Our young benefactor was never to hear of our family's love and
gratitude to him. That glimpse of his bright face over the railings
before our house at Lambeth, as he rode away on his little horse, was
the last we ever were to have of him. At Christmas a basket comes to us,
containing a great turkey, and three brace of partridges, with a
card, and “shot by M. W.” wrote on one of them. And on receipt of this
present, we wrote to thank the child and gave him our sister's message.

To this letter, there came a reply from Lady Warrington, who said she
was bound to inform me, that in visiting me her child had been guilty
of disobedience, and that she learned his visit to me now for the
first time. Knowing my views regarding duty to my parents (which I had
exemplified in my marriage), she could not wish her son to adopt them.
And fervently hoping that I might be brought to see the errors of
my present course, she took leave of this most unpleasant subject,
subscribing herself, etc. etc. And we got this pretty missive as sauce
for poor Miles's turkey, which was our family feast for New Year's Day.
My Lady Warrington's letter choked our meal, though Sampson and Charley
rejoiced over it.

Ah me! Ere the month was over, our little friend was gone from amongst
us. Going out shooting, and dragging his gun through a hedge after him,
the trigger caught in a bush, and the poor little man was brought home
to his father's house, only to live a few days and expire in pain and
torture. Under the yew-trees yonder, I can see the vault which covers
him, and where my bones one day no doubt will be laid. And over our pew
at church, my children have often wistfully spelt the touching epitaph
in which Miles's heartbroken father has inscribed his grief and love for
his only son.
